Abraham de Moivre (26 May 1667 in Vitry-le-François, Champagne, France – 27 November 1754 in London, England; French pronunciation: ​[abʁaam də mwavʁ]) was a French mathematician known for de Moivre's formula, one of those that link complex numbers and trigonometry, and for his work on the normal distribution and probability theory. He was a friend of Isaac Newton, Edmond Halley, and James Stirling. Even though he faced religious persecution he remained a "steadfast Christian" throughout his life. Among his fellow Huguenot exiles in England, he was a colleague of the editor and translator Pierre des Maizeaux. De Moivre wrote a book on probability theory, The Doctrine of Chances, said to have been prized by gamblers. De Moivre first discovered Binet's formula, the closed-form expression for Fibonacci numbers linking the nth power of the golden ratio φ to the nth Fibonacci number. He also was the first to postulate the Central Limit Theorem, a cornerstone of probability theory.   == Life ==   === Early years === Abraham de Moivre was born in Vitry in Champagne on May 26, 1667. His father, Daniel de Moivre, was a surgeon who, though middle class believed in the value of education. Though Abraham de Moivre's parents were Protestant, he first attended Christian Brothers' Catholic school in Vitry, which was unusually tolerant given religious tensions in France at the time. When he was eleven, his parents sent him to the Protestant Academy at Sedan, where he spent four years studying Greek under Jacques du Rondel. The Protestant Academy of Sedan had been founded in 1579 at the initiative of Françoise de Bourbon, the widow of Henri-Robert de la Marck. In 1682 the Protestant Academy at Sedan was suppressed, and de Moivre enrolled to study logic at Saumur for two years. Although mathematics was not part of his course work, de Moivre read several works on mathematics on his own including Elémens des mathématiques by Jean Prestet and a short treatise on games of chance, De Ratiociniis in Ludo Aleae, by Christiaan Huygens. In 1684, de Moivre moved to Paris to study physics, and for the first time had formal mathematics training with private lessons from Jacques Ozanam. Religious persecution in France became severe when King Louis XIV issued the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, which revoked the Edict of Nantes, that had given substantial rights to French Protestants. It forbade Protestant worship and required that all children be baptized by Catholic priests. De Moivre was sent to the Prieure de Saint-Martin, a school that the authorities sent Protestant children to for indoctrination into Catholicism. It is unclear when de Moivre left the Prieure de Saint-Martin and moved to England, since the records of the Prieure de Saint-Martin indicate that he left the school in 1688, but de Moivre and his brother presented themselves as Huguenots admitted to the Savoy Church in London on August 28, 1687.   === Middle years === By the time he arrived in London, de Moivre was a competent mathematician with a good knowledge of many of the standard texts. To make a living, de Moivre became a private tutor of mathematics, visiting his pupils or teaching in the coffee houses of London. De Moivre continued his studies of mathematics after visiting the Earl of Devonshire and seeing Newton's recent book, Principia Mathematica. Looking through the book, he realized that it was far deeper than the books that he had studied previously, and he became determined to read and understand it. However, as he was required to take extended walks around London to travel between his students, de Moivre had little time for study, so he tore pages from the book and carried them around in his pocket to read between lessons. According to a possibly apocryphal story, Newton, in the later years of his life, used to refer people posing mathematical questions to him to de Moivre, saying, "He knows all these things better than I do." By 1692, de Moivre became friends with Edmond Halley and soon after with Isaac Newton himself. In 1695, Halley communicated de Moivre's first mathematics paper, which arose from his study of fluxions in the Principia Mathematica, to the Royal Society. This paper was published in the Philosophical Transactions that same year. Shortly after publishing this paper, de Moivre also generalized Newton's noteworthy binomial theorem into the multinomial theorem. The Royal Society became apprised of this method in 1697, and it made de Moivre a member two months later. After de Moivre had been accepted, Halley encouraged him to turn his attention to astronomy. In 1705, de Moivre discovered, intuitively, that "the centripetal force of any planet is directly related to its distance from the centre of the forces and reciprocally related to the product of the diameter of the evolute and the cube of the perpendicular on the tangent." In other words, if a planet, M, follows an elliptical orbit around a focus F and has a point P where PM is tangent to the curve and FPM is a right angle so that FP is the perpendicular to the tangent, then the centripetal force at point P is proportional to FM/(R*(FP)3) where R is the radius of the curvature at M. The mathematician Johann Bernoulli proved this formula in 1710. Despite these successes, de Moivre was unable to obtain an appointment to a chair of mathematics at any university, which would have released him from his dependence on time-consuming tutoring that burdened him more than it did most other mathematicians of the time. At least a part of the reason was a bias against his French origins. In November 1697 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and in 1712 was appointed to a commission set up by the society, alongside MM. Arbuthnot, Hill, Halley, Jones, Machin, Burnet, Robarts, Bonet, Aston, and Taylor to review the claims of Newton and Leibniz as to who discovered calculus. The full details of the controversy can be found in the Leibniz and Newton calculus controversy article. Throughout his life de Moivre remained poor. It is reported that he was a regular customer of Slaughter's Coffee House, St. Martin's Lane at Cranbourn Street, where he earned a little money from playing chess.   === Later years === De Moivre continued studying the fields of probability and mathematics until his death in 1754 and several additional papers were published after his death. As he grew older, he became increasingly lethargic and needed longer sleeping hours. He noted that he was sleeping an extra 15 minutes each night and correctly calculated the date of his death as the day when the sleep time reached 24 hours, November 27, 1754. He died in London and his body was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, although his body was later moved.   == Probability ==  De Moivre pioneered the development of analytic geometry and the theory of probability by expanding upon the work of his predecessors, particularly Christiaan Huygens and several members of the Bernoulli family. He also produced the second textbook on probability theory, The Doctrine of Chances: a method of calculating the probabilities of events in play. (The first book about games of chance, Liber de ludo aleae (On Casting the Die), was written by Girolamo Cardano in the 1560s, but it was not published until 1663.) This book came out in four editions, 1711 in Latin, and in English in 1718, 1738, and 1756. In the later editions of his book, de Moivre included his unpublished result of 1733, which is the first statement of an approximation to the binomial distribution in terms of what we now call the normal or Gaussian function. This was the first method of finding the probability of the occurrence of an error of a given size when that error is expressed in terms of the variability of the distribution as a unit, and the first identification of the calculation of probable error. In addition, he applied these theories to gambling problems and actuarial tables. An expression commonly found in probability is n! but before the days of calculators calculating n! for a large n was time consuming. In 1733 de Moivre proposed the formula for estimating a factorial as n! = cnn+1/2e−n. He obtained an approximate expression for the constant c but it was James Stirling who found that c was √(2π) . Therefore, Stirling's approximation is as much due to de Moivre as it is to Stirling. De Moivre also published an article called "Annuities upon Lives" in which he revealed the normal distribution of the mortality rate over a person’s age. From this he produced a simple formula for approximating the revenue produced by annual payments based on a person’s age. This is similar to the types of formulas used by insurance companies today.   === Priority regarding the Poisson distribution === Some results on the Poisson distribution were first introduced by de Moivre in De Mensura Sortis seu; de Probabilitate Eventuum in Ludis a Casu Fortuito Pendentibus in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, p. 219. As a result, some authors have argued that the Poisson distribution should bear the name of de Moivre.   == De Moivre’s formula == In 1707 de Moivre derived:  which he was able to prove for all positive integers n. In 1722 he suggested it in the more well known form of de Moivre's Formula:  In 1749 Euler proved this formula for any real n using Euler's formula, which makes the proof quite straightforward. This formula is important because it relates complex numbers and trigonometry. Additionally, this formula allows the derivation of useful expressions for cos(nx) and sin(nx) in terms of cos(x) and sin(x).   == Notes ==   == References == See de Moivre's Miscellanea Analytica (London: 1730) p 26–42. H. J. R. Murray, 1913. History of Chess. Oxford University Press: 846. Schneider, I., 2005, "The doctrine of chances" in Grattan-Guinness, I., ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 105–20   == Further reading == de Moivre, Abraham at the Wayback Machine (archived December 19, 2007) The Doctrine of Chance at MathPages. Biography (PDF), Matthew Maty's Biography of Abraham De Moivre, Translated, Annotated and Augmented. Excerpt from Trigonometric Delights de Moivre, On the Law of Normal Probability

Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet (French: [kətlɛ]; 22 February 1796 – 17 February 1874) ForMemRS was a Belgian astronomer, mathematician, statistician and sociologist. He founded and directed the Brussels Observatory and was influential in introducing statistical methods to the social sciences. His name is sometimes spelled with an accent as Quételet.   == Biography == Adolphe was born in Ghent (which at that time was a part of the newborn French Republic), the son of François-Augustin-Jacques-Henri Quetelet, a Frenchman and Anne Françoise Vandervelde, a Flemish woman. His father François was born at Ham, in Picardy, and being of a somewhat adventurous spirit, crossed the English Channel and became a British citizen and the secretary of a Scottish nobleman. In this capacity he traveled with his employer on the Continent, particularly spending time in Italy. At aged about 31, he settled in Ghent and was employed by the city, where Adolphe was born the fifth of nine children, several of whom died in childhood. Francois died when Adolphe was only seven years old. Adolphe studied at the Ghent lycée, where he started teaching mathematics in 1815 at the age of 19. In 1819 he moved to the Athenaeum in Brussels and in the same year he completed his dissertation (De quibusdam locis geometricis, necnon de curva focal – Of some new properties of the focal distance and some other curves). Quetelet received a doctorate in mathematics in 1819 from the University of Ghent. Shortly thereafter, the young man set out to convince government officials and private donors to build an astronomical observatory in Brussels; he succeeded in 1828. He became a member of the Royal Academy in 1820. He lectured at the museum for sciences and letters and at the Belgian Military School. In 1825 he became correspondent of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands, in 1827 he became member. From 1841 to 1851 he was supernumerair' associate in the Institute, and when it became Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences he became foreign member. In 1850, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Quetelet also founded several statistical journals and societies, and was especially interested in creating international cooperation among statisticians. In 1855 Quetelet suffered from apoplexy, which diminished but did not end his scientific activity. He died in Brussels on 17 February 1874, and is buried in the Brussels Cemetery.   == Work == His scientific research encompassed a wide range of different scientific disciplines: meteorology, astronomy, mathematics, statistics, demography, sociology, criminology and history of science. He made significant contributions to scientific development, but he also wrote several monographs directed to the general public. He founded the Royal Observatory of Belgium, founded or co-founded several national and international statistical societies and scientific journals, and presided over the first series of the International Statistical Congresses. Quetelet was a liberal and an anticlerical, but not an atheist or materialist nor a socialist.   === Social physics === The new science of probability and statistics was mainly used in astronomy at the time, to get a handle on measurement errors with the method of least squares. Quetelet was among the first who attempted to apply it to social science, planning what he called a "social physics". He was keenly aware of the overwhelming complexity of social phenomena, and the many variables that needed measurement. His goal was to understand the statistical laws underlying such phenomena as crime rates, marriage rates or suicide rates. He wanted to explain the values of these variables by other social factors. These ideas were rather controversial among other scientists at the time who held that it contradicted the concept of freedom of choice. His most influential book was Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou Essai de physique sociale, published in 1835 (In English translation, it is titled Treatise on Man, but a literal translation would be "On Man and the Development of his Faculties, or Essays on Social Physics"). In it, he outlines the project of a social physics and describes his concept of the "average man" (l'homme moyen) who is characterized by the mean values of measured variables that follow a normal distribution. He collected data about many such variables. When Auguste Comte discovered that Quetelet had appropriated the term 'social physics', which Comte had originally introduced, Comte found it necessary to invent the term 'sociologie' (sociology) because he disagreed with Quetelet's collection of statistics.   === Criminology === Quetelet was an influential figure in criminology. Along with Andre-Michel Guerry, he helped to establish the cartographic school and positivist schools of criminology which made extensive use of statistical techniques. Through statistical analysis, Quetelet gained insight into the relationships between crime and other social factors. Among his findings were strong relationships between age and crime, as well as gender and crime. Other influential factors he found included climate, poverty, education, and alcohol consumption, with his research findings published in Of the Development of the Propensity to Crime.   === Anthropometry === In 1835 he presented his theory of the average man in Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, essai d'une physique sociale, which measurements of human trait are grouped according to the normal curve. This normal variation helped to provide proof that a population produces enough variation for artificial or natural selection to operate. In terms of influence over later public health agendas, was Quetelet's establishment of a simple measure for classifying people's weight relative to an ideal weight for their height. His proposal, the body mass index (or Quetelet index), has endured with minor variations to the present day. Anthropometric data is used in modern applications and referenced in the development of every consumer-based product.   == Awards and honours == Quetelet was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1839. The asteroid 1239 Queteleta is named after him.   == Publications == 1823. Relation d'un voyage fait à la grotte de Han au mois d'août 1822'. 'With M.M. Kickx. 1827. Recherches sur la population, les naissances, les décès, les prisons, les dépôts de mendicité, etc., dans le royaume des Pays-Bas. 1829. Recherches statistiques sur le royaume des Pays-Bas. 1831. The Propensity to Crime. 1834. Astronomie élémentaire. 1835. Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou Essai de physique sociale. 2 volumes. 1838. De l'influence des saisons sur la mortalité aux différens âges dans la Belgique. 1839. Catalogue des principales apparitions d'étoiles filantes. 1842. A Treatise on Man and the Development of His Faculties. 1843. Sur l'emploi de la boussole dans les mines. 1845–1851. Sur le climat de la Belgique. 2 volumes. 1848. Du système social et des lois qui le régissent. 1848. Sur la statistique morale et les principes qui doivent en former la base. 1850. Mémoire sur les lois des naissances et de la mortalité à Bruxelles. 1853. Mémoire sur les variations périodiques et non périodiques de la température, d'après les observations faites, pendant vingt ans, à l'observatoire royal de Bruxelles. 1864. Histoire des sciences mathématiques et physiques chez les Belges. 1867. Météorologie de la Belgique comparée à celle du globe. 1867. Sciences mathématiques et physiques au commencement du XIXe siècle. 1869. Sur la physique du globe en Belgique. 1870. Anthropométrie, ou Mesure des différentes facultés de l'homme.   == References ==   == Further reading == Ian Hacking (1990). The Taming of Chance. Cambridge University Press, chapters 13–15. Alain Desrosières (1998). The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning. Harvard University Press, chapter 3. Stephen Stigler (1999). Statistics on the Table. Harvard University Press, chapter 2. Philip Ball (2005). Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another. Arrow Books 2005, chapter 3. Fabien Locher (2007). "The observatory, the land-based ship and the crusades: earth sciences in european context, 1830–1850", British Journal for History of Science, 40(4), 2007, pp. 491–504 (On the leading role of Adolphe Quetelet in the fields of meteorology and geomagnetism in early nineteenth-century).

Adrian E. Raftery (born 1955 in Dublin, Ireland) is an Irish and American statistician and sociologist. He is the Blumstein-Jordan Professor of Statistics and Sociology, and founding Director of the Center for Statistics and Social Sciences at the University of Washington in Seattle, Washington, USA. Raftery studied mathematics and statistics at Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, and obtained his doctorate in mathematical statistics in 1980 from the Université Pierre et Marie Curie in Paris, France, advised by Paul Deheuvels. From 1980 to 1986 he was a lecturer in statistics at Trinity College Dublin, and since then he has been on the faculty of the University of Washington. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2003 and a member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 2009. He was identified as the world's most cited researcher in mathematics for the decade 1995-2005 by Thomson-ISI. As of 2009, Raftery has written or coauthored over 150 articles in scholarly journals. His research has focused on the development of new statistical methods, particularly for the social, environmental and health sciences. He has been a leader in developing methods for Bayesian model selection and Bayesian model averaging, and model-based clustering, as well as inference from computer simulation models. He has recently developed new methods for probabilistic weather forecasting and probabilistic population projections.   == Selected publications == Raftery, A. E. (2001). Statistics in Sociology, 1950—2000: A Selective Review. Sociological Methodology, 31, 1-45. Raftery, A. E.; Gneiting, T.; Balabdaoui, F.; Polakowski, M. (2005). "Using Bayesian Model Averaging to Calibrate Forecast Ensembles". Monthly Weather Review 133 (5): 1155. doi:10.1175/MWR2906.1.  Sloughter, J. M. L.; Raftery, A. E.; Gneiting, T.; Fraley, C. (2007). "Probabilistic Quantitative Precipitation Forecasting Using Bayesian Model Averaging". Monthly Weather Review 135 (9): 3209. doi:10.1175/MWR3441.1.  McLean Sloughter, J.; Gneiting, T.; Raftery, A. E. (2013). "Probabilistic Wind Vector Forecasting Using Ensembles and Bayesian Model Averaging". Monthly Weather Review 141 (6): 2107. doi:10.1175/MWR-D-12-00002.1.    == References ==   == External links == Adrian Raftery's home page

Alexander Craig "Alec" Aitken, FRS, FRSE, Hon FRSNZ, FRSL (1895–1967) was one of New Zealand's greatest mathematicians. In a 1935 paper he introduced the concept of generalized least squares, along with now standard vector/matrix notation for the linear regression model. Another influential paper co-authored with his student Harold Silverstone established the lower bound on the variance of an estimator, now known as Cramér–Rao bound.   == Life and workEdit == Aitken was born on 1 April 1895 in Dunedin, the eldest of the 7 children of William Aitken and Elizabeth Towers. Nevertheless he was of Scottish descent, his grandfather having emigrated from the Borders in 1868. He was educated at Otago Boys' High School in Dunedin (1908–13) and won the Thomas Baker Calculus Scholarship in his last year at school. He saw active service during World War I with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force, at Gallipoli, in Egypt, and at the Western Front. He was wounded at the Somme. Aitken graduated wit an M.A. degree from the University of Otago in 1920, then worked as a schoolmaster at Otago Boys' High School from 1920–3. Aitken studied for a Ph.D. degree at the University of Edinburgh, in Scotland, where his dissertation, "Smoothing of Data", was considered so impressive that he was awarded a Sc.D. degree in 1926. Aitken's impact at the University had been so great that he had been elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (FRSE) the year before the award of his degree, upon the proposal of Sir Edmund Whittaker, Sir Charles Galton Darwin, Edward Copson and David Gibb. Aitken was awarded the Makdougall-Brisbane Prize for 1930-2, and was very active in the affairs of the RSE, serving as Councillor (1934–36), Secretary to Ordinary Meetings (1936–40), and Vice-President (1948–51; 1956-9). He was also an active member of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society and a Fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries. Aitken spent his entire career at Edinburgh University, working as Lecturer in Actuarial Mathematics & Statistics (1925–36), Reader in Statistics (1936–46), and finally Professor of Mathematics (1946–65). During World War II he worked in Hut 6 Bletchley Park decrypting ENIGMA code. Aitken was one of the best mental calculators known, and had a prodigious memory. He knew the first 1000 digits of , the 96 recurring digits of 1/97, and memorised the Aeneid in high school. Unfortunately, his inability to forget the horrors he witnessed in World War I led to recurrent depression throughout his life. Aitken was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1936 and an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand (Hon FRSNZ) in 1940, both for his work in statistics, algebra and numerical analysis. He was an accomplished writer, being elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature (FRSL) in 1964 in response to the publication of his war memoirs. He was also an excellent musician, being described by Eric Fenby as the most accomplished amateur musician he had ever known, and was a champion athlete in his younger days.   == Awards and honoursEdit == An annual "Aitken Prize" is awarded by the New Zealand Mathematical Society for the best student talk at their colloquium. The prize was inaugurated in 1995 at the University of Otago's Aitken Centenary Conference, a joint mathematics and statistics conference held to remember Aitken a hundred years after his birth.   == Personal lifeEdit == He married a lecturer in Biology at Otago University, and they had a son and a daughter. Aitken died on 3 November 1967, in Edinburgh.   == ReferencesEdit ==   === Further readingEdit === I. M. L. Hunter, An exceptional talent for calculative thinking, British Journal of Psychology 53 (3) (1962), 243–258. New Zealand Mathematical Society Newsletter, Number 63, April 1995 (Centerfold) NZ Heroes page on Aitken A.C. Aitken (1895–1967), P.C. Fenton, Gazette of the Australian Mathematical Society, March 1995 Alexander Aitken, Econometrics Beat: Dave Giles' Blog Times obituary Royal Society citation Aitken prize Transcript of 1954 radio interview with Aitken and another mental calculator

Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov (or Tschuprov) (Russian: Алекса́ндр Александро́вич Чупро́в) (Mosal'sk, February 18, 1874 - Geneva, April 19, 1926) Russian statistician who worked on mathematical statistics, sample survey theory and demography. Chuprov was born in Mosal'sk but grew up and was educated in Moscow where his father, Alexander Ivanovich (1842–1908), a distinguished economist and statistician, was a professor. Alexander Alexandrovich graduated from the physico-mathematical faculty of Moscow University in 1896 with a dissertation on "The theory of probability as the foundation of theoretical statistics." He spent the years 1897-1901 studying political economy in Germany, in Berlin and Strasbourg. His doctoral dissertation, supervised by Georg Friedrich Knapp (1842–1926) Die Feldgemeinschaft, eine morphologische Untersuchung was published in 1902. The most important result of his stay in Germany was his friendship with the statistician Ladislaus Bortkiewicz. On his return to Russia and, in order to get a teaching position, Chuprov completed master's examinations at the University of Moscow, concentrating on theoretical economics and the application of mathematical methods. He started teaching at the St. Petersburg Polytechnical Institute and was in charge of the teaching of statistics until 1917. Chuprov used to go abroad regularly to work in foreign libraries. In June 1917 he went to Stockholm to the Statistical Bureau. He was away from Russia when the Bolshevik Revolution occurred. He intended to return but first illness and then money problems prevented him. In January 1919 he became director of the statistical bureau of the Central Union in Stockholm and in charge of its publication Bulletin of World Economy. In the middle of 1920 he moved to Dresden where in complete seclusion he wrote furiously. In 1925 he took up an appointment with the Russian College in Prague. The following year he died.   == Work and influence == Chuprov was influential both as a teacher and as a writer. The curriculum he designed for the St. Petersburg Polytechnic Institute was modern and his book on the theory of statistics was influential. He had some good students, the best known was Oskar Anderson. Chuprov's research was influenced by Bortkiewicz on the theoretical side and his father, A. I. Chuprov, on the empirical. Bortkiewicz was the leading exponent of the dispersion theory of Lexis and Chuprov contributed to this research. (There is a brief account of the history of this theory in Heyde & Seneta (1977.)) A. I. Chuprov was the leader of a movement to get statistical information on social conditions in Russia. By 1910 his son A. A. Chuprov was writing about the use of random sampling in such investigations. His work paralleled that of Bowley in England. Chuprov's first work on sampling was not mathematical but in the 1920s he developed the formula for optimal allocation in stratified sampling (to be rediscovered by Neyman in 1934 and usually associated with him). Chuprov also did demographic research. Chuprov tried to bring together the approaches of Bortkiewicz and Lexis, of the Russian mathematicians and of the English biometricians. He watched developments in Britain and was sympathetic to the work of Karl Pearson, much more so than A. A. Markov with whom he corresponded on statistical matters. Both Chuprov and his student Oskar Anderson published in Pearson’s journal Biometrika. Chuprov was not above telling the English off, “English scientific tradition rejects the concept of ‘mathematical probability’ … and the method of mathematical expectation has naturally shared the fate of the concept … on which it rests.” For a brief period Chuprov was known in Britain. In John Maynard Keynes' Treatise on Probability (1921) he is put with Markov and Chebyshev as the three great Russian names in the theory of statistics. However, with the rise of Fisherian statistics, Chuprov was forgotten. In Scandinavia he had a more lasting influence, principally through the papers he published in the Skandinavisk Aktuarietidskrift.   == Publications == Until recently (see Sheynin link below) only a few of Chuprov's many works were available in English Al. A. Tchouproff (1918) On the Mathematical Expectation of the Moments of Frequency Distributions, Biometrika, 12, No. 1/2, pp. 140-169. A. A. Chuprov (1924) On the Mathematical Expectation of the Moments of Frequency Distributions in the Case of Correlated Observations, Metron, 2, 461-493, 646-683. A. A. Tschuprow Principles of the Mathematical Theory of Correlation; translated by M. Kantorowitsch. W. Hodge & Co. 1939 The Correspondence between A.A. Markov and A.A. Chuprov on the Theory of Probability and Mathematical Statistics, ed. Kh.O. Ondar (1981, Springer)   == Obituaries == L. I. (Leon Isserlis) (1926) Alexander Alexandrovitch Tschuprow, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 89, No. 3 (May, 1926), pp. 619-622. J. M. K. (John Maynard Keynes) (1926) Obituary: Professor A. A. Tschuprow, Economic Journal, Vol. 36, No. 143 (Sep., 1926), pp. 517-518.   == Discussion == E. Seneta (2001) Aleksander Aleksandrovich Chuprov, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 303-307. New York: Springer. E. Seneta "Chuprov, Alexander Alexandrovich," pp. 185–7 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. O Sheynin, Aleksandr A Chuprov : life, work, correspondence. The making of mathematical statistics (Göttingen, 1996). E. Seneta (1985) A Sketch of the History of Survey Sampling in Russia, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 148, 118-125. C. C. Heyde & E. Seneta (1977) I. J. Bienaymé: Statistical Theory Anticipated, New York: Springer.   == External links == Seneta, Eugene William (2010). "Aleksander Aleksandrovich Chuprov (or Tschuprow)". StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC.  The richest source of information about Chuprov is Oscar Sheynin's article: Alexandr Chuprov Statistical Papers and Memorial Publications (The same website now [2007] also offers a downloadable version, in Russian, of the recently discovered Bortkiewicz-Chuprov correspondence 1895-1926.) The MacTutor site does not have an entry for Chuprov but it has entries for Chuprov's 'masters', Bortkiewicz and Lexis, and his student, Oskar Anderson. Wilhelm Lexis Ladislaus Josephowitsch Bortkiewicz Oskar Anderson There is a photograph of Chuprov at Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov on the Portraits of Statisticians page. The photograph also appears on the Russian Academy of Sciences website, as does one of his father A. I. Chuprov. Aleksandr Ivanovich Chuprov

Brigadier General Alexander Jobson DSO (2 April 1875 – 7 November 1933) was an Australian Army Brigadier General in World War I.   == Early life and career == Alexander Jobson was born on 2 April 1875 in Clunes, Victoria. He was educated in the public system and at the age of 14 he started working as a junior clerk with the Australian Mutual Provident Society (AMP) in Melbourne. He studied accountancy and qualified as an Associate of the Institute of Actuaries and a Fellow of the Australian Corporation of Public Accountants. Jobson moved to Sydney in 1902 and became actuary for an American firm. He established his own business as an accountant and actuary in 1906. From 1910 to 1916, he also wrote a financial column in the Sydney Sun. Jobson enlisted in the Scottish Rifles in August 1898 and was commissioned as a full lieutenant on 2 December 1899. He was promoted to captain on 29 August 1902. After moving to Sydney he joined the New South Wales Scottish Rifles with the rank of lieutenant on 1 January 1903 and was promoted to captain again on 1 July. He was promoted major on 13 September 1909. He transferred to the 25th Infantry on 1 July 1912 and on 1 July 1913 he was promoted to lieutenant colonel; and appointed to command the 34th Infantry Regiment.   == World War I == Jobson was appointed to the First Australian Imperial Force on 10 February 1916 with the rank of colonel and given command of the 9th Infantry Brigade. He was promoted to temporary brigadier general on 1 May 1916, shortly before departing Sydney. He arrived in London via South Africa and Dakar on 11 July 1916. The brigade trained on Salisbury Plain before moving to France in November. The brigade entered the an area of the line known as "Nursery Sector" at Armentières on 26 November 1916. Twice, during the absence of Major General Monash in 1917, Jobson became acting commander of the 3rd Division. His brigade was involved in a number of raids and Jobson was mentioned in dispatches for his part. At the Battle of Messines in June 1917, Jobson's planning and performance was excellent, but afterwards Jobson seemed badly affected by the stress of the situation. At a conference on 24 July 1917, Jobson appeared to be in an agitated state and Monash felt that his friend was becoming unstable. Jobson relinquished command on 25 August 1917 and returned to Australia where his appointment with the AIF was terminated on 9 December. Monash arranged for him to be again mentioned in dispatches and awarded the Distinguished Service Order in the 1918 New Year's List.   == Post war == In October 1918, Jobson was appointed to command the 2nd Battalion, 53rd Infantry Regiment with the rank of lieutenant colonel and honorary brigadier general. Failure in the field was apparently considered no bar to promotion and he was promoted to colonel in December 1919 and transferred to the Reserve of Officers in 1921. After the war, Jobson held a number of company directorates, most notably director of AMP in 1925 and Vice Chairman in 1932. Jobson collapsed and died from a coronary occlusion in King Street, Sydney on 7 November 1933 and was cremated.   == See also == List of Australian Generals   == References == Ross Mallett, Alexander Jobson, General Officers of the First AIF, adfa.edu.au Colin Forster, 'Jobson, Alexander (1875–1933)', Australian Dictionary of Biography, Volume 9, Melbourne University Press, 1983, pp 488–489.

Allan Birnbaum (May 27, 1923 – July 1, 1976) was an American statistician who contributed to statistical inference, foundations of statistics, statistical genetics, statistical psychology, and history of statistics. Birnbaum was born in San Francisco. His parents were Russian-born Orthodox Jews. He studied mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, doing a premedical programme at the same time. After taking a bachelor's degree in mathematics in 1945, he spent two years doing graduate courses in science, mathematics and philosophy, planning perhaps a career in the philosophy of science. One of his philosophy teachers, Hans Reichenbach, suggested he combine philosophy with science. He went to Columbia University to do a PhD with Abraham Wald but, when Wald died in a plane crash, Birnbaum asked Erich Leo Lehmann, who was visiting Columbia to take him on. Birnbaum's thesis and his early work was very much in the spirit of Lehmann's classic text Testing Statistical Hypotheses. Birnbaum stayed at Columbia until 1959 when he moved to the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, becoming a full Professor of Statistics in 1963. He travelled a good deal and liked Britain especially. In 1975 he accepted a post at the City University, London, and worked with The Open University on their course M341 (with Adrian Smith). He killed himself in 1976. The article in the Leading Personalities volume opens with the declaration, "Allan Birnbaum was one of the most profound thinkers in the field of foundations of statistics." The assessment is based on Birnbaum's 1962 article and the publications surrounding it. Birnbaum's argument for the likelihood principle generated great controversy; it implied, amongst other things, a repudiation of the approach of Wald and Lehmann, that Birnbaum had followed in his own research. Leonard Jimmie Savage opened the discussion by saying  Without any intent to speak with exaggeration or rhetorically, it seems to me that this is really a historic occasion. This paper is landmark in statistics because it seems to me improbable that many people will be able to read this paper or to have heard it tonight without coming away with considerable respect for the likelihood principle.  Although Birnbaum made other contributions, none compared with this for impact or continuing resonance.   == Publications of Allan Birnbaum == 41 papers are listed by Barnard and Godambe. The first appeared in 1953 and the last, posthumously, in 1977. The most celebrated is the 1962 paper on the likelihood principle. Birnbaum, Allan (1962). "On the foundations of statistical inference". Journal of the American Statistical Association (American Statistical Association) 57 (298): 269–326. doi:10.2307/2281640. JSTOR 2281640.  (With discussion.)   == Discussions == Norton, B. (1977). "Obituary of Allan D. Birnbaum". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 140: 564–565. ISSN 0035-9238.  Barnard, G. A.; Godambe, V. P. (1982). "Memorial Article: Allan Birnbaum 1923-1976". Annals of Statistics 10 (4): 1033–1039. doi:10.1214/aos/1176345968.  N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz (eds), ed. (1997). "Allan Birnbaum". Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present. New York: Wiley. pp. 83–85. ISBN 0-471-16381-3.  Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science.   == External links == For Birnbaum’s PhD students see Allan Birnbaum at the Mathematics Genealogy Project For information about Birnbaum's correspondence with R. A. Fisher (and a copy of one letter) see Correspondence of Sir R.A. Fisher: Calendar of Correspondence with Allan Birnbaum

The American Statistical Association (ASA) is the main professional organization for statisticians and related professionals in the United States. It was founded in Boston, Massachusetts on November 27, 1839, and is the second oldest continuously operating professional society in the US (only the Massachusetts Medical Society, founded in 1781, is older). The ASA services statisticians, quantitative scientists, and users of statistics across many academic areas and applications.   == Mission == The organization's mission is to broadly promote good application of statistical science, specifically to: support excellence in statistical practice, research, journals, and meetings work for the improvement of statistical education at all levels promote the proper application of statistics anticipate and meet member needs use the discipline of statistics to enhance human welfare seek opportunities to advance the statistics profession   == Membership == ASA has about 18,000 members, found in government, academia, and the private sector. The membership is involved in a wide variety of activities including: research in medical areas such as AIDS environmental risk assessment the development of new therapeutic drugs the exploration of space quality assurance in industry the examination of social issues such as the homeless and the poor analytic research on current business problems and economic forecasting the setting of standards for statistics used at all levels of government the promotion and development of statistical education for the public and the profession, and the expansion of methods and the use of computers and graphics to advance the science of statistics   == Fellowship == New Fellowships of the ASA are granted annually by the ASA Committee on Fellows. Candidates must have been members for the preceding three years but may be nominated by anyone. The maximum number of recipients each year is one-third of one percent of the ASA membership.   == Organizational structure == ASA is organized in Sections, Chapters and Committees. Chapters are arranged geographically, representing 78 areas across the US and Canada. Sections are subject-area and industry-area interest groups covering 22 sub-disciplines. ASA has more than 60 committees coordinating meetings, publications, education, careers, and special-interest topics involving statisticians.   == Accredited Professional Statistician == As of April 2010, the ASA offers PStat, the Accredited Professional Statistician status, to members who meet the ASA's credentialing requirements, which include an advanced degree in statistics or related quantitative field, five years of documented experience, and evidence of professional competence. A list of current members with PStat status is available.   == Publications ==  The ASA publishes several scientific journals: Journal of the American Statistical Association (JASA) The American Statistician (TAS) Journal of Business & Economic Statistics (JBES) Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics (JABES) Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics (JCGS) Technometrics (TECH) Online-only journals: Journal of Statistics Education (JSE) Journal of Statistical Software (JSS) It co-sponsors: The Current Index to Statistics (CIS) Quarterly magazine: Chance Historical publications include: Edward Jarvis, William Brigham and John Wingate Thornton, Memorial Of The American Statistical Association Praying The Adoption Of Measures For The Correction Of Errors In The Census, 1844 Publications of the American Statistical Association, 1888-1919 (Vols. 1-16) and Quarterly Publications of the American Statistical Association, 1920-1921   == See also == Fellows of the American Statistical Association President of the American Statistical Association American Mathematical Society COPSS Presidents' Award Statistics Without Borders (SWB)   == References ==   == External links == American Statistical Association The ASA: the First 160 years by Robert L. Mason MacTutor: American Statistical Association

Anders Lindstedt (27 June 1854 – 16 May 1939) was a Swedish mathematician, astronomer, and actuarial scientist, known for the Lindstedt-Poincaré method.   == Life and work == Lindstedt was born in a small village in the district of Sundborns, Dalecarlia a province in central Sweden. He obtained a PhD from the University of Lund aged 32 and was subsequently appointed as a lecturer in astronomy. He later went on to a position at the University of Dorpat (then belonging to Russia, now University of Tartu in Estonia) where he worked for around seven years on theoretical astronomy. He combined practical astronomy with an interest in theory, developing especially an interest in the three body problem This work was to influence Poincaré whose work on the three-body problem led to the discovery that there can be orbits which are nonperiodic, and yet not forever increasing nor approaching a fixed point, the beginning of what we now know as 'chaos theory'. His papers on celestial mechanics written during that period include a technique for uniformly approximating periodic solutions to ordinary differential equations when regular perturbation approaches fail. This was later developed by Henri Poincaré and is known today as the Lindstedt–Poincaré method. Lindstedt returned to Sweden in 1886 to take a post as professor at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm. During the period occupying this position, until 1909, he developed an interest in actuarial science. He made contributions to the theory of pension funds and worked as a member of government committees responsible for insurance law and social insurance. He became a corresponding member of the Institute of Actuaries in London. He was for a time Kings Inspector of insurance companies. In 1909 he resigned his professorial position to work full-time on insurance. From 1909 to 1916 Lindstedt was also a Justice of the Supreme Administrative Court of Sweden. In 1912 Lindstedt constructed a life table for annuities using data from Swedish population experience and for each age was able to extrapolate the sequence of annual probability of death, namely the mortality profile. Probably, this work constitutes the earliest projection of age-specific functions. He directed the actuarial work which underpinned the state old age an invalidity pensions in Sweden introduced in 1913 as part of the National Pension Act (see Swedish welfare). Even after his retirement aged 70 he continued to take an active interest in actuarial activities both in Sweden and abroad, attending meetings of the Swedish Actuarial Society until shortly before his death in 1939.   == Notes == ^ a b Hvar 8 dag, 10:de Årg, No 11, 13 december 1908, sid. 162. ^ a b Memoir Anders Lindstedt 27 June 1854-16 May 1939, Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, 70 (1939) p. 269. [1] ^ Lindstedt, A. (1884). "Über die Bestimmung der gegenseitigen Entfernungen in dem Probleme der drei Körper". Astronomische Nachrichten 107 (13–14): 197–214. Bibcode:1884AN....107..197L. doi:10.1002/asna.18841071301.  (Roughly translated, the title of this paper is "On determining the mutual distances in the three body problem".), ^ Jules Henri Poincaré (1890) "Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique. Divergence des séries de M. Lindstedt," Acta Mathematica, vol. 13, pages 1–270., ^ A. Lindstedt, Abh. K. Akad. Wiss. St. Petersburg 31, No. 4 (1882) ^ H. Poincaré, Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique Célèste I, II, III (Dover Publ., New York,1957). ^ A brief history of the professors at the department of Mathematics, KTH Dept. of Mathematics, retrieved 2013-12-29. ^ Cramer H and H Wold (1935), Mortality variations in Sweden: a study in graduation and forecasting, Skandinavisk Aktuarietidskrift, 18: 161–241 ^ Pitcco, Ermnno, From Halley to Frailty: A Review of Survival Models for Actuarial Calculations, [2]

Anderson Gray McKendrick (8 September 1876 – 30 May 1943) was a Scottish physician and epidemiologist pioneered the use of mathematical methods in epidemiology. Irwin (see below) commented on the quality of his work, "Although an amateur, he was a brilliant mathematician, with a far greater insight than many professionals." McKendrick was born in Edinburgh the fifth and last child of John Gray McKendrick FRS, a distinguished physiologist. The son trained as a doctor at the University of Glasgow and joined the Indian Medical Service. He worked with Ronald Ross and eventually would continue his work on mathematical epidemiology. His primary interest was in research and he became director of the Pasteur Institute at Kasauli in the Punjab. He was invalided home to Britain in 1920 and settled in Edinburgh where he became Superintendent of the Laboratory of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He held this post for the rest of his life. McKendrick's career as a mathematical epidemiologist began in India. In 1911, McKendrick rediscovered the logistic equation and fit it to bacterial growth data. In 1914 he published a paper in which he gave equations for the pure birth process and a particular birth-death process. After his return to Scotland he published more. His 1926 paper, 'Applications of mathematics to medical problems' was particularly impressive, including the widely used McKendrick–Von Foerster partial differential equation  Some of this papers other results for stochastic models of epidemics and population growth were rediscovered by William Feller in 1939. Feller remarks in his Introduction to the Theory of Probability & its Applications (3rd edition p. 450), "It is unfortunate that this remarkable paper passed practically unnoticed." The same paper is also the earliest reference in Dempster et al.'s 1977 paper that defined and popularized the EM algorithm (expectation-maximization algorithm) In 1927 McKendrick began a collaboration with W. O. Kermack (1898–1970) which produced a notable series of papers on the Kermack–McKendrick theory, a general theory of infectious disease transmission. W. M. Hirsch gives this picture of the man: "McKendrick was a truly Christian gentleman, a tall and handsome man, brilliant in mind, kind and modest in person, a skilful counsellor and administrator who gave of himself and knew how to enable others."   == Selected works == A. G. McKendrick Applications of mathematics to medical problems Kapil Proceedings of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society, vol 44, (1925–6), pp. 1–34. Reprinted with commentary in S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson (Editors) (1997) Breakthroughs in Statistics: Volume III New York Springer. W. O. Kermack; A. G. McKendrick “A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 115, (1927), pp. 700–721. W. O. Kermack; A. G. McKendrick “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. II. The Problem of Endemicity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 138, (1932) pp. 55–83. W. O. Kermack; A. G. McKendrick “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. III. Further Studies of the Problem of Endemicity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 141, (1933), pp. 94–122.   == Commentary == There is an account of McKendrick's Applications paper in J. O. Irwin The Place of Mathematics in Medical and Biological Statistics, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), Vol. 126, No. 1. (1963), pp. 1–45.   == Biography == Warren M. Hirsch (2004) McKendrick, Anderson Gray (1876–1943), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press. Gani, J. (2001) Anderson Gray McKendrick, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 323–327. New York: Springer.   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Anderson Gray McKendrick", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . There is a photograph at A. G. McKendrick on the Portraits of Statisticians page. There is a modern presentation of one of the Kermack–McKendrick models in Mathworld: Kermack–McKendrick model McKendrick's father was elected to the Royal Society, as was Kermack his co-worker Royal Society citation for John Gray McKendrick Royal Society citation for William Ogilvy Kermack Photo of Kermack KERMACK, William Ogilvy

Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (Russian: Андрей Николаевич Колмогоров; IPA: [ɐnˈdrʲej nʲɪkɐˈlajɪvʲɪtɕ kəlmɐˈɡorəf], 25 April 1903 – 20 October 1987) was a 20th-century Soviet mathematician who made significant contributions to the mathematics of probability theory, topology, intuitionistic logic, turbulence, classical mechanics, algorithmic information theory and computational complexity.   == BiographyEdit ==   === Early lifeEdit === Andrey Kolmogorov was born in Tambov, about 500 kilometers south-southeast of Moscow, in 1903. His unmarried mother, Maria Y. Kolmogorova, died giving birth to him. Andrey was raised by two of his aunts in Tunoshna (near Yaroslavl) at the estate of his grandfather, a well-to-do nobleman. Little is known about Andrey's father. He was supposedly named Nikolai Matveevich Kataev and had been an agronomist. Nikolai had been exiled from St. Petersburg to the Yaroslavl province after his participation in the revolutionary movement against the czars. He disappeared in 1919 and he was presumed to have been killed in the Russian Civil War. Andrey Kolmogorov was educated in his aunt Vera's village school, and his earliest literary efforts and mathematical papers were printed in the school journal "The Swallow of Spring". Andrey (at the age of five) was the "editor" of the mathematical section of this journal. Kolmogorov's first mathematical discovery was published in this journal: at the age of five he noticed the regularity in the sum of the series of odd numbers.  etc. In 1910, his aunt adopted him, and they moved to Moscow, where he graduated from high school in 1920. Later that same year, Kolmogorov began to study at the Moscow State University and at the same time Mendeleev Moscow Institute of Chemistry and Technology. Kolmogorov writes about this time: "I arrived at Moscow University with a fair knowledge of mathematics. I knew in particular the beginning of set theory. I studied many questions in articles in the Encyclopedia of Brockhaus and Efron, filling out for myself what was presented too concisely in these articles." Kolmogorov gained a reputation for his wide-ranging erudition. While an undergraduate student in college, he attended the seminars of the Russian historian S. V. Bachrushin, and he published his first research paper on the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries' landholding practices in the Novgorod Republic. During the same period (1921–22), Kolmogorov worked out and proved several results in set theory and in the theory of Fourier series.   === AdulthoodEdit === In 1922, Kolmogorov gained international recognition for constructing a Fourier series that diverges almost everywhere. Around this time, he decided to devote his life to mathematics. In 1925, Kolmogorov graduated from the Moscow State University and began to study under the supervision of Nikolai Luzin. He formed a lifelong friendship with Pavel Alexandrov. (Both were later involved in the political persecution of their common teacher Nikolai Luzin, in the so-called Luzin affair in 1936.) Kolmogorov (together with Aleksandr Khinchin) became interested in probability theory. Also in 1925, he published his work in intuitionistic logic — On the principle of the excluded middle, in which he proved that under a certain interpretation, all statements of classical formal logic can be formulated as those of intuitionistic logic. In 1929, Kolmogorov earned his Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree, from the Moscow State University. In 1930, Kolmogorov went on his first long trip abroad, traveling to Göttingen and Munich, and then to Paris. He had various scientific contacts in Göttingen. First of all with Courant and his students working on limit theorems, where diffusion processes turned out to be the limits of discrete random processes, then with H. Weyl in intuitionistic logic, and lastly with Landau in function theory. His pioneering work, About the Analytical Methods of Probability Theory, was published (in German) in 1931. Also in 1931, he became a professor at the Moscow State University. In 1933, Kolmogorov published his book, Foundations of the Theory of Probability, laying the modern axiomatic foundations of probability theory and establishing his reputation as the world's leading expert in this field. In 1935, Kolmogorov became the first chairman of the department of probability theory at the Moscow State University. Around the same years (1936) Kolmogorov contributed to the field of ecology and generalized the Lotka–Volterra model of predator-prey systems. In a 1938 paper, Kolmogorov "established the basic theorems for smoothing and predicting stationary stochastic processes"—a paper that would have major military applications during the Cold War. In 1939, he was elected a full member (academician) of the USSR Academy of Sciences. During World War II Kolmogorov contributed to the Soviet war effort by applying statistical theory to artillery fire, developing a scheme of stochastic distribution of barrage balloons intended to help protect Moscow from German bombers. In his study of stochastic processes (random processes), especially Markov processes, Kolmogorov and the British mathematician Sydney Chapman independently developed the pivotal set of equations in the field, which have been given the name of the Chapman–Kolmogorov equations.  Later, Kolmogorov focused his research on turbulence, where his publications (beginning in 1941) significantly influenced the field. In classical mechanics, he is best known for the Kolmogorov–Arnold–Moser theorem, first presented in 1954 at the International Congress of Mathematicians. In 1957, working jointly with his student V. I. Arnold, he solved a particular interpretation of Hilbert's thirteenth problem. Around this time he also began to develop, and was considered a founder of, algorithmic complexity theory – often referred to as Kolmogorov complexity theory. Kolmogorov married Anna Dmitrievna Egorova in 1942. He pursued a vigorous teaching routine throughout his life, not only at the university level but also with younger children, as he was actively involved in developing a pedagogy for gifted children (in literature, music, and mathematics). At the Moscow State University, Kolmogorov occupied different positions, including the heads of several departments: probability, statistics, and random processes; mathematical logic. He also served as the Dean of the Moscow State University Department of Mechanics and Mathematics. In 1971, Kolmogorov joined an oceanographic expedition aboard the research vessel Dmitri Mendeleev. He wrote a number of articles for the Great Soviet Encyclopedia. In his later years, he devoted much of his effort to the mathematical and philosophical relationship between probability theory in abstract and applied areas. Kolmogorov died in Moscow in 1987, and his remains were buried in the Novodevichy cemetery. A quotation attributed to Kolmogorov is [translated into English]: "Every mathematician believes that he is ahead of the others. The reason none state this belief in public is because they are intelligent people." Vladimir Arnold once has said: "Kolmogorov – Poincaré – Gauss – Euler – Newton, are only five lives separating us from the source of our science".   == Awards and honoursEdit == Kolmogorov received numerous awards and honours both during and after his lifetime: Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Awarded the Stalin Prize in 1941 Award the Balzan Prize in 1962 Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1963 Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1964. Awarde the Lenin Prize in 1965 Awarded the Wolf Prize in 1980 Awarded the Lobachevsky Prize in 1986 The following are named in Kolmogorov's honour:   == BibliographyEdit == A bibliography of his works appeared in "Publications of A. N. Kolmogorov". Annals of Probability 17 (3): 945–964. July 1989. doi:10.1214/aop/1176991252.   Kolmogorov, Andrey (1933). Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung (in German). Berlin: Julius Springer. Translation: Kolmogorov, Andrey (1956). Foundations of the Theory of Probability (2nd ed.). New York: Chelsea. ISBN 0-8284-0023-7.   1991–93. Selected works of A.N. Kolmogorov, 3 vols. Tikhomirov, V. M., ed., Volosov, V. M., trans. Dordrecht:Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 90-277-2796-1 1925. "On the principle of the excluded middle" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 414–37. Kolmogorov, Andrei N. (1963). "On Tables of Random Numbers". Sankhyā Ser. A. 25: 369–375. MR 178484.  Kolmogorov, Andrei N. (1998) [1963]. "On Tables of Random Numbers". Theoretical Computer Science 207 (2): 387–395. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(98)00075-9. MR 1643414.  Kolmogorov, Andrei N. (2005) Selected works. In 6 volumes. Moscow (in Russian) Textbooks: A. N. Kolmogorov and B. V. Gnedenko. "Limit distributions for sums of independent random variables", 1954. A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin. "Elements of the Theory of Functions and Functional Analysis", Publication 1999, Publication 2012   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Biography at Scholarpedia The Legacy of Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov Curriculum Vitae and Biography. Kolmogorov School. Ph.D. students and descendants of A. N. Kolmogorov. A. N. Kolmogorov works, books, papers, articles. Photographs and Portraits of A. N. Kolmogorov. The origins and legacy of Kolmogorov's Grundbegriffe Vitanyi, P.M.B., Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov. Scholarpedia, 2(2):2798; 2007 Collection of links to Kolmogorov resources Interview with Professor A. M. Yaglom about Kolmogorov, Gelfand and other (1988, Ithaca, New York) Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (in Russian) Kolmogorov School at Moscow University Annual Kolmogorov Lecture at the Computer Learning Research Centre at Royal Holloway, University of London Lorentz G. G., Mathematics and Politics in the Soviet Union from 1928 to 1953 Kutateladze S. S., The Tragedy of Mathematics in Russia Video recording of the G. Falkovich's lecture: "Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (1903–1987) and the Russian school"

André-Michel Guerry (December 24, 1802 – April 9, 1866) was a French lawyer and amateur statistician. Together with Adolphe Quetelet he may be regarded as the founder of moral statistics which led to the development of criminology, sociology and ultimately, modern social science.   == Early life and education == Guerry was born in Tours, Indre-et-Loire, the only child of Michel Guerry, a building contractor, whose family had a long history as innkeepers, merchants, farmers and trades-people. About 1817-1820 he studied at the Imperial College of Tours (now the Lyceum Descartes, founded in 1807) and subsequently studied law at the University of Poitiers. About 1824-1825 he moved to Paris and was admitted to the bar as a royal advocate. Shortly after, he was employed by the Ministry of Justice. Guerry worked with the data on crime statistics in France collected as part of the General office for administration of criminal justice in France, the first centralized national system of crime reporting. Guerry was so fascinated with these data, and the possibility to discover empirical regularities and laws that might govern them, that he gave up the active practice of law to devote the rest of his life to study crime and its relation to other moral variables.   == Moral statistics and criminology == Guerry's first work on what would come to be called moral statistics was a large, one page sheet containing three shaded maps of France, prepared together with the Venetian geographer, Adriano Balbi in 1829. These showed the departments of France, shaded according to crimes against persons, crimes against property, and school instruction. Such statistical maps, now called choropleth maps had just been invented in 1826 by Baron Charles Dupin. Guerry is best known for his Essay on moral statistics of France, presented to the French Academy of Sciences on July 2, 1832 and published in 1833 after it was awarded the Prix Montyon in statistics. His presentation, in tables and thematic maps, showed that rates of crime and suicide remained remarkably stable over time, when broken down by age, sex, region of France and even season of the year. Yet, these numbers also varied systematically across departments of France. This regularity of social numbers created the possibility to conceive that human actions could be described by social laws, just as inanimate actions were governed by physical laws. Throughout his career, Guerry was particularly interested in uncovering the relation between social and moral variables. How are personal crime and property related to each other, and to suicide, donations to the poor, illegitimate births, wealth, and so forth? How do different types of crimes vary with age of the accused? Statistical methods (correlation and regression) were still in their infancy, so Guerry relied on graphic comparisons of maps and semi-graphic tables. Shown below are three of the six thematic maps that Guerry included in his Essay.   === Suicide === In addition to a map of France showing rates of suicide by department, Guerry collected all the suicide notes found by the police in Paris over a four-year period. He classified these by the apparent motive expressed for taking one's life, perhaps the first content analysis in the social sciences.   === Ordonnateur statistique === Around 1851, Guerry invented the Ordonnateur Statistique, probably the first mechanical device designed to aid in statistical calculations and the assessment of relationships among moral variables. This device is now known to have been used for sorting one target variable (e.g., crimes of different types) in relation to other possibly explanatory variables (e.g., population density).   === Polar area diagram === In 1829, Guerry invented a new graphic form, the Polar area diagram to show variations in weather and other phenomena over calendar cycles. This variation of the Pie chart uses equi-angular sectors of differing radii, in contrast to the pie chart that uses sectors with varying angle, but equal radii. The polar area diagram is often mistakenly credited to Florence Nightingale, who used it to great effect to illustrate needless mortality in the Crimean War due to unsanitary medical conditions. Nightingale most probably got the idea from William Farr, who in turn was acquainted with Guerry's work.   === Other activities === Guerry also resided in Beaumont-sur-Dême, where he was mayor of the village from 1846–1855.   == Major works == Balbi, Adriano, and André-Michel Guerry. 1829. Statistique comparée de l'état de l'instruction et du nombre des crimes dans les divers arrondissements des Académies et des Cours Royales de France. Paris. Guerry, André-Michel. 1829. Mémoire sur les variations méterologiques comparées aux phénomènes physiologiques. Annales d'Hygiène Publique et de Médecine Légal 1:228. Guerry, André-Michel. 1833. Essai sur la statistique morale de la France. Paris: Crochard. Gallica Guerry, André-Michel. 1864. Statistique morale de l'Angleterre comparée avec la statistique morale de la France, d'après les comptes de l'administration de la justice criminelle en Angleterre et en France, etc. Paris: J.-B. Baillière et fils.   == References ==   == External links == Milestones project A.-M. Guerry's Moral Statistics of France Friendly M. (2007) A.-M. Guerry's Moral Statistics of France: Challenges for Multivariable Spatial Analysis, Statistical Science, 22 (3), 368-399. Project Euclid Friendly, M. & de Saint Agathe, N. (2012) André-Michel Guerry's Ordonnateur Statistique: The First Statistical Calculator?, The American Statistician, v. 66(3), 195-200. [1]

Anil Kumar Gain (Bengali: অনীল কুমার গায়েন), FRS (1 February 1919 – 7 February 1978) (also spelt Anil Kumar Gayen) was an Indian mathematician and statistician best known for his works on the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient in the field of applied statistics, with his colleague Ronald Fisher. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge under the supervision of Henry Ellis Daniels, who was the then President of the Royal Statistical Society. He was honoured as a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and the famous Cambridge Philosophical Society. Gain was the President of the Statistics section of the Indian Science Congress Association, as well as the Head of the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He later went on to found Vidyasagar University, naming it after the famous social reformer of the Bengali renaissance, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar.   == Early life == Anil Kumar Gain was born in a poor Bengali family of a village named Lakkhi in Purba Medinipur, West Bengal, to Jibankrishna Gain and Panchami Devi. His father having died in his childhood, he and his siblings were brought up by his widowed mother under economic hardship. He started his education in an informal village school or Pathshala and was admitted to a formal school when he was eight. In his schooldays, he showed particular interest in English and Mathematics, subjects he was primarily taught by his mother. Upon finishing school, he travelled to Kolkata to complete an Honours degree in Mathematics from Surendranath College, followed by a Master's degree in Applied mathematics from the University of Calcutta. He was declared the University Gold Medalist for the year 1943.   == Career ==  After briefly teaching at Presidency College and Bengal College of Engineering & Technology, Gain got married to Krishna Chongdar, daughter of a famous and wealthy businessman. He travelled to England in 1947, to pursue his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in Mathematical statistics – only to complete it in the year 1950. It was there that he met the famous Henry Ellis Daniels, under whose supervision he wrote most of his papers. He also befriended Sir Ronald Fisher there, and spent much of his time working with him in the field of Applied statistics, particularly on the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. After returning to India, he started teaching at the Indian Statistical Institute as well as the University of Calcutta, and finally joined the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, where he spent most of his remaining career. During his years at Kharagpur, he began to work on educational projects such as the National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT) to reform the education sector in Bengal. This interest in revolutionizing education eventually led to the inception of Vidyasagar University, which he founded with the vision of having a non-traditional teaching and learning environment at the University level. The University was finally established by the University Grants Commission (India) under the Vidyasagar University Act of 1981.   == Legacy and Death ==  Due to his efforts to revolutionise education in Bengal, he became a key figure in the latter half of the Bengali renaissance, as well as a renowned scholar and academic. In 2012, Vidyasagar announced the establishment of the Anil Kumar Gain Memorial Lecture, in honour of his contributions to the university, and to Bengal as a whole. He died a week after his birthday, on the 7th of February 1978, of natural causes at his residence in Kolkata, India. His descendants still live in Kolkata, as well as abroad.   == See also ==   == References ==

Sir Arthur Lyon Bowley (Bristol, 6 November 1869 – Surrey, 21 January 1957) was an English statistician and economist who worked on economic statistics and pioneered the use of sampling techniques in social surveys.   == Early life == Bowley's father, James William Lyon Bowley, was a minister in the Church of England. He died in 1870 when Arthur was under two, leaving Arthur's mother as mother or stepmother to seven children. Arthur was educated at a Christ's Hospital, and won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge to study mathematics. He graduated as Tenth Wrangler. At Cambridge Bowley had a short course of study with the economist Alfred Marshall who had also been a Cambridge wrangler. Under Marshall's influence Bowley became an economic statistician. His Account of England's Foreign Trade won the Cobden Essay Prize and was published as a book. Marshall watched over Bowley's career, recommending him for jobs and offering him advice. Most notoriously Marshall told him the Elements of Statistics contained "too much mathematics."   == Academic career == After leaving Cambridge Bowley taught mathematics at St John's School in Leatherhead from 1893 to 1899. Meanwhile, he was publishing in economic statistics; his first article for the journal of the Royal Statistical Society) appeared in 1895. In that year the London School of Economics opened. Bowley was appointed as a part-time lecturer and he would be connected with the School until he retired in 1936. He can be considered one of the School's intellectual fathers. However, he continued to teach elsewhere; for more than a decade he taught at University College, Reading (now the University of Reading). He was the Newmarch lecturer at University College, London (1897–98 and 1927–28). At the LSE he became Reader in 1908, and Professor in 1915. In 1919 he was appointed to a newly established Chair of Statistics, probably the first of its kind in Britain. In Bowley's time, however, the LSE statistics group was very small: E. C. Rhodes arrived in 1924 and R. G. D. Allen in 1928. Bowley produced a stream of studies of British economic statistics, beginning in the 1890s with work on trade and on wages and income, and proceeding to studies of national income in the 1920s and –30s. Specially noteworthy was his collaboration with Josiah Stamp on a comparison of the UK national income in 1911 and 1924. (Official national income statistics date only from the Second World War.) From around 1910 Bowley worked on social statistics as well. In aim, the work was a continuation of such surveys of social conditions as Charles Booth's "Life and Labour of the People in London" (1889–1903) and Seebohm Rowntree's "Poverty, A Study of Town Life" (1901). The methodological innovation was the use of sampling techniques. Bowley gave a detailed exposition of his approach to sampling in a 62-page paper published in 1926. The culmination of Bowley's work on social surveys was the monumental New Survey of London Life and Labour. Even in the 1930s his research could take a new direction, as when he collaborated with his junior colleague R. G. D. Allen on an econometric study of family expenditure.   == Books == Bowley's "Elements of Statistics" is generally regarded as the first English-language statistics text-book. It described the techniques of descriptive statistics that would be useful for economists and social sciences, and in the early editions contained little statistical theory. In statistical theory Bowley was not an innovator but drew on the writings of Karl Pearson, Udny Yule and F. Y. Edgeworth. In the 1930s Bowley informed Fisher that "Professor Edgeworth had written a great deal on a kindred subject" and slapping Neyman down with "I am not at all sure that the 'confidence' [in confidence interval] is not a 'confidence trick.'" Bowley's teaching presaged several of the EDA ideas later popularised by John Tukey, including stemplots, decile boxplots, the seven-figure summary and trimean. Bowley's '"The Mathematical Groundwork of Economics'" was a notable attempt to provide the practising economist with the main ideas and techniques of mathematical economics; it was the first book in English of its kind. One of its successes was to bring the Edgeworth box to the attention of economists generally. Bowley was so successful that this is often referred to as the "Edgeworth-Bowley box". He also introduced the concept of conjectural variation into the theory of oligopoly in this book.   == Honours == Bowley received many honours. In 1922 he became Fellow of the British Academy and in 1950 he was knighted. He served on the council of the Royal Economic Society and was president of the Econometric Society 1938-9. The Royal Statistical Society awarded him its Guy Medal in Gold in 1935 and he served as its president 1938–40.   == Personal life == According to Allen and George, "In personality Bowley was somewhat shy and retiring. He did not readily make friends and his close friendship with Edwin Cannan over many years was an almost unique experience." They recall an anecdote about an occasion when Bowley and Cannan were cycling with Edgeworth. When Edgeworth wanted to discuss a mathematical question Cannan said, "Bowley, let us go a little faster, Edgeworth cannot talk mathematics at more than eight miles an hour." His daughter Marian Bowley also had an academic career in economics.   == Bowley's law == Bowley formulated Bowley's law, which says that the proportion of GNP from labour is constant.   == Main publications of A. L. Bowley == A Short Account of England's Foreign Trade in the Nineteenth Century, 1893. Wages and Income in the United Kingdom Since 1860, 1900. Elements of Statistics, 1901. (4th edition in 1920) An Elementary Manual of Statistics, 1909. Livelihood and Poverty: a study in the economic conditions of working-class households, with A.R. Bennett-Hurst, 1915. The Division of the Product of Industry, 1919 The Mathematical Groundwork of Economics, 1924. Has Poverty Diminished? with M.Hogg, 1925. Measurement of Precision attained in Sampling, Bulletin de l'Institut International de Statistique,(1926) 22, Suppl. to Book 1, 1–62. Gallica (after p. 451) The National Income 1924 with J. Stamp, 1927. Bilateral Monopoly, 1928, Economic Journal. F. Y. Edgeworth's Contributions to Mathematical Statistics, 1928. New Survey of London Life and Labour, 1930–35. Family Expenditure with R.G.D. Allen, 1935. Three Studies in National Income, 1939.   == Discussions == Allen, R.D.G. and George R. F. (1957) Obituary of Professor Sir Arthur Bowley. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, A, 102, 236–241. W F Maunder and Sir Arthur Lyon Bowley (1869–1957) in Studies in the History of Statistics Probability, (ed. E S Pearson and M G Kendall) 1970. London: Griffin. Darnell, A. (1981), "A.L. Bowley, 1969-1957", in O'Brien, D. P.; Presley, J. R., Pioneers of Modern Economics in Britain, London: Macmillan, pp. 140–174 . Bowley, Arthur Lyon, pp. 277–9 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science.   == See also == Stem-and-leaf display attributed to Bowley's work   == References ==   == External links == Horizons March 2005: Stats in History—Arthurian Legend Bowley Papers at the LSE Archives New School: Arthur Lyon Bowley The New School entry has a photograph. There is another at Bowley on the Portraits of Statisticians page. In the 4th edition of the Elements (1920) Bowley gave a lot more space to statistical theory. The following excerpt illustrates his approach Bowley's Pearsonian approach to chi-squared on the Life and Work of Statisticians page. This was written just before Bowley got involved in the controversy between Fisher and Pearson on chi-squared. In the fifth edition (1926) Bowley added a reference to his own contribution. For Bowley's contribution to sampling theory put in historical perspective see Part D: A Review of Statistical Sampling from Laplace to Neyman

Sir Franz Arthur Friedrich Schuster FRS FRSE (12 September 1851 – 17 October 1934) was a German-born British physicist known for his work in spectroscopy, electrochemistry, optics, X-radiography and the application of harmonic analysis to physics. Schuster's Integral is named after him. He contributed to making the University of Manchester a centre for the study of physics.   == Early years == Arthur Schuster was born in Frankfurt am Main, Germany into a family of merchants and bankers. Schuster's parents were married in 1849, converted from Judaism to Christianity, and brought up their children in that faith. In 1869, his father moved to Manchester where the family textile business was based. Arthur, who had been to school in Frankfurt and was studying in Geneva, joined his parents in 1870 and he and the other children became British citizens in 1875. Edgar Schuster (1897–1969) was his nephew. From his childhood, Schuster had been interested in science and after working for a year for Schuster Brothers he persuaded his father to let him study at Owens College. He studied mathematics under Thomas Barker and physics under Balfour Stewart, and began research with Henry Roscoe on the spectra of hydrogen and nitrogen. He spent a year with Gustav Kirchhoff at the University of Heidelberg, and having gained his PhD, returned to Owens as an unpaid demonstrator in physics. Schuster later used his family's wealth to buy material and equipment and to endow readerships in mathematical physics at Manchester and meteorology at the University of Cambridge. He also contributed to the Royal Society and the International Union for Co-operation in Solar Research. After a further period of study in Germany with Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Hermann von Helmholtz, he returned to England, where his knowledge of spectrum analysis led to him being appointed to lead an expedition to Siam, to photograph the coronal spectrum during the total solar eclipse of 6 April 1875. This was an important appointment for such a junior scientist. On the way, he wrote a letter dated 21 February 1875, to Nature describing his observation of the "green flash" phenomenon.   == Career ==  On his return to Manchester, he began research on electricity and then went on to spend five years at the Cavendish Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. His status there was quite unofficial; he was neither a student nor a fellow. He worked with James Clerk Maxwell and with Rayleigh. In 1881 he was appointed to the Beyer Chair of Applied Mathematics at Owens, by now one of the colleges of the new Victoria University. He succeeded his teacher Balfour Stewart as professor of physics in 1888. This appointment gave him the opportunity to establish a large, active teaching and research department. In 1900 a new laboratory, for which he had fought and which he had designed, was officially opened. It was the fourth largest in the world. The laboratory quickly became a serious rival to the Cavendish; see Manchester Science Hall of Fame. Much of this later fame was associated with Ernest Rutherford who succeeded Schuster as Langworthy Professor in 1907. Schuster resigned from the chair, partly for health reasons and partly to promote the cause of international science. He ensured that Rutherford would succeed him. Schuster is credited with coining the concept of "antimatter" in two letters to Nature in 1898. He hypothesized antiatoms, and whole antimatter solar systems, which would yield energy if the atoms combined with atoms of normal matter. His hypothesis was given a mathematical foundation by the work of Paul Dirac in 1928, which predicted antiparticles and later led to their discovery. Schuster is perhaps most widely remembered for his periodogram analysis, a technique which was long the main practical tool for identifying statistically important frequencies present in a time series of observations. He first used this form of harmonic analysis in 1897 to disprove C. G. Knott's claim of periodicity in earthquake occurrences. He went on to apply the technique to analysing sunspot activity. This was an old interest. In 1875 Stewart's friend and Roscoe's cousin, the economist Jevons, reported, "Mr. A Schuster of Owens College has ingeniously pointed out that the periods of good vintage in Western Europe have occurred at intervals somewhat approximating to eleven years, the average length of the principal sun-spot cycle." Schuster is credited by Chandrasekhar to have given a fresh start to the radiative transfer problem. Schuster formulated in 1905 a problem in radiative transfer in an attempt to explain the appearance of absorption and emission lines in stellar spectra. Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the Schuster family was subjected to anti-German prejudice in the press and, in Arthur's case, in some quarters of the Royal Society. His brother Sir Felix Schuster had to issue a statement pointing out the family's loyalty to Britain and that they all had sons serving in the British army. On the day Arthur gave his presidential address to the 1915 British Association meeting, he learned that his son had been wounded. Schuster was regarded by his contemporaries as a mathematical physicist of exceptional ability but also as a capable administrator and teacher, and an advocate for the role of science in education and industry.   == Honours and awards == Schuster was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1879, and knighted in the 1920 New Year Honours. Other honours include doctorates from the universities of Calcutta (1908), Geneva (1909), St Andrews (1911), and Oxford (1917) and the award of the Royal, Rumford and Copley medals of the Royal Society (1893, 1926 and 1931). ; LLD, Calcutta, 1876; Schuster served as secretary of the Royal Society and was elected vice-president (1919–20) and foreign secretary (1920–24). He also served as secretary of the International Research Council (1919–28) and on the management committees for the Meteorological Office (1905–32) and National Physical Laboratory (1899–1902, 1920–25). The University of Manchester's Schuster Laboratory, home to the School of Physics and Astronomy is named after him.   == Bibliography == The Progress of Physics (1910) Four lectures delivered to the University of Calcutta during March 1908, which give cautious provisional approval of Einstein's Special Relativity and Max Planck's initial ideas about Quanta. An introduction to the theory of optics (1904) There are two subsequent editions to this book, and Schuster is the author. Edition two was published in 1909 and edition three appears to have two publication dates of 1924, and 1928.   == Gallery ==   == References ==   == Further reading == Beginning in 1871 Schuster contributed many articles to the Royal Society journals. These articles are available online at JSTOR and at Gallica. Arthur Schuster Biographical Fragments London; Macmillan (1932). – An attractive collection of reminiscences about Schuster's education and his expeditions with recollections of the scientists he knew. The Physical Laboratories of the University of Manchester – Professor Arthur Schuster: Biographical and Bibliographical Notes. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 1906. pp. 39–60.    == External links == Arthur Schuster, "On Lunar and Solar Periodicities of Earthquakes ", Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 61 (1897), pp. 455–465 – Schuster's first paper on the use of the technique he later called the periodogram Arthur Schuster, "On the Periodicities of Sunspots", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 206. (1906), pp. 69–100. – Schuster's later paper on sunspots Schuster's Royal Society citation signed by Maxwell, Joule, and others Obituary Notices : Fellows:- Schuster, Sir Arthur, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 95, p.326 There is a photograph of Schuster at the Science and Society Picture Library and many more (as well as the X ray photographs he took) at Wellcome Images. The story of Schuster and the medical use of X-rays is told at Sir Arthur Schuster A pioneer in the use of X-Rays The position of Schuster at the Cavendish is described in Cavendish Laboratory: the First Ten Years

Sir Austin Bradford Hill FRS (8 July 1897 – 18 April 1991), English epidemiologist and statistician, pioneered the randomized clinical trial and, together with Richard Doll, demonstrated the connection between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. Hill is widely known for pioneering the "Bradford Hill" criteria for determining a causal association.   == Early life == Son of Sir Leonard Erskine Hill FRS a distinguished physiologist, Hill was born in London, lived as a child at the family home, Osborne House, Loughton, Essex; and educated at Chigwell School, Essex. He served as a pilot in the First World War but was invalided out when he contracted tuberculosis. Two years in hospital and two years of convalescence put a medical qualification out of the question and he took a degree in economics by correspondence at London University.   == Career == In 1922 Hill went to work for the Industry Fatigue Research Board. He was associated with the medical statistician Major Greenwood and, to improve his statistical knowledge, Hill attended lectures by Karl Pearson. When Greenwood accepted a chair at the newly formed London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Hill moved with him, becoming Reader in Epidemiology and Vital Statistics in 1933 and Professor of Medical Statistics in 1947. Hill had a distinguished career in research and teaching and as author of a very successful textbook, Principles of Medical Statistics, but he is famous for two landmark studies. He was the statistician on the Medical Research Council Streptomycin in Tuberculosis Trials Committee and their study evaluating the use of streptomycin in treating tuberculosis, is generally accepted as the first randomised clinical trial. The use of randomisation in agricultural experiments had been pioneered by Ronald Aylmer Fisher. The second study was rather a series of studies with Richard Doll on smoking and lung cancer. The first paper, published in 1950, was a case-control study comparing lung cancer patients with matched controls. Doll and Hill also started a long-term prospective study of smoking and health. This was an investigation of the smoking habits and health of over 30,000 British doctors for several years (British doctors study). Fisher was in profound disagreement with the conclusions and procedures of the smoking/cancer work and from 1957 he criticised the work in the press and in academic publications. Hill was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1954. Fisher was actually one of the proposers. The certificate of election read  Has, by the application of statistical methods, made valuable contributions to our knowledge of the incidence and aetiology of industrial diseases, of the effects of internal migration upon mortality rates, and of the natural and experimental epidemiology of various infections, for example of the risks of an attack of poliomyelitis following inoculation procedures and of the risk of congenital abnormalities being precipitated by maternal rubella in the pregnant woman. Since the war he has demonstrated in an exact and controlled field survey the association between cigarette smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung, and has been the leader in the development in medicine of the precise experimental methods now used nationally and internationally in the evaluation of new therapeutic and prophylactic agents.  In 1950–52 Hill was president of the Royal Statistical Society and was awarded its Guy Medal in Gold in 1953. He was knighted in 1961. On Hill's death Peter Armitage wrote, "to anyone involved in medical statistics, epidemiology or public health, Bradford Hill was quite simply the world’s leading medical statistician." In 1965, built upon the work of Hume and Popper, Hill suggested several aspects of causality in medicine and biology (read more), which have remained in use by epidemiologists to date.   == Bibliography == Note that Austin Bradford Hill's surname was Hill and he always used the name Hill, AB in publications. However, he is often referred to as Bradford Hill. To add to the confusion, his friends called him Tony. Furthermore, there is often a misleading hyphen such as in "Bradford-Hill criteria." "Principles of Medical Statistics" (1937) London: The Lancet, 1937. Doll, R.; Hill, A. B. (1 September 1950). "Smoking and Carcinoma of the Lung". British Medical Journal 2 (4682): 739–748. doi:10.1136/bmj.2.4682.739. ISSN 0007-1447. PMC 2038856. PMID 14772469.  Doll, R.; Hill, A. B. (1954). "The mortality of doctors in relation to their smoking habits; a preliminary report". British Medical Journal 1 (4877): 1451–1455. doi:10.1136/bmj.1.4877.1451. PMC 2085438. PMID 13160495.  Hill, A. B. (1965). "The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation?". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine 58 (5): 295–300. PMC 1898525. PMID 14283879.  [1] Chalmers, I. (2003). "Fisher and Bradford Hill: Theory and pragmatism?". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 922–924; discussion 924–8. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg295. PMID 14681246.  Armitage, P. (2003). "Fisher, Bradford Hill, and randomization". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 925–928; discussion 928–8. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg286. PMID 14681247.  Doll, R. (2003). "Fisher and Bradford Hill: Their personal impact". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 929–931; discussion 931–8. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg287. PMID 14681248.  "Fisher and Bradford Hill: A discussion". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 945–948. 2003. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg316.    == References == ^ Doll, R. (1994). "Austin Bradford Hill. 8 July 1897-18 April 1991". Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 40: 128–126. doi:10.1098/rsbm.1994.0032.  ^ Farewell, V.; Johnson, T. (2010). "Woods and Russell, Hill, and the emergence of medical statistics". Statistics in Medicine: n/a. doi:10.1002/sim.3893.  ^ Armitage, P. (1991). "Obituary: Sir Austin Bradford Hill, 1897-1991". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 154 (3): 482–484. doi:10.2307/2983156 (inactive 2015-11-29).  ^ Yoshioka, A. (1998). "Use of randomisation in the Medical Research Council's clinical trial of streptomycin in pulmonary tuberculosis in the 1940s". BMJ 317 (7167): 1220–1223. doi:10.1136/bmj.317.7167.1220. PMC 1114162. PMID 9794865.    == External links == Doll has some comments on his teacher and boss in Interview with Richard Doll Photographs of Hill: on University of York site on National Portrait Gallery site

Basílio de Bragança Pereira (born 29 April 1945 in Rio de Janeiro) is a Brazilian statistician. He studied at Escola Nacional de Ciências Estatísticas since 1958 until his BSc in Statistics (1968), and obtained his Ph.D.and D.I.C. from the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine (1976) supervised by Sir David Cox. He also obtained an MSc in Operational Research (1970) and a Docent Free in Applied Statistics (1989) from Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. In 2003 he spent a year working on a Project on Neural Networks in Statistics with Professor C.R. Rao at Penn State University on a postdoctoral grant from the Brazilian Government (CAPES). He is employed by the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro since 1970, in the Institute of Mathematics, Postgraduate School of Engineering (COPPE) and School of Medicine. Associate Professor at the Institute of Mathematics (1970–1989 and 1994–1997),Research Professor at COPPE (1970-present),Titular Professor of Applied Statistics at COPPE(1989-1994,retired),Titular Professor of Biostatistics at the School of Medicine(1998-2015, retired). He has supervised more than 70 thesis and dissertations. He was Elected member of the International Statistical Institute. His current statistical interests are Applications of Statistical Learning Methods in Medicine, acting mainly in choice of separated models, likelihood and Bayesian inference, time series,regression and survival analysis, neural networks in statistics.   == Books == SANTOS, A. M.; PEREIRA, B de B. Modelos Gráficos e Aplicações. 56a RBRAS e 14o SEAGRO, Maringa, 2011, 56p [1] PEREIRA, B. de B. ; RAO, Calyampudi Radhakrishna. Data Mining Using Neural Networks: A Guide for Statisticians. State College, Pennsylvania, 2009. 186 p. PEREIRA, B. de B. ; RODRIGUES, C V C . Redes Neurais em Estatística. Rio de Janeiro:, 1998. v. 1. 144 p. Associação Brasileira de Estatística PEREIRA, B. de B. ; SANT'ANNA, A. P. . Análise Econométrica de Séries Temporais. Rio de Janeiro:, 1989. 343 p. IM/UFRJ SALES, P. R. H. ; PEREIRA, B. de B. ; VIEIRA, A. M. . Identificação e Estimação Recursiva de Modelos de Séries Temporais Uni e Multivariadas. Rio de Janeiro: 1989. 60 p. 3a ESTE, Rio de Janeiro. PEREIRA, B. de B. ; PAIS, M. B. Z. ; SALES, P. R. H. . Análise Espectral de Séries Temporais: Uma Introdução para Engenharia, Economia e Estatística. Rio de Janeiro: 1986. 109 p. Arte Final e Eletrobrás PEREIRA, B. de B. . Séries Temporais Multivariadas., 1984. 219 p. Associação Brasileira de Estatística PEREIRA, B. de B. Tópicos em Séries Temporais: Métodos Automáticos de Previsão. PDD 07/80 COPPE/UFRJ. Rio de Janeiro, 1980   == References ==   == External links == Mathematical Genealogy

Bernard Walter Silverman FRS (born 22 February 1952) is a British statistician and Anglican Priest. He was Master of St Peter's College, Oxford from 1 October 2003 to 31 December 2009. He is a member of the Statistics Department at Oxford University, and is also attached to the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, the Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, and the Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance. He has been a member of the Council of Oxford University and of the Council of the Royal Society. He was briefly President of the Royal Statistical Society in January 2010, a position from which he stood down upon announcement of his appointment as Chief Scientific Advisor to the Home Office.   == Career == 1970–73 Undergraduate, Jesus College, Cambridge. 1973–74 Graduate Student, Jesus College, Cambridge. 1974–75 Research Student, Statistical Laboratory, Cambridge. 1975–77 Research Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge. 1976–77 Calculator Development Manager, Sinclair Radionics Ltd. 1977–78 Junior Lecturer in Statistics, Oxford University and Weir Junior Research Fellow of University College, Oxford. 1978–80 Lecturer in Statistics, University of Bath. 1981–84 Reader in Statistics, University of Bath. 1984 and 1992–93 Head of Statistics Group, University of Bath. 1984–93 Professor of Statistics, University of Bath. 1988–91 Head of School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath. 1993–2003 Professor of Statistics, University of Bristol 1993–97 and 1998–99 Head of Statistics Group, University of Bristol 1999–2003 Henry Overton Wills Professor of Mathematics, University of Bristol 2000–03 Provost of the Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Bristol 2003–09 Master of St Peter's College, Oxford 2010– Senior Research Fellow, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, Oxford (part-time) 2010– Professorial Research Associate, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford (part-time) 2010– Chief Scientific Advisor, Home Office   === Degrees and qualifications === 1973 Bachelor of Arts, Cambridge. (Wrangler) 1974 Part III of Mathematical Tripos, Cambridge (with Distinction) 1977 Doctor of Philosophy, Cambridge 1989 Doctor of Science, Cambridge 1993 Chartered Statistician, Royal Statistical Society 2000 Bachelor of Theology, Southampton (First Class Honours) through STETS   === Awards and honours === 1970 Gold Medal, International Mathematical Olympiad 1974 Mayhew Prize for Mathematical Tripos Part III, University of Cambridge 1976 Smith's Prize, Cambridge University 1984 Royal Statistical Society Guy Medal in Bronze 1985 Special Invited Paper, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1988 Technometrics Special Discussion Paper, American Statistical Association 1991 Presidents' Award of the Committee of presidents of Statistical Societies 1993 Fulkerson Lecturer, Cornell University 1995 Royal Statistical Society Guy Medal in Silver 1997 Fellow of the Royal Society 1999 Special Invited Paper, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1999 Henri Willem Methorst Medal, International Statistical Institute 2000 Corcoran Lecturer, Oxford University 2001 Member of Academia Europaea 2002 Original Member, Highly Cited Researchers database, ISI 2003 Honorary Fellow, Jesus College, Cambridge   === Ecclesiastical === 1999 Ordained deacon, Church of England 2000 Ordained priest, Church of England   == Books == Green, P.J.; Silverman, B.W. (1994). Nonparametric Regression and Generalized Linear Models: A Roughness Penalty Approach. Chapman & Hall.  Ramsay, J.O.; Silverman, B.W. (2002). Applied Functional Data Analysis: Methods and Case Studies. Springer-Verlag.  Ramsay, J.O.; Silverman, B.W. (2005) [1997]. Functional Data Analysis (second, expanded and rewritten ed.). Springer-Verlag.  Silverman, B.W. (1986). Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall.  Silverman, B.W.; Vassilicos, J.C., eds. (2000). Wavelets: The Key to Intermittent Information?. Oxford University Press.    == References ==   == Sources and links == Bernard Silverman's CV Bernard Silverman home page Bernard Silverman's results at the International Mathematical Olympiad Prof Bernard Silverman, FRS at Debrett's People of Today

George William "Bill" James (born October 5, 1949) is an American baseball writer, historian, and statistician whose work has been widely influential. Since 1977, James has written more than two dozen books devoted to baseball history and statistics. His approach, which he termed sabermetrics in reference to the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR), scientifically analyzes and studies baseball, often through the use of statistical data, in an attempt to determine why teams win and lose. His Baseball Abstract books in the 1980s are the modern predecessor to websites using sabermetrics such as Baseball Prospectus and Baseball Primer (now Baseball Think Factory). In 2006, Time named him in the Time 100 as one of the most influential people in the world. He is a Senior Advisor on Baseball Operations for the Boston Red Sox. In 2010, Bill James was inducted into the Irish American Baseball Hall of Fame.   == Early lifeEdit == James was born in Holton, Kansas; he never knew his mother, who died in 1954. His father was a janitor at a high school. After four years at the University of Kansas residing at Stephenson Scholarship hall, James joined the Army in 1971. He was the last person in Kansas to be sent to fight in the Vietnam War, although he never saw action there. Instead, he spent two years stationed in South Korea, during which time he wrote to KU about taking his final class. He was told he actually had met all his graduation requirements, so he returned to Lawrence in 1973 with degrees in English and economics. He also finished an Education degree in 1975, likewise from the University of Kansas.   == The Bill James Baseball AbstractsEdit == An aspiring writer and obsessive fan, James began writing baseball articles after leaving the United States Army in his mid-twenties. Many of his first baseball writings came while he was doing night shifts as a security guard at the Stokely-Van Camp's pork and beans cannery. Unlike most writers, his pieces did not recount games in epic terms or offer insights gleaned from interviews with players. A typical James piece posed a question (e.g., "Which pitchers and catchers allow runners to steal the most bases?"), and then presented data and analysis written in a lively, insightful, and witty style that offered an answer. Editors considered James's pieces so unusual that few believed them suitable for their readers. In an effort to reach a wider audience, James self-published an annual book titled The Bill James Baseball Abstract beginning in 1977. The first edition of the book presented 80 pages of in-depth statistics compiled from James's study of box scores from the preceding season and was offered for sale through a small advertisement in The Sporting News. Over the next three years James's work won respect, including a very favorable review by Daniel Okrent in Sports Illustrated. New annual editions added essays on teams and players. By 1982 sales had increased tenfold, and a media conglomerate agreed to publish and distribute future editions. While writers had published books about baseball statistics before (most notably Earnshaw Cook's Percentage Baseball, in the 1960s), few had ever reached a mass audience. Attempts to imitate James's work spawned a flood of books and articles that continues to this day.   == Post-Abstracts workEdit == In 1988, James ceased writing the Abstract, citing workload-related burnout and concern about the volume of statistics on the market. He has continued to publish hardcover books about baseball history, which have sold well and received admiring reviews. These books include three editions of The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract (1985, 1988, 2001, the last entitled The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract.) James has also written several series of new annuals: The Baseball Book (1990–1992) was a loosely organized collection of commentary, profiles, historical articles, and occasional pieces of research. James' assistant Rob Neyer was responsible for much of the research, and wrote several short pieces. Neyer went on to become a featured baseball columnist at ESPN and SB Nation. The Player Ratings Book (1993–95) offered statistics and 50-word profiles aimed at the fantasy baseball enthusiast. The Bill James Handbook (2003–present) provides past-season statistics and next-season projections for Major League players and teams, and career data for all current Major League players. Results for the Fielding Bible Awards, an alternative to the Gold Glove Awards voted on by a 10-person panel that includes James, are also included. The Bill James Gold Mine (2008–2010) was a collection of new essays and never-before-seen statistics, as well as profiles of players and teams. Playing off the name of the earlier series, Solid Fool's Gold: Detours on the Way to Conventional Wisdom (2011) was a mixed collection of both baseball-related and miscellaneous pieces, culled from the Bill James Online archives (see below). In 2008, James launched Bill James Online. Subscribers can read James' new, original writing and interact with one another —- as well as with James —- in a question-and-answer format. The web site also offers new "profiles" of teams and players full of facts and statistics that hope to one day map what James has termed "the lost island of baseball statistics."   == InnovationsEdit == Among the statistical innovations attributable to James are: Runs created. A statistic intended to quantify a player's contribution to runs scored, as well as a team's expected number of runs scored. Runs created is calculated from other offensive statistics. James's first version of it was: Runs Created = (Total bases * (Hits + Walks))/(Plate Appearances). Applied to an entire team or league, the statistic correlates closely to that team's or league's actual runs scored. Since James first created the statistic, sabermetricians have refined it to make it more accurate, and it is now used in many different variations. Range factor. A statistic that quantifies the defensive contribution of a player, calculated in its simplest form as RF = (Assists + Put Outs)/(Games Played). The statistic is premised on the notion that the total number of outs that a player participates in is more relevant in evaluating his defensive play than the percentage of cleanly handled chances as calculated by the conventional statistic Fielding percentage. Defensive Efficiency Rating. A statistic that shows the percentage of balls in play a defense turns into an out. It is used to help determine a team's defensive ability. Calculated by: 1 – ((Opp. Hits + Reached on Error – Opp. Home runs) / (Plate appearances – Walks – Strikeouts – HitByPitch – Opp. Home runs)). Win shares. A unifying statistic intended to allow the comparison of players at different positions, as well as players of different eras. Win Shares incorporates a variety of pitching, hitting and fielding statistics. One drawback of Win Shares is the difficulty of computing it. Pythagorean Winning Percentage. A statistic explaining the relationship of wins and losses to runs scored and runs allowed. In its simplest form: Pythagorean Winning Percentage equals Runs squared divided by the square of Runs plus the square of Runs Allowed. The statistic correlates closely to a team's actual winning percentage. Game Score is a metric to determine the strength of a pitcher in any particular baseball game. Major League Equivalency. A metric that uses minor league statistics to predict how a player is likely to perform at the major league level. The Brock2 System. A system for projecting a player's performance over the remainder of his career based on past performance and the aging process. Similarity scores. Scoring a player's statistical similarity to other players, providing a frame of reference for players of the distant past. Examples: Lou Gehrig comparable to Don Mattingly; Joe Jackson to Tony Oliva. Secondary average. A statistic that attempts to measure a player's contribution to an offense in ways not reflected in batting average. The formula is (Extra bases on hits+Walks+Stolen Bases)/At bats. Secondary averages tend to be similar to batting averages, but can vary widely, from less than .100 to more than .500 in extreme cases. Extra bases on hits is calculated with the formula (Doubles)+(Triplesx2)+(Homerunsx3) or more easily, (Total Bases)-(Hits). Power/Speed Number. A statistic that attempts to consolidate the various "clubs" of players with impressive numbers of both home runs and stolen bases (e.g., the "30/30" club (Bobby Bonds was well known for being a member), the "40/40" club (José Canseco was the first to perform this feat), and even the "25/65" club (Joe Morgan in the '70s)). The formula: (2x(Home Runs)x(Stolen Bases))/(Home Runs + Stolen Bases). Approximate Value. A system of cutoffs designed to estimate the value a player contributed to various category groups (including his team) to study broad questions such as "how do players age over time". "Temperature gauge" to determine how "hot" a player is, based on recent performance. The gauge has been used in NESN Red Sox telecasts and has provoked mixed reactions from critics. Although James may be best known as an inventor of statistical tools, he has often written on the limitations of statistics and urged humility concerning their place amid other kinds of information about baseball. To James, context is paramount: he was among the first to emphasize the importance of adjusting traditional statistics for park factors and to stress the role of luck in a pitcher's win-loss record. Many of his statistical innovations are arguably less important than the underlying ideas. When he introduced the notion of secondary average, it was as a vehicle for the then-counterintuitive concept that batting average represents only a fraction of a player's offensive contribution. (The runs-created statistic plays a similar role vis-à-vis the traditional RBI.) Some of his contributions to the language of baseball, like the idea of the "defensive spectrum", border on being entirely non-statistical.   == STATS, Inc.Edit == In an essay published in the 1984 Abstract, James vented his frustration about Major League Baseball's refusal to publish play-by-play accounts of every game. James proposed the creation of Project Scoresheet, a network of fans that would work together to collect and distribute this information. While the resulting non-profit organization never functioned smoothly, it worked well enough to collect accounts of every game from 1984 through 1991. James's publisher agreed to distribute two annuals of essays and data – the 1987 and 1988 editions of Bill James Presents The Great American Baseball Statbook (though only the first of these featured writing by James). The organization was eventually disbanded, but many of its members went on to form for-profit companies with similar goals and structure. STATS, Inc., the company James joined, provided data and analysis to every major media outlet before being acquired by Fox Sports in 2001.   == Acceptance and employment in mainstream baseballEdit == Oakland Athletics general manager Billy Beane began applying sabermetric principles to running his low-budget team in the late 1990s, to notable effect, as chronicled in Michael Lewis' book Moneyball. In 2003, James was hired by a former reader, John Henry, the new owner of the Boston Red Sox. One point of controversy was in handling the relief pitching of the Red Sox. James had previously published analysis of the use of the closer in baseball, and had concluded that the traditional use of the closer both overrated the abilities of that individual, and used him in suboptimal circumstances. He wrote that it is "far better to use your relief ace when the score is tied, even if that is the seventh inning, than in the ninth inning with a lead of two or more runs." The Red Sox in 2003 staffed their bullpen with several marginally talented relievers. Red Sox manager Grady Little was never fully comfortable with the setup, and designated unofficial closers and reshuffled roles after a bad outing. When Boston lost a number of games due to bullpen failures, Little reverted to a traditional closer approach and moved Byung-Hyun Kim from being a starting pitcher to a closer. The Red Sox did not follow James' idea of a bullpen with no closer, but with consistent overall talent that would allow the responsibilities to be shared. Red Sox reliever Alan Embree thought the plan could have worked if the bullpen had not suffered injuries. During the 2004 regular season Keith Foulke was used primarily as a closer in the conventional model; however, Foulke's usage in the 2004 postseason was along the lines of a relief ace with multiple inning appearances at pivotal times of the game. Houston Astros manager Phil Garner also employed a relief ace model with his use of Brad Lidge in the 2004 postseason. As of 2014, James is still employed by the Red Sox, having published several new sabermetric books during his tenure (see Bibliography, below). Indeed, although James is typically tight-lipped about his activities on behalf of the Red Sox, he is credited with advocating some of the moves that led to the team's first World Series championship in 86 years, including the signing of non-tendered free agent David Ortiz, the trade for Mark Bellhorn, and the team's increased emphasis on on-base percentage. After the Red Sox suffered through a disastrous 2012 season, Henry stated that James had fallen "out of favor [in the front office] over the last few years for reasons I really don't understand. We've gotten him more involved recently in the central process and that will help greatly." During his time with the Red Sox, Bill James has received three World Series rings for the team's 2004, 2007, and 2013 victories.   == In cultureEdit == James was profiled on 60 Minutes on March 30, 2008, in his role as a sabermetric pioneer and Red Sox advisor. Michael Lewis, in his book Moneyball, dedicates a chapter to James' career and Sabermetrics as background for his portrayal of Billy Beane and the Oakland Athletics' unlikely success. James made a guest appearance on the The Simpsons episode "MoneyBART". Steven Soderbergh's planned film adaptation of Moneyball would have featured an animated version of James as a "host". This script was discarded when director Bennett Miller and writer Aaron Sorkin succeeded Soderbergh on the project. Ultimately, the film as produced mentions James several times. His unlikely bio is briefly recapped, and Billy Beane is depicted telling John Henry that Henry's hiring of James is the reason Beane is interested in the Red Sox general manager job.   == Dowd Report controversyEdit == In his Baseball Book 1990, James heavily criticized the methodology of the Dowd Report, which was an investigation (commissioned by baseball commissioner Bart Giamatti) on the gambling activities of Pete Rose. James reproached commissioner Giamatti and his successor, Fay Vincent, for their acceptance of the Dowd Report as the final word on Rose's gambling. (James' attitude on the matter surprised many fans, especially after the writer had been deeply critical of Rose in the past, especially what James considered to be Rose's selfish pursuit of Ty Cobb's all-time record for base hits.) James expanded his defense of Rose in his 2001 book The New Historical Baseball Abstract, with a detailed explanation of why he found the case against Rose flimsy. James wrote "I would characterize the evidence that Rose bet on baseball as...well, not quite non-existent. It is extremely weak." This countered the popular opinion that the case against Rose was a slam dunk, and several critics claimed that James misstated some of the evidence in his defense of Rose. Derek Zumsteg of Baseball Prospectus wrote an exhaustive review of the case James made and concluded: "James' defense of Rose is filled with oversights, errors in judgment, failures in research, and is a great disservice to the many people who have looked to him for a balanced and fair take on this complicated and important issue." In 2004, Rose admitted publicly that he had bet on baseball and confirmed the Dowd Report was correct. James remained steadfast, continuing to insist that the evidence available to Dowd at the time was insufficient to reach the conclusion that it did.   == Paterno controversyEdit == On November 4, 2011, Jerry Sandusky was indicted for committing sex crimes against young boys, which brought the Penn State child sex abuse scandal to national attention. On December 11, 2011, James published an article called "The Trial of Penn State", depicting an imaginary trial in which Penn State defended itself against charges of "acting rashly and irresponsibly in the matter of Joe Paterno, in such a manner that [they] defamed, libeled and slandered Paterno, unfairly demolishing his reputation." On July 12, 2012, the Freeh report was released, charging Paterno and three other University officials with covering up reports of sexual assaults and enabling the attacker to prey on other children for more than a decade, often in Penn State facilities. Soon afterwards, during an interview on ESPN radio, James claimed that the Freeh report's characterizations of Paterno as a powerful figure were wrong, and that it wasn't Paterno's responsibility to report allegations of child molestation to the police. "[Paterno] had very few allies. He was isolated and he was not nearly as powerful as people imagine him to have been." When asked if he knew anyone who had showered with a boy they were not related to, James said it was a common practice when he was growing up. "That was actually quite common in the town I grew up in. That was quite common in America 40 years ago." The July 2012 interview comments were widely criticized. Rob Neyer wrote in defense of James. James' employer, the Boston Red Sox, issued a statement disavowing the comments James made and saying that he has been asked not to make further public comments on the matter.   == Other activitiesEdit == James is a fan of the University of Kansas men's basketball team and has written about basketball. He has created a formula for what he calls a "safe lead" in the sport. James has written a true crime book titled Popular Crime: Reflections on the Celebration of Violence.   == BibliographyEdit == Bill James Baseball Abstract (annual editions published 1977–1988) The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract (1985; revised edition 1988) This Time Let's Not Eat the Bones (1989) The Bill James Baseball Book (annual editions published 1990–1992) The Politics of Glory (1994) (revised as Whatever Happened to the Hall of Fame?) The Bill James Player Ratings Book (annual editions published 1993–1996) The Bill James Guide to Baseball Managers (1997) The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract (2001) Win Shares (2002) The Bill James Handbook (annual editions published 2003–present) The Neyer/James Guide to Pitchers (2004, with co-author Rob Neyer) The Bill James Gold Mine (annual editions published 2008–2010) Popular Crime – Reflections on the Celebration of Violence (ISBN 978-1-4165-5273-4, published 2011) Solid Fool's Gold (2011)   == Books about JamesEdit == The Mind of Bill James (2006) How Bill James Changed Our View of Baseball: by Colleagues, Critics, Competitors and Just Plain Fans (2007)   == See alsoEdit ==  Baseball Prospectus Defensive spectrum Keltner list Similarity score Win shares   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Baseball Prospectus (2005). Mind Game: How the Boston Red Sox Got Smart, Won a World Series, and Created a New Blueprint for Winning. New York City: Workman Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7611-4018-4. Retrieved March 3, 2011.    == Further readingEdit == Lewis, Michael (April 10, 2003). Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 45–47. ISBN 0-393-05765-8.    == External linksEdit == Bill James Online –interactions with James through statistics, articles, conversations and more Works of Bill James Audio interview by Jesse Thorn, public radio program The Sound of Young America (April 29, 2008) Chronister, Levi (April 25, 2004). "Grassroots Guru". Lawrence Journal-World (Lawrence, KS). Interview at Baseball Digest Daily – Part I, Baseball Digest Interview at Baseball Digest Daily – Part II Interview at Baseball Digest Daily – Part III McGrath, Ben (July 14, 2003). "The Professor of Baseball". The New Yorker Wall Street Journal profile Does Bill James Belong in the Hall of Fame? Okrent, Daniel (May 25, 1981). "He Does It by the Numbers". Sports Illustrated.  Wright, Craig R.. "Dick Allen:Another View". White Sox Interactive.  – contrary to James Schwarz, Alan (July 18, 2006). "25 For 25: Don Fehr, Peter Gammons, Pat Gillick, Bo Jackson, Bill James". 25 for 25: Stars in the Baseball America Universe. Baseball America. Henry, John (May 8, 2006). "Scientists & Thinkers: Bill James". The 2006 TIME 100. TIME. Surowiecki, James (June 10, 2003). "Moneyball Redux: Slate talks to the man who revolutionized baseball.". Slate. Lederer, Bill (February 28, 2005). "Breakfast with Bill James". Baseball Analysts (baseballanalysts.com). Bill James at Library of Congress Authorities, with 18 catalog records

William (Bill) Patrick McLennan (born 26 January 1942) is an Australian statistician who was Director of the Central Statistical Office (CSO) of the United Kingdom and Australian Statistician.   == Early yearsEdit == Bill McLennan was born on 26 January 1942 in Grafton, New South Wales. He joined the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) on 29 February 1960 as a statistics cadet and by 1964 had completed a degree in Statistics and Economics from the Australian National University and started working at the ABS full-time.   == Australian Bureau of StatisticsEdit == McLennan spent almost all his career at the ABS. Initially, he worked on sampling and methodology, then was promoted to Assistant Statistician in 1973. He left the ABS in 1979 to become Victorian Deputy Commonwealth Statistician in Melbourne but shortly afterwards, he was promoted to First Assistant Statistician and returned to the ABS as the head of Coordination and Management Division, where he led a review of the Census and Statistics Act in the early 1980s. He oversaw the establishment of the corporate planning system and the production of the ABS's first Corporate Plan in 1987. He championed the adoption of PC and Internet technologies to reduce the cost structure in the ABS and improved the readability of statistical output. In 1986, he became Deputy Australian Statistician.   == Central Statistical Office, United KingdomEdit == In 1992, McLennan was appointed Director of the Central Statistical Office (CSO) and head of the Government Statistical Services of the United Kingdom. He was the first person from outside the UK to be appointed to that post. During his tenure, he proposed the merger of the OPCS and the CSO in August 1994, which was subsequently announced by Prime Minister John Major in September 1995 following a consultation period and took place on 1 April 1996 when the Office for National Statistics was launched. He persuaded the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, to reduce ministerial access to economic statistics in advance of publication and to permit statistics to be released independently of ministers. He produced the Official Statistics Code of Practice, first published in April 1995, which set good practice and principles for statisticians producing official statistics with the aim of promoting high standards and maintaining public confidence in official statistics. He led the CSO through its early years as a 'Next Steps Agency' with demanding and quantified targets for the accuracy of statistics.   == United Nations Statistical CommissionEdit == McLennan was Chairman of the United Nations Statistical Commission from 1994 to 1995.   == Australian StatisticianEdit == McLennan became the Australian Statistician and head of the Australian Bureau of Statistics from 1995. During this period, he developed the work and direction of the ABS; placed great emphasis on the professional development of the staff; and provided a focus for the international activities of the Bureau, with a special emphasis on Asia. He retired on 30 June 2000.   == NotesEdit == ^ The Australian Bureau of Statistics Leading Edge Project Management Practices at a Board level, a Macquarie Graduate School of Management Case Study, September 2005 ^ The National Archives, Statistical Departments, Office for National Statistics ^ "Ministers economical with vital statistics?", New Scientist, 20 February 1993. ^ "Ministers curbed over sensitive statistics", New Scientist, 27 February 1993. ^ Official Statistics Code of Practice, an abstract. ^ McLennan, W. You Can Count on Us--With Confidence, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in Society), Vol. 158, No. 3 (1995), pp. 467-489. ^ Country Participation and Chairpersons, UN Statistical Commission ^ Official Hansard, House of Representatives, Thursday, 29 June 2000, pp 18634-18635   == ReferencesEdit == Australian Bureau of Statistics (2005), "Informing a Nation: The Evolution of the Australian Bureau of Statistics 1905-2005", ISBN 0-642-47985-2.

Bogoljub Kočović (born 1920) is a Bosnian jurist and statistician, Yugoslav by ethnic affiliation. Kočović was born in Sarajevo; his father was a Serb and mother French by origin. He obtained a MA in economy at the Roosevelt University in Chicago, and a Ph. D. in law in Paris. Kočović was a research assistant in the French National Center of Scientific Research (CNRS) from 1947 to 1952 and worked in the USA for ten years. In the 1960s, he returned to France, where he lives today. His best known work is perhaps the book WWII Victims in Yugoslavia, published in London in 1985 in Sebo-Croatian. Kočović compared the censuses from 1921, 1931 and 1948, and, assuming the possible population growth at 1.1% and emigration in that period, obtained the demographic and actual losses of Yugoslavia during the World War II. He clearly stated that his estimates depended on these assumptions, and that if other population growth were assumed, different results would have been obtained. He calculated that the actual losses were around 1,014,000 and the demographic losses around 1,925,000. He allowed for a margin of error of 250,000. However, the official number upheld by the Yugoslav communist regime was 1,706,000. Though Kočovic's estimate was rough, it indicated that the official figure was possibly too high. Kočović's book was ignored in his homeland until the breakup of Yugoslavia, when it was reprinted in Sarajevo in 1990. In the 1980s, independently from Kočović, Vladimir Žerjavić in Zagreb, Croatia, used a similar method and obtained similar results. Both had lower figures for their own ethnicity (Kočović was assumed to be inclined to the Serbs) which was seen as a proof of their objectivity. Although his calculations of WWII victims in Yugoslavia are even lower than those of Žerjavić, he has never been called a Holocaust denier like Žerjavić. However, Žerjavić gave a much more detailed account of numbers and nationalities of dead, and did not express caution in interpretation of the results the way Kočović did. However, Kočović has expressly confirmed that he considered his work in the field scientifically valid and, ultimately, accurate. He went so far as to write a new book, published in 1997, with the aim of refuting the Serbian statistician Đorđević's efforts to "reinstate" the "great numbers" victims figures dominant during Communist Yugoslavia period. Kočović was one of the founders of the Oslobođenje union in Geneva and Paris, a contributor and one of the editors of Naša reč, and founder, with Dr. Dragan Pavlovic, of Parisian quarterly Dialogue. He is a member of the Association of Serbian Writers and Artists, as well as the Action Committee for the Democratic Alternative.   == Works == Žrtve drugog svetskog rata u Jugoslaviji (Casualties of WWII in Yugoslavia; Biddles of Guilford for Veritas Foundation Press, London, 1985.) Nauka, nacionalizam i propaganda (Science, Nationalism and Propaganda; Paris, 1998)   == References ==   == Sources == Tomasevich, Jozo. War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941-1945: Occupation and Collaboration. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-8047-3615-4 In Cap.17 Alleged and True Population Losses there is a detailed account of the controversies related to Yugoslav war losses.   == External links == Victims of War between Science and Propaganda (Serbian)

Brian David Ripley FRSE (born 29 April 1952) is a British statistician. From 1990, he was professor of applied statistics at the University of Oxford and is also a professorial fellow at St Peter's College. He retired August 2014 due to ill health. Ripley has made contributions to the fields of spatial statistics and pattern recognition. His work on artificial neural networks in the 1990s helped to bring aspects of machine learning and data mining to the attention of statistical audiences. He emphasised the value of robust statistics in his books Modern Applied Statistics with S and Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Ripley helped develop the S programming language and its implementations: S-PLUS and R. He co-authored two books based on S, Modern Applied Statistics with S and S Programming. He was educated at the University of Cambridge, where he was awarded both the Smith's Prize and the Rollo Davidson Prize. The university also awarded him the Adams Prize in 1987 for an essay entitled Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes, later published as a book. He served on the faculty of Imperial College, London from 1976 until 1983, at which point he moved to the University of Strathclyde.   == Authored books == Ripley, B. D. (1981) Spatial Statistics. Wiley, 252pp. Ripley, B. D. (1983) Stochastic Simulation. Wiley, ISBN 0-471-81884-4. Ripley, B. D. (1988). Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-35234-7.  Ripley, B. D. (1996) Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge University Press. 403 pages. ISBN 0-521-46086-7. Venables, W. N. and Ripley, B. D. (2000) S Programming. Springer, 264pp. ISBN 978-0-387-98966-2. Venables, W. N. and Ripley, B. D. (2002) Modern Applied Statistics with S (Fourth Edition; previous editions published as Modern Applied Statistics with S-PLUS in 1994, 1997 & 1999). Springer, 462pp. ISBN 978-0-387-95457-8.   == References == ^ Professor Ripley's Homepage at Oxford University. Accessed 2015-05-10. ^ For instance, his book Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks was reviewed in the Journal of the American Statistical Association: Lange, Nicholas (December 1997), "Reviewed Works: Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition by C. M. Bishop; Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks by B. D. Ripley", Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (440): 1642–1645, JSTOR 2965437 . ^ Ripley, B. D. (1988). Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes. Cambridge University Press. pp. iv, vii. ISBN 0-521-35234-7.  ^ Profile of Professor Brian D Ripley (Last edited 1 October 1999 by Brian Ripley). Accessed 2010-12-28.   == External links == Brian Ripley's home page at the University of Oxford

Bruno de Finetti (13 June 1906 – 20 July 1985) was an Italian probabilist, statistician and actuary, noted for the "operational subjective" conception of probability. The classic exposition of his distinctive theory is the 1937 "La prévision: ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives," which discussed probability founded on the coherence of betting odds and the consequences of exchangeability.   == LifeEdit == De Finetti was born in Innsbruck, Austria and studied mathematics at Politecnico di Milano. He graduated in 1927 writing his thesis under the supervision of Giulio Vivanti. After graduation, he worked as an actuary and a statistician at Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (National Institute of Statistics) in Rome and, from 1931, the Trieste insurance company Assicurazioni Generali. He published extensively (17 papers in 1930 alone, according to Lindley) and acquired an international reputation in the small world of probability mathematicians. He taught mathematical analysis in Padua and then won a chair in Financial Mathematics at Trieste University (1939). In 1954 he moved to the Sapienza University of Rome, first to another chair in Financial Mathematics and then, from 1961 to 1976, one in the Calculus of Probabilities. De Finetti developed his ideas on subjective probability in the 1920s independently of Frank P. Ramsey. Still, according to the preface of his Theory of Probability, he drew on ideas of Harold Jeffreys, I. J. Good and B.O. Koopman. He only became known in the Anglo-American statistical world in the 1950s when L. J. Savage, who had independently adopted subjectivism, drew him into it; another great champion was Dennis Lindley. De Finetti died in Rome.   == WorkEdit == De Finetti emphasized a predictive inference approach to statistics; he proposed a thought experiment along the following lines (described in greater detail at coherence (philosophical gambling strategy)): You must set the price of a promise to pay $1 if there was life on Mars 1 billion years ago, and $0 if there was not, and tomorrow the answer will be revealed. You know that your opponent will be able to choose either to buy such a promise from you at the price you have set, or require you to buy such a promise from your opponent, still at the same price. In other words: you set the odds, but your opponent decides which side of the bet will be yours. The price you set is the "operational subjective probability" that you assign to the proposition on which you are betting. This price has to obey the probability axioms if you are not to face certain loss, as you would if you set a price above $1 (or a negative price). By considering bets on more than one event de Finetti could justify additivity. Prices, or equivalently odds, that do not expose you to certain loss through a Dutch book are called coherent. De Finetti is also noted for de Finetti's theorem on exchangeable sequences of random variables. De Finetti was not the first to study exchangeability but he brought the subject to greater visibility. He started publishing on exchangeability in the late 1920s but the 1937 article is his most famous treatment. In 1929, de Finetti introduced the concept of infinitely divisible probability distributions. He also introduced de Finetti diagrams for graphing genotype frequencies. The 1974 English translation of his book is credited with reviving interest in predictive inference in the Anglophone world, and bringing the idea of exchangeability to its attention. The de Finetti Award, presented annually by the European Association for Decision Making, is named after him.   == BibliographyEdit == See Works on Bruno de Finetti website   === de Finetti in EnglishEdit === (The following are translations of works originally published in Italian or French.) "Probabilism: A Critical Essay on the Theory of Probability and on the Value of Science," (translation of 1931 article) in Erkenntnis, volume 31, September 1989. The entire double issue is devoted to de Finetti's philosophy of probability. 1937, “La Prévision: ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives,” Annales de l'Institut Henri Poincaré, - "Foresight: its Logical Laws, Its Subjective Sources," (translation of the 1937 article in French) in H. E. Kyburg and H. E. Smokler (eds), Studies in Subjective Probability, New York: Wiley, 1964. Theory of Probability, (translation by A Machi and AFM Smith of 1970 book) 2 volumes, New York: Wiley, 1974-5.   === DiscussionsEdit === D. V. Lindley, "Bruno de Finetti, 1906-1985 (Obituary)" Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 149, p. 252 (1986). The following books have a chapter on de Finetti and references to further literature. Jan von Plato, Creating Modern Probability : Its Mathematics, Physics, and Philosophy in Historical Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994 Donald Gillies, Philosophical Theories of Probability, London: Routledge, 2000.   == See alsoEdit == Coherence (philosophical gambling strategy) De Finetti diagram De Finetti's theorem Exchangeability Infinitely divisible probability distributions Predictive inference Quasiconvex function   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Probabilità e induzione, Bologna, 1993. (Italian) Bruno de Finetti website Generate finetti diagrams online MacTutor: Bruno de Finetti Bruno de Finetti's Papers [1](Bruno de Finetti Papers, 1924-2000, ASP.1992.01, Archives of Scientific Philosophy, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh) De Finetti on the Portraits of Statisticians page. Interpretations of Probability from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. De Finetti's views are discussed in Section 3.5 of this article. Bruno de Finetti e la geometria del benessere by Rosaria Adriani (Italian)

Ching Chun Li (李景均; pinyin: Lǐ Jǐngjūn; 27 October 1912 in Tianjin, China; 20 October 2003 in Mt. Lebanon, United States) was a respectable American population geneticist and human geneticist. Li was best known for his book An Introduction to Population Genetics and his teaching in human genetics.   == Biography == Ching Chun Li was born on October 27, 1912, in Taku, Tianjin, China. He received his B.S. degree in agronomy from the University of Nanking in 1936 and a Ph.D. in plant breeding and genetics from Cornell University in 1940. He worked as post-doctorate fellows at Columbia University and North Carolina State University from 1940 to 1941. Li returned to China at the age of 30 and became the Professor of Genetics and Biometry at University of Nanking, his alma mater, in 1943. After World War II, he moved to Beijing for a Professorship of Agronomy at Peking University in 1946, where he finished An Introduction to Population Genetics in 1948. The book was the first notable publication where a combination of the ideas of Ronald Fisher, Sewall Wright, and J. B. S. Haldane about population genetics was brought to and made understandable to the academia. Li became persona non grata for publishing and teaching theory of genes following the 1949 establishment of a Communist government in Mainland China. In 1950, Li fled with his family to Hong Kong, where he was trapped without a documentation of citizenship and unable to obtain a visa. Friends and colleagues, particularly Nobel laureate H. J. Muller and sixth Surgeon General of the United States T. Parran assisted Dr. Li's emigration to US. Li joined newly founded Pitt's School of Public Health (GSPH) in 1951, became the professor of biometry in 1960, and headed the biostatistics department of GSPH from 1969 to 1975. He also served as the president of the American Society of Human Genetics in 1960. After his official retirement in 1982, he still published another 25 papers and continued to go to his office every day until a few months before his death in 2003.   == Bibliography ==   === Original Reports === Li, C.C.: On an equation specifying equilibrium populations. Science 1953; 117:378-379. Li, C.C.: Some general properties of recessive inheritance. Am J Hum Genet 1953; 5:269-279. Li, C.C.: An introduction to genetic statistics. Am J Hum Genet 1958; 10:72-75. Li, C.C.: McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology. Biometrics 1960; 1:223-232. Li, C.C.: Methodology in human genetics. Science 1962; 138:807-808. Li, C.C.: Environment changes: The implications for health from the viewpoint of a geneticist. National Health Forum 1964; 79-83.   === Books === Li, C.C.: Introduction to Population Genetics National Peking University Press. 1948. Li, C.C.: Population Genetics University of Chicago Press. 1955. Li, C.C.: Human Genetics Principles and Methods McGraw-Hill Book Co. 1961.   == References ==   == External links == Partha P. Majumder, "C. C. Li (1912–2003): his science and his spirit", in Journal of Genetics, Vol. 83, No. 1, April 2004, pp. 101-105. Pittsburgh Gazette obituary

Chien-Fu Jeff Wu (born January 15, 1949) is the Coca-Cola Chair in Engineering Statistics and Professor in the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is known for his work on the convergence of the EM algorithm, resampling methods such as the bootstrap and jackknife, and industrial statistics, including design of experiments, and robust parameter design (Taguchi methods). Born in Taiwan, Wu earned a B.Sc. in Mathematics from National Taiwan University in 1971, and a Ph.D. in Statistics from University of California, Berkeley in 1976. He has been a faculty member at the University of Wisconsin, Madison (1977-1988), the University of Waterloo (1988-1993; GM-NSERC chair in quality and productivity), the University of Michigan (1995-2003; chair of Department of Statistics 1995-98; H.C. Carver professor of statistics, 1997-2003) and currently the Georgia Institute of Technology. He has supervised 40 Ph.D. students and published around 160 peer-reviewed articles and two books.   He has received several awards, including the COPSS Presidents' Award in 1987, the Shewhart Medal in 2008, the COPSS R. A. Fisher Lectureship in 2011, and the Deming Lecturer Award in 2012. He has been elected as a fellow of the American Statistical Association, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the American Society for Quality and the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences. In 2000 he was elected as a member of Academia Sinica. In 2004, he was elected as a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He received the Shewhart Medal of the American Society for Quality and an honorary degree from the University of Waterloo in 2008.  In November 1997, he gave the inaugural lecture entitled "Statistics = Data Science?" for his appointment to the H. C. Carver Professorship at the University of Michigan. He popularized the term "data science" and advocated that statistics be renamed data science and statisticians data scientists. Later, he presented his lecture entitled "Statistics = Data Science?" as the first of his 1998 P.C. Mahalanobis Memorial Lectures. These lectures honor Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis, an Indian scientist and statistician and founder of the Indian Statistical Institute. In Mile, Yunnan, China, a conference was held in July 2014 celebrating Professor Wu's 65th birthday. In 2014 he gave the Bradley Lecture at the University of Georgia.   == References ==   == External links == Interview with Jeff Wu, ICSA Bulletin (pages 36–45) Convergence of the EM algorithm Personal page at Georgia Tech Recognition of Jeff Wu by Academia Sinica

Carl O. Nordling (1919 – February 15, 2007) was a Finnish born architect, urban planner and amateur historian. He graduated as an architect from the Helsinki University of Technology in 1939 and immigrated to Sweden after the end of the Continuation War in 1944. Nordling published an article on the Holocaust, How Many Jews Died in the German Concentration Camps?, in the Holocaust denial publication Journal of Historical Review. Nordling has also published an article entitled Did Stalin deliver his alleged speech of 19 August 1939? in the Journal of Slavic Military Studies. As a statistician, he applied statistical methods to a number of scientific problems and published a large number of articles, mainly in his native Swedish. His most notable work is in scientific disciplines outside his professional expertise. Internationally he is best known for the small number of papers he published in English language peer reviewed scientific journals. In 1953, in a paper published in the British Journal of Cancer, he first proposed the multi-mutation theory on cancer, today generally known as Knudson hypothesis after Alfred G. Knudson's work from 1971. In his later years he wrote mainly about issues in Nordic and Germanic history, contributing among other to the debate on Shakespeare's identity    == Publications ==   === Books === Gåtorna kring Birger jarl, Ösel och Borgå: Omvärdering av historiska teorier rörande svensk östpolitik och finsk och estnisk kolonisation under tidig medeltid Faktainformation (1976) ISBN 978-91-85494-00-2 Den svenske Runeberg Ekenäs tryckeri aktiebolags förlag (1988) ISBN 978-951-9001-20-3   === Journals === A New Theory on the Cancer-inducing Mechanism, The British Journal of Cancer, 1953, Vol. VII, p. 68-72. The Jewish Establishment Under Nazi Threat and Domination 1938-1945 - The Journal of Historical Review, volume 10 no. 2 (Summer 1990), p. 195. How Many Jews Died in the German Concentration Camps? - The Journal of Historical Review, volume 11 no. 3 (Fall 1991), p. 335. The Location of the "Birca" - The Missionary Station of Bishop Ansgar - in the Scandinavian Journal of History, Volume 23 Number 1/2 1998 The Death of Karl XII.(18th-century Swedish king) - in Scandinavian Studies, Volume 71 Number 1; Spring 1999 Was There a Finnish Settlement in Uusimaa before the Swedish One? at Linguistica Uralica (2/2004) Did Stalin deliver his alleged speech of 19 August 1939?, in Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 19:93-106, 2006.   == References == ^ Who is Carl O. Nordling? (Who’s Who in the World) ^ Carl O. Nordling at Revisionists.com ^ Milestone 9: (1953) Two-hit hypothesis - It takes (at least) two to tango - at nature.com ^ Shakespeare: Who wrote Hamlet and why?   == External links == Personal home page Blog at blogspot.com

Charles "Chip" Lawrence is an American bioinformatician and mathematician, who is the pioneer in developing novel statistical approaches to biological sequence analysis. After his PhD graduation, Lawrence became the assistant professor in Systems Engineering and Operations Research and Statistics, in Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. In the same time period of time (1971–1975), Lawrence worked as the consultant to the Ministry of Maternal and Child Health in Dominican Republic. From 1975 to 1981, he worked in the New York State Department of Health as the Director of Operations Research and Statistics, in the Division of Epidemiology. Now, he is the Professor of Applied Mathematics and Center for computational Molecular Biology, at Brown University. From 2004 to 2006, he was the director of the Center for Computational Biology. Now he is the director of the Statistical Molecular Biology Group (SMBG), at Brown University. Lawrence’s key scientific works to date are focusing on algorithmic approaches to biological sequence analysis. In fact, he was one of the first to recognize that the inherent statistical nature of genomic processes and the immense data resulting from genomic sequencing projects could only be fully analyzed by using statistical algorithms.   == Early life and education == Lawrence got his Bachelor’s degree in 1967, in Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, majoring in physics. After the graduation from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, he pursued further education in Cornell University and moved to another research field: Applied Operation Research and Statistics in Environmental Engineering. He finished his PhD in 1971. His dissertation topic is population dynamics. Lawrence did not switch to bioinoformatics until he finished his PhD study.   == Research interests and contributions == Since the 1980s, Lawrence started the research in the field of computational biology. focusing on algorithmic approaches, he was a pioneer in developing novel statistical approaches to biological sequence analysis.   === Gibbs sampling in motif finding === Lawrence has particular contributions in the development of sequence alignment algorithms, which is approaching the modif finding problem by integrating the Bayesian statistics and Gibbs sampling strategy. In his seminal paper published in Science in 1993, the first application of the statistical technique Gibbs sampling to the problem of multiple sequence alignment was described and clearly illustrated. Besides, Lawrence collaborated with others to further develop the Bayesian statistical approaches to RNA secondary structure prediction, which greatly facilitate the predictions on the full ensemble of probable structures that an RNA molecule may adopt. Lawrence researches the application of Bayesian algorithms, specifically in the statistical approaches for the understanding of biological problems, with particular interest in transcription regulation and identification of regulatory motifs in sequences, antisense oligonucleotide and siRNA design, comparative genomics, the composition of nucleotide sequences and detailed analyses of several protein families.   === Software and platforms === In the past several years, based on the statistical algorithm development by Lawrence and his collaborators, several programs have also been publicly available and widely used, such as the Gibbs Motif Sampler, the Bayes aligner, Sfold, BALSA, Gibbs Gaussian Clustering, and Bayesian Motif Clustering. His work in Bayesian Statistics won the Mitchell Prize for outstanding applied Bayesian statistics paper in 2000.   === Chip Lawrence Lab === Lawrence became the director of Chip Lawrence Lab at Brown University. Their work is more focused on the applications of the high-D inferences in the biological problems such as the regulatory motif finding, RNAsecondary structure prediction, and genome wide studies of epigenetics; besides, his research interests also expanded into the geoscience areas of change point estimators of paleoclimate records and probabilistic alignment of geological stratigraphic sequences. The application models of stochastic grammars is also studied in Chip Lawrence Lab.   == Teaching and traineeship == Lawrence has also devoted time to education. He developed a tutorial on Bayesian statistics and Gibbs sampling, as well as the introduction courses in Bayesian statistics at Brown University. Lawrence has mentored several young investigators before he took the job at Brown University. From 1981 to 2003, his worked as the Chief in Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of Health, many young bioinformaticians were trained by him, such as Stephen Bryant. Dr. Bryant now is the senior Investigator in National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, and National Institutes of Health, working in the branch of computational biology. His focus is in the area of structural bioinformatics. Dr. Bryant also leads NCBI information resource teams in protein structure, protein family classification, and cheminformatics. These teams maintain NCBI’s macromolecular structure database and Cn3D visualization tool, the Conserved Domain Database and CDTree analysis tool, and most recently the PubChem cheminformatics database and associated analysis tools.   == Career summary == 1971–1975: Assistant Professor, Systems Engineering and Operations Research and Statistics, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 1971–1975: Consultant to the Ministry of Maternal and Child Health, Dominican Republic. 1975–1981: Director of Operations Research and Statistics, Division of Epidemiology, New York State Department of Health. 1981–2003: Chief of the Biometrics/Bioinformatics Laboratory, Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of Health. 1985–1992: Statistical Consultant, Harrison Radiator Division General Motors Corp. 1992–1996: Visiting Scientist, National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM-NIH. 2000–2003: Research Professor, Computer Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (one day per week). 2004–2006: Director of the Center for Computational Molecular Biology, and Professor of Applied Mathematics, Brown University. 2004–present: Professor of Applied Mathematics and Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University.   == References ==   == External links == Faculty page at Brown University

Charles Patrick Neill (1865–1942) was an American civil servant who raised in Austin, Texas after his family emigrated from Ireland in 1850. Neill graduated from Johns Hopkins University in 1897 with a doctorate in economics and politics. He was appointed the United States Commissioner of Labor in 1906 by President Theodore Roosevelt. As Commissioner of Labor he helped inspect the Meat Packing industries, and reported women and child labor injustices. He also mediated labor disputes between workers and employers in the coal, railroad, and steel corporations.   == Early years == Charles P. Neill was born on December 12, 1865 at Rock Island, Illinois. His parents James and Julia Neill had emigrated from Ireland in 1850. The family moved to Austin, Texas in 1871, where Charles' father, James, practiced law. Charles was employed as a bank messenger from 1876 to 1885. He attended the University of Notre Dame from 1885 to 1888 where he enjoyed his youth playing with snowballs. He then attended the University of Texas at Austin from 1888 to 1889 and finally graduated from Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. in 1891. He later taught at Notre Dame from 1891 to 1894. He studied at Johns Hopkins University from 1894 to 1897 and earned a doctorate in economics and politics. He then decided to continue teaching at the Catholic University of America, where he taught as an economics professor from 1896 to 1905 along with his peer Carroll D. Wright. He married Esther Waggaman of Washington, D.C., in 1901. In 1902, Charles was appointed by President Roosevelt to serve as assistant recorder of the Anthracite Coal Strike Commission and his work received recognition. In 1904 the board of arbitration was appointed to defuse a threatened coal strike in Alabama and one of the members, Judge George Gray of Delaware, made his participation dependent upon Charles serving as the recorder, which allowed for Charles to become better known in his field. Shortly after, in 1905, Roosevelt selected Neill to succeed Carroll D. Wright, who had also taught economics at Catholic University, as United States Commissioner of Labor from 1905 to 1913.   == Work == President William Howard Taft reappointed Charles in 1909. Woodrow Wilson appointed him Commissioner of Labor Statistics in 1913 when the Department of Commerce and Labor was divided and the Bureau of Labor Statistics was established in the new Department of Labor. Neill provided federal mediation services in railroad labor disputes and he drafted the Newlands Labor Act in 1913. When Upton Sinclair wrote his book The Jungle, Roosevelt sent Neill to Chicago investigate the meat packing industry, when Neill returned he described the packing industries as being "revolting". This caused much controversy in society as the terrible unsanitary conditions were of meat products were being publicized. The Neill-Reynolds Report (which is what the investigation report was named) led to the Meat Inspection Act of 1906. The Pure Food and Drug Act, enacted on the same day in 1906, also gave the government broad jurisdiction over food in interstate commerce. In addition, his detailed report on child labor provided a basis for congressional legislation. his child labor report showed the injustices of the working condition for children as well as women. Many employers believed that getting women and children out of the farm and working in mills was actually better for them. However, this was proved untrue, as reports were publicized about the bad ventilation in these factories and the unsanitary conditions in which they were put to work. Also, it was noted that they did not receive the same benefits as men and were often used as cheap labor. As a result, Charles helped pass an 8-hour maximum work day. Charles P. Neill also exposed the shocking working hours and conditions in the Bethlehem Steel Works company, as well as writing a report on the strike of textile workers in Lawrence, Massachusetts in 1912. What Roosevelt has said about his work with Charles P. Neill:  Unfortunately, thoroughly efficient government servants often proved to be the prime offenders so far as the enforcement of the eight-hour law was concerned, because in their zeal to get good work done for the Government they became harsh taskmasters, and declined to consider the needs of their fellow-employees who served under them. The more I had studied the subject the more strongly I had become convinced that an eight-hour day under the conditions of labor in the United States was all that could, with wisdom and propriety, be required either by the Government or by private employers; that more than this meant, on the average, a decrease in the qualities that tell for good citizenship. I finally solved the problem, as far as Government employees were concerned, by calling in Charles P. Neill, the head of the Labor Bureau; and, acting on his advice, I speedily made the eight-hour law really effective. Any man who shirked his work, who dawdled and idled, received no mercy; slackness is even worse than harshness; for exactly as in battle mercy to the coward is cruelty to the brave man, so in civil life slackness towards the vicious and idle is harshness towards the honest and hard-working. We passed a good law protecting the lives and health of miners in the Territories, and other laws providing for the supervision of employment agencies in the District of Columbia, and protecting the health of motormen and conductors on street railways in the District. We practically started the Bureau of Mines. We provided for safeguarding factory employees in the District against accidents, and for the restriction of child labor therein. We passed a workmen's compensation law for the protection of Government employees; a law which did not go as far as I wished, but which was the best I could get, and which committed the Government to the right policy. We provided for an investigation of woman and child labor in the United States. We incorporated the National Child Labor Committee. Where we had most difficulty was with the railway companies engaged in inter-State business. We passed an act improving safety appliances on railway trains without much opposition, but we had more trouble with acts regulating the hours of labor of railway employees and making those railways that were engaged in inter-State commerce liable for injuries to or the death of their employees while on duty.    == Later years == After his departure from the Department of Labor later in 1913, the skilled arbitrator was employed by Southeastern Railways from 1915 to 1939 to handle labor issues. He also served on the United States Railroad Board of Adjustments from 1919 to 1921. He was interested in industrial safety and workmen's compensation laws. Some of his charitable work included the Girls' Reform School, and the Board of Charities of the District of Columbia. He had numerous memberships and positions of leadership in several professional societies, including the American Statistical Association. He was honored by Notre Dame with the Laetare Medal in 1922. Charles Patrick Neill died in Washington, D.C., on 3 October 1942.   == Charles P. Neill papers == The Charles Patrick Neill Papers consist of seven manuscript boxes and one reel of microfilm from the years 1893–1956. His personal papers include correspondence, tax information (1940–1946), clippings and a scrapbook (1893–1903). Neill's professional papers contain correspondence (1904–1942) written while performing one of his various positions as professor, arbitrator, labor commissioner and so on. Included with these papers are: Class notes and publications from his teaching career at the University of Notre Dame and the Catholic University of America Legal papers regarding various grievances brought by workmen against their bosses and the charges brought against Neill when he became Commissioner of Labor Statistics News clippings and other printed material dealing with his work for the Department of Labor Scrapbooks on microfilm concerning his Labor Department activities and his membership on the Railway Commission However, Richard G. Balfe, notes that Neill destroyed most of his personal papers during the last year of his life; little remains apart from some press clippings and letters of congratulations from friends.   == Books == The beginnings of child labor legislation in certain states: a comparative study (1910) Some ethical aspects of the labor movement (1908)   == References == Black Studies in the Department of Labor, 1897-1907 at U.S. Department of Labor web site

Charles Sanders Peirce (/ˈpɜrs/, like "purse", September 10, 1839 – April 19, 1914) was an American philosopher, logician, mathematician, and scientist who is sometimes known as "the father of pragmatism". He was educated as a chemist and employed as a scientist for 30 years. Today he is appreciated largely for his contributions to logic, mathematics, philosophy, scientific methodology, and semiotics, and for his founding of pragmatism. An innovator in mathematics, statistics, philosophy, research methodology, and various sciences, Peirce considered himself, first and foremost, a logician. He made major contributions to logic, but logic for him encompassed much of that which is now called epistemology and philosophy of science. He saw logic as the formal branch of semiotics, of which he is a founder, and which foreshadowed the debate among logical positivists and proponents of philosophy of language that dominated 20th century Western philosophy; additionally, he defined the concept of abductive reasoning, as well as rigorously formulated mathematical induction and deductive reasoning. As early as 1886 he saw that logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits; the same idea was used decades later to produce digital computers. In 1934, the philosopher Paul Weiss called Peirce "the most original and versatile of American philosophers and America's greatest logician". Webster's Biographical Dictionary said in 1943 that Peirce was "now regarded as the most original thinker and greatest logician of his time." Keith Devlin similarly referred to Peirce as one of the greatest philosophers ever.   == LifeEdit ==  Peirce was born at 3 Phillips Place in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He was the son of Sarah Hunt Mills and Benjamin Peirce, himself a professor of astronomy and mathematics at Harvard University and perhaps the first serious research mathematician in America. At age 12, Charles read his older brother's copy of Richard Whately's Elements of Logic, then the leading English-language text on the subject. So began his lifelong fascination with logic and reasoning. He went on to earn the A.B. and A.M. from Harvard; in 1863 the Lawrence Scientific School awarded him a B.Sc. that was Harvard's first summa cum laude chemistry degree; and otherwise his academic record was undistinguished. At Harvard, he began lifelong friendships with Francis Ellingwood Abbot, Chauncey Wright, and William James. One of his Harvard instructors, Charles William Eliot, formed an unfavorable opinion of Peirce. This opinion proved fateful, because Eliot, while President of Harvard 1869–1909—a period encompassing nearly all of Peirce's working life—repeatedly vetoed Harvard's employing Peirce in any capacity. Peirce suffered from his late teens onward from a nervous condition then known as "facial neuralgia", which would today be diagnosed as trigeminal neuralgia. Brent says that when in the throes of its pain "he was, at first, almost stupefied, and then aloof, cold, depressed, extremely suspicious, impatient of the slightest crossing, and subject to violent outbursts of temper". Its consequences may have led to the social isolation which made his life's later years so tragic.   === Early employmentEdit === Between 1859 and 1891, Peirce was intermittently employed in various scientific capacities by the United States Coast Survey and its successor, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, where he enjoyed his highly influential father's protection until the latter's death in 1880. That employment exempted Peirce from having to take part in the Civil War; it would have been very awkward for him to do so, as the Boston Brahmin Peirces sympathized with the Confederacy. At the Survey, he worked mainly in geodesy and gravimetry, refining the use of pendulums to determine small local variations in the Earth's gravity. He was elected a resident fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in January 1867. The Survey sent him to Europe five times, first in 1871 as part of a group sent to observe a solar eclipse; there, he sought out Augustus De Morgan, William Stanley Jevons, and William Kingdon Clifford, British mathematicians and logicians whose turn of mind resembled his own. From 1869 to 1872, he was employed as an Assistant in Harvard's astronomical observatory, doing important work on determining the brightness of stars and the shape of the Milky Way. On April 20, 1877 he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences. Also in 1877, he proposed measuring the meter as so many wavelengths of light of a certain frequency, the kind of definition employed from 1960 to 1983. During the 1880s, Peirce's indifference to bureaucratic detail waxed while his Survey work's quality and timeliness waned. Peirce took years to write reports that he should have completed in months. Meanwhile, he wrote entries, ultimately thousands during 1883–1909, on philosophy, logic, science, and other subjects for the encyclopedic Century Dictionary. In 1885, an investigation by the Allison Commission exonerated Peirce, but led to the dismissal of Superintendent Julius Hilgard and several other Coast Survey employees for misuse of public funds. In 1891, Peirce resigned from the Coast Survey at Superintendent Thomas Corwin Mendenhall's request. He never again held regular employment.   === Johns Hopkins UniversityEdit === In 1879, Peirce was appointed Lecturer in logic at the new Johns Hopkins University, which had strong departments in a number of areas that interested him, such as philosophy (Royce and Dewey completed their PhDs at Hopkins), psychology (taught by G. Stanley Hall and studied by Joseph Jastrow, who coauthored a landmark empirical study with Peirce), and mathematics (taught by J. J. Sylvester, who came to admire Peirce's work on mathematics and logic). 1883 saw publication of his Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University containing works by himself and Allan Marquand, Christine Ladd, Benjamin Ives Gilman, and Oscar Howard Mitchell, several of whom were his graduate students. Peirce's nontenured position at Hopkins was the only academic appointment he ever held. Brent documents something Peirce never suspected, namely that his efforts to obtain academic employment, grants, and scientific respectability were repeatedly frustrated by the covert opposition of a major Canadian-American scientist of the day, Simon Newcomb. Peirce's efforts may also have been hampered by a difficult personality; Brent conjectures as to further psychological difficulty. Conversely, Keith Devlin believes that Peirce's work was too far ahead of his time to be appreciated by the academic establishment of the day and that this played a large role in Peirce's inability to obtain a tenured position. Peirce's personal life worked against his professional success. After his first wife, Harriet Melusina Fay ("Zina"), left him in 1875, Peirce, while still legally married, became involved with Juliette, whose name, given variously as Froissy and Pourtalai and nationality (she spoke French) remain uncertain. When his divorce from Zina became final in 1883, he married Juliette. That year, Newcomb pointed out to a Johns Hopkins trustee that Peirce, while a Hopkins employee, had lived and traveled with a woman to whom he was not married; the ensuing scandal led to his dismissal in January 1884. Over the years Peirce sought academic employment at various universities without success. He had no children by either marriage.   === PovertyEdit === In 1887 Peirce spent part of his inheritance from his parents to buy 2,000 acres (8 km2) of rural land near Milford, Pennsylvania, which never yielded an economic return. There he had an 1854 farmhouse remodeled to his design. The Peirces named the property "Arisbe". There they lived with few interruptions for the rest of their lives, Charles writing prolifically, much of it unpublished to this day (see Works). Living beyond their means soon led to grave financial and legal difficulties. He spent much of his last two decades unable to afford heat in winter and subsisting on old bread donated by the local baker. Unable to afford new stationery, he wrote on the verso side of old manuscripts. An outstanding warrant for assault and unpaid debts led to his being a fugitive in New York City for a while. Several people, including his brother James Mills Peirce and his neighbors, relatives of Gifford Pinchot, settled his debts and paid his property taxes and mortgage. Peirce did some scientific and engineering consulting and wrote much for meager pay, mainly encyclopedic dictionary entries, and reviews for The Nation (with whose editor, Wendell Phillips Garrison, he became friendly). He did translations for the Smithsonian Institution, at its director Samuel Langley's instigation. Peirce also did substantial mathematical calculations for Langley's research on powered flight. Hoping to make money, Peirce tried inventing. He began but did not complete a number of books. In 1888, President Grover Cleveland appointed him to the Assay Commission.  From 1890 on, he had a friend and admirer in Judge Francis C. Russell of Chicago, who introduced Peirce to editor Paul Carus and owner Edward C. Hegeler of the pioneering American philosophy journal The Monist, which eventually published at least 14 articles by Peirce. He wrote many texts in James Mark Baldwin's Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901–5); half of those credited to him appear to have been written actually by Christine Ladd-Franklin under his supervision. He applied in 1902 to the newly formed Carnegie Institution for a grant to write a systematic book of his life's work. The application was doomed; his nemesis Newcomb served on the Institution's executive committee, and its President had been the President of Johns Hopkins at the time of Peirce's dismissal. The one who did the most to help Peirce in these desperate times was his old friend William James, dedicating his Will to Believe (1897) to Peirce, and arranging for Peirce to be paid to give two series of lectures at or near Harvard (1898 and 1903). Most important, each year from 1907 until James's death in 1910, James wrote to his friends in the Boston intelligentsia to request financial aid for Peirce; the fund continued even after James died. Peirce reciprocated by designating James's eldest son as his heir should Juliette predecease him. It has been believed that this was also why Peirce used "Santiago" ("St. James" in English) as a middle name, but he appeared in print as early as 1890 as Charles Santiago Peirce. (See Charles Santiago Sanders Peirce for discussion and references). Peirce died destitute in Milford, Pennsylvania, twenty years before his widow.   === Slavery, the Civil War and racismEdit === Peirce grew up in a home where the supremacy of the white Anglo-Saxon male was taken for granted, Irish immigrants were considered inferior and Negro slavery was considered natural. Until the outbreak of the Civil War his father described himself as a secessionist, but after the outbreak of the war, this stopped and he became a Union partisan, supporting with donations the Sanitary Commission, the leading Northern war charity. No members of the Peirce family volunteered or enlisted. Peirce shared his father's views and liked to use the syllogism     All Men are equal in their political rights,    Negroes are Men    -  Negroes are equal in political rights to whites  to illustrate the unreliability of traditional forms of logic. See: Peirce's law#Other proofs of Peirce's law   == ReceptionEdit == Bertrand Russell (1959) wrote, "Beyond doubt [...] he was one of the most original minds of the later nineteenth century, and certainly the greatest American thinker ever." (Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, published from 1910 to 1913, does not mention Peirce; Peirce's work was not widely known until later.) A. N. Whitehead, while reading some of Peirce's unpublished manuscripts soon after arriving at Harvard in 1924, was struck by how Peirce had anticipated his own "process" thinking. (On Peirce and process metaphysics, see Lowe 1964.) Karl Popper viewed Peirce as "one of the greatest philosophers of all times". Yet Peirce's achievements were not immediately recognized. His imposing contemporaries William James and Josiah Royce admired him, and Cassius Jackson Keyser at Columbia and C. K. Ogden wrote about Peirce with respect, but to no immediate effect. The first scholar to give Peirce his considered professional attention was Royce's student Morris Raphael Cohen, the editor of an anthology of Peirce's writings titled Chance, Love, and Logic (1923) and the author of the first bibliography of Peirce's scattered writings. John Dewey studied under Peirce at Johns Hopkins and, from 1916 onwards, Dewey's writings repeatedly mention Peirce with deference. His 1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry is much influenced by Peirce. The publication of the first six volumes of the Collected Papers (1931–35), the most important event to date in Peirce studies and one that Cohen made possible by raising the needed funds, did not prompt an outpouring of secondary studies. The editors of those volumes, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, did not become Peirce specialists. Early landmarks of the secondary literature include the monographs by Buchler (1939), Feibleman (1946), and Goudge (1950), the 1941 Ph.D. thesis by Arthur W. Burks (who went on to edit volumes 7 and 8), and the studies edited by Wiener and Young (1952). The Charles S. Peirce Society was founded in 1946. Its Transactions, an academic quarterly specializing in Peirce, pragmatism, and American philosophy, has appeared since 1965. In 1949, while doing unrelated archival work, the historian of mathematics Carolyn Eisele (1902–2000) chanced on an autograph letter by Peirce. So began her 40 years of research on Peirce the mathematician and scientist, culminating in Eisele (1976, 1979, 1985). Beginning around 1960, the philosopher and historian of ideas Max Fisch (1900–1995) emerged as an authority on Peirce; Fisch (1986) includes many of his relevant articles, including a wide-ranging survey (Fisch 1986: 422–48) of the impact of Peirce's thought through 1983. Peirce has gained a significant international following, marked by university research centers devoted to Peirce studies and pragmatism in Brazil (CeneP/CIEP), Finland (HPRC, including Commens), Germany (Wirth's group, Hoffman's and Otte's group, and Deuser's and Härle's group), France (L'I.R.S.C.E.), Spain (GEP), and Italy (CSP). His writings have been translated into several languages, including German, French, Finnish, Spanish, and Swedish. Since 1950, there have been French, Italian, Spanish, British, and Brazilian Peirceans of note. For many years, the North American philosophy department most devoted to Peirce was the University of Toronto's, thanks in good part to the leadership of Thomas Goudge and David Savan. In recent years, U.S. Peirce scholars have clustered at Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, home of the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), and the Pennsylvania State University.  Currently, considerable interest is being taken in Peirce's ideas by researchers wholly outside the arena of academic philosophy. The interest comes from industry, business, technology, intelligence organizations, and the military; and it has resulted in the existence of a substantial number of agencies, institutes, businesses, and laboratories in which ongoing research into and development of Peircean concepts are being vigorously undertaken.  In recent years, Peirce's trichotomy of signs is exploited by a growing number of practitioners for marketing and design tasks.   == WorksEdit == Peirce's reputation rests largely on a number of academic papers published in American scientific and scholarly journals such as Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Journal of Speculative Philosophy, The Monist, Popular Science Monthly, the American Journal of Mathematics, Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, The Nation, and others. See Articles by Peirce, published in his lifetime for an extensive list with links to them online. The only full-length book (neither extract nor pamphlet) that Peirce authored and saw published in his lifetime was Photometric Researches (1878), a 181-page monograph on the applications of spectrographic methods to astronomy. While at Johns Hopkins, he edited Studies in Logic (1883), containing chapters by himself and his graduate students. Besides lectures during his years (1879–1884) as Lecturer in Logic at Johns Hopkins, he gave at least nine series of lectures, many now published; see Lectures by Peirce. Harvard University obtained from Peirce's widow soon after his death the papers found in his study, but did not microfilm them until 1964. Only after Richard Robin (1967) catalogued this Nachlass did it become clear that Peirce had left approximately 1650 unpublished manuscripts, totaling over 100,000 pages, mostly still unpublished except on microfilm. On the vicissitudes of Peirce's papers, see Houser (1989). Reportedly the papers remain in unsatisfactory condition. The first published anthology of Peirce's articles was the one-volume Chance, Love and Logic: Philosophical Essays, edited by Morris Raphael Cohen, 1923, still in print. Other one-volume anthologies were published in 1940, 1957, 1958, 1972, 1994, and 2009, most still in print. The main posthumous editions of Peirce's works in their long trek to light, often multi-volume, and some still in print, have included: 1931–58: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (CP), 8 volumes, includes many published works, along with a selection of previously unpublished work and a smattering of his correspondence. This long-time standard edition drawn from Peirce's work from the 1860s to 1913 remains the most comprehensive survey of his prolific output from 1893 to 1913. It is organized thematically, but texts (including lecture series) are often split up across volumes, while texts from various stages in Peirce's development are often combined, requiring frequent visits to editors' notes. Edited (1–6) by Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss and (7–8) by Arthur Burks, in print and online. 1975–87: Charles Sanders Peirce: Contributions to The Nation, 4 volumes, includes Peirce's more than 300 reviews and articles published 1869–1908 in The Nation. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner and James Edward Cook, online. 1976: The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, 4 volumes in 5, included many previously unpublished Peirce manuscripts on mathematical subjects, along with Peirce's important published mathematical articles. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1977: Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence between C. S. Peirce and Victoria Lady Welby (2nd edition 2001), included Peirce's entire correspondence (1903–1912) with Victoria, Lady Welby. Peirce's other published correspondence is largely limited to the 14 letters included in volume 8 of the Collected Papers, and the 20-odd pre-1890 items included so far in the Writings. Edited by Charles S. Hardwick with James Cook, out of print. 1982–now: Writings of Charles S. Peirce, A Chronological Edition (W), Volumes 1–6 & 8, of a projected 30. The limited coverage, and defective editing and organization, of the Collected Papers led Max Fisch and others in the 1970s to found the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), whose mission is to prepare a more complete critical chronological edition. Only seven volumes have appeared to date, but they cover the period from 1859–1892, when Peirce carried out much of his best-known work. W 8 was published in November 2010; and work continues on W 7, 9, and 11. In print and online. 1985: Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic of Science: A History of Science, 2 volumes. Auspitz has said, "The extent of Peirce's immersion in the science of his day is evident in his reviews in the Nation [...] and in his papers, grant applications, and publishers' prospectuses in the history and practice of science", referring latterly to Historical Perspectives. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1992: Reasoning and the Logic of Things collects in one place Peirce's 1898 series of lectures invited by William James. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner, with commentary by Hilary Putnam, in print. 1992–98: The Essential Peirce (EP), 2 volumes, is an important recent sampler of Peirce's philosophical writings. Edited (1) by Nathan Hauser and Christian Kloesel and (2) by PEP editors, in print. 1997: Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking collects Peirce's 1903 Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" in a study edition, including drafts, of Peirce's lecture manuscripts, which had been previously published in abridged form; the lectures now also appear in EP 2. Edited by Patricia Ann Turisi, in print. 2010: Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Writings collects important writings by Peirce on the subject, many not previously in print. Edited by Matthew E. Moore, in print.   == MathematicsEdit ==  Peirce's most important work in pure mathematics was in logical and foundational areas. He also worked on linear algebra, matrices, various geometries, topology and Listing numbers, Bell numbers, graphs, the four-color problem, and the nature of continuity. He worked on applied mathematics in economics, engineering, and map projections (such as the Peirce quincuncial projection), and was especially active in probability and statistics. Discoveries Peirce made a number of striking discoveries in formal logic and foundational mathematics, nearly all of which came to be appreciated only long after he died: In 1860 he suggested a cardinal arithmetic for infinite numbers, years before any work by Georg Cantor (who completed his dissertation in 1867) and without access to Bernard Bolzano's 1851 (posthumous) Paradoxien des Unendlichen.  In 1880–81 he showed how Boolean algebra could be done via a repeated sufficient single binary operation (logical NOR), anticipating Henry M. Sheffer by 33 years. (See also De Morgan's Laws). In 1881 he set out the axiomatization of natural number arithmetic, a few years before Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano. In the same paper Peirce gave, years before Dedekind, the first purely cardinal definition of a finite set in the sense now known as "Dedekind-finite", and implied by the same stroke an important formal definition of an infinite set (Dedekind-infinite), as a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with one of its proper subsets. In 1885 he distinguished between first-order and second-order quantification. In the same paper he set out what can be read as the first (primitive) axiomatic set theory, anticipating Zermelo by about two decades (Brady 2000, pp. 132–3). In 1886 he saw that Boolean calculations could be carried out via electrical switches, anticipating Claude Shannon by more than 50 years.  By the later 1890s he was devising existential graphs, a diagrammatic notation for the predicate calculus. Based on them are John F. Sowa's conceptual graphs and Sun-Joo Shin's diagrammatic reasoning. The New Elements of Mathematics Peirce wrote drafts for an introductory textbook, with the working title The New Elements of Mathematics, that presented mathematics from an original standpoint. Those drafts and many other of his previously unpublished mathematical manuscripts finally appeared in The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce (1976), edited by mathematician Carolyn Eisele. Nature of mathematics Peirce agreed with Auguste Comte in regarding mathematics as more basic than philosophy and the special sciences (of nature and mind). Peirce classified mathematics into three subareas: (1) mathematics of logic, (2) discrete series, and (3) pseudo-continua (as he called them, including the real numbers) and continua. Influenced by his father Benjamin, Peirce argued that mathematics studies purely hypothetical objects and is not just the science of quantity but is more broadly the science which draws necessary conclusions; that mathematics aids logic, not vice versa; and that logic itself is part of philosophy and is the science about drawing conclusions necessary and otherwise.   === Mathematics of logicEdit ===  Beginning with his first paper on the "Logic of Relatives" (1870), Peirce extended the theory of relations that Augustus De Morgan had just recently awakened from its Cinderella slumbers. Much of the mathematics of relations now taken for granted was "borrowed" from Peirce, not always with all due credit; on that and on how the young Bertrand Russell, especially his Principles of Mathematics and Principia Mathematica, did not do Peirce justice, see Anellis (1995). In 1918 the logician C. I. Lewis wrote, "The contributions of C.S. Peirce to symbolic logic are more numerous and varied than those of any other writer — at least in the nineteenth century." Beginning in 1940, Alfred Tarski and his students rediscovered aspects of Peirce's larger vision of relational logic, developing the perspective of relation algebra. Relational logic gained applications. In mathematics, it influenced the abstract analysis of E. H. Moore and the lattice theory of Garrett Birkhoff. In computer science, the relational model for databases was developed with Peircean ideas in work of Edgar F. Codd, who was a doctoral student of Arthur W. Burks, a Peirce scholar. In economics, relational logic was used by Frank P. Ramsey, John von Neumann, and Paul Samuelson to study preferences and utility and by Kenneth J. Arrow in Social Choice and Individual Values, following Arrow's association with Tarski at City College of New York. On Peirce and his contemporaries Ernst Schröder and Gottlob Frege, Hilary Putnam (1982) documented that Frege's work on the logic of quantifiers had little influence on his contemporaries, although it was published four years before the work of Peirce and his student Oscar Howard Mitchell. Putnam found that mathematicians and logicians learned about the logic of quantifiers through the independent work of Peirce and Mitchell, particularly through Peirce's "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation" (1885), published in the premier American mathematical journal of the day, and cited by Peano and Schröder, among others, who ignored Frege. They also adopted and modified Peirce's notations, typographical variants of those now used. Peirce apparently was ignorant of Frege's work, despite their overlapping achievements in logic, philosophy of language, and the foundations of mathematics. Peirce's work on formal logic had admirers besides Ernst Schröder: Philosophical algebraist William Kingdon Clifford and logician William Ernest Johnson, both British; The Polish school of logic and foundational mathematics, including Alfred Tarski; Arthur Prior, who praised and studied Peirce's logical work in a 1964 paper and in Formal Logic (saying on page 4 that Peirce "perhaps had a keener eye for essentials than any other logician before or since."). A philosophy of logic, grounded in his categories and semiotic, can be extracted from Peirce's writings and, along with Peirce's logical work more generally, is exposited and defended in Hilary Putnam (1982); the Introduction in Nathan Houser et al. (1997); and Randall Dipert's chapter in Cheryl Misak (2004).   === ContinuaEdit === Continuity and synechism are central in Peirce's philosophy: "I did not at first suppose that it was, as I gradually came to find it, the master-Key of philosophy". From a mathematical point of view, he embraced infinitesimals and worked long on the mathematics of continua. He long held that the real numbers constitute a pseudo-continuum; that a true continuum is the real subject matter of analysis situs (topology); and that a true continuum of instants exceeds—and within any lapse of time has room for—any Aleph number (any infinite multitude as he called it) of instants. In 1908 Peirce wrote that he found that a true continuum might have or lack such room. Jérôme Havenel (2008): "It is on May 26, 1908, that Peirce finally gave up his idea that in every continuum there is room for whatever collection of any multitude. From now on, there are different kinds of continua, which have different properties."   === Probability and statisticsEdit === Peirce held that science achieves statistical probabilities, not certainties, and that spontaneity (absolute chance) is real (see Tychism on his view). Most of his statistical writings promote the frequency interpretation of probability (objective ratios of cases), and many of his writings express skepticism about (and criticize the use of) probability when such models are not based on objective randomization. Though Peirce was largely a frequentist, his possible world semantics introduced the "propensity" theory of probability before Karl Popper. Peirce (sometimes with Joseph Jastrow) investigated the probability judgments of experimental subjects, "perhaps the very first" elicitation and estimation of subjective probabilities in experimental psychology and (what came to be called) Bayesian statistics. Peirce was one of the founders of statistics. He formulated modern statistics in "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" (1877–8) and "A Theory of Probable Inference" (1883). With a repeated measures design, Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow introduced blinded, controlled randomized experiments in 1884 (Hacking 1990:205) (before Ronald A. Fisher). He invented optimal design for experiments on gravity, in which he "corrected the means". He used correlation and smoothing. Peirce extended the work on outliers by Benjamin Peirce, his father. He introduced terms "confidence" and "likelihood" (before Jerzy Neyman and Fisher). (See Stephen Stigler's historical books and Ian Hacking 1990).   == PhilosophyEdit ==  It is not sufficiently recognized that Peirce's career was that of a scientist, not a philosopher; and that during his lifetime he was known and valued chiefly as a scientist, only secondarily as a logician, and scarcely at all as a philosopher. Even his work in philosophy and logic will not be understood until this fact becomes a standing premise of Peircean studies.  Peirce was a working scientist for 30 years, and arguably was a professional philosopher only during the five years he lectured at Johns Hopkins. He learned philosophy mainly by reading, each day, a few pages of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, in the original German, while a Harvard undergraduate. His writings bear on a wide array of disciplines, including mathematics, logic, philosophy, statistics, astronomy, metrology, geodesy, experimental psychology, economics, linguistics, and the history and philosophy of science. This work has enjoyed renewed interest and approval, a revival inspired not only by his anticipations of recent scientific developments but also by his demonstration of how philosophy can be applied effectively to human problems. Peirce's philosophy includes (see below in related sections) a pervasive three-category system, belief that truth is immutable and is both independent from actual opinion (fallibilism) and discoverable (no radical skepticism), logic as formal semiotic on signs, on arguments, and on inquiry's ways—including philosophical pragmatism (which he founded), critical common-sensism, and scientific method—and, in metaphysics: Scholastic realism, e.g. John Duns Scotus, belief in God, freedom, and at least an attenuated immortality, objective idealism, and belief in the reality of continuity and of absolute chance, mechanical necessity, and creative love. In his work, fallibilism and pragmatism may seem to work somewhat like skepticism and positivism, respectively, in others' work. However, for Peirce, fallibilism is balanced by an anti-skepticism and is a basis for belief in the reality of absolute chance and of continuity, and pragmatism commits one to anti-nominalist belief in the reality of the general (CP 5.453–7). For Peirce, First Philosophy, which he also called cenoscopy, is less basic than mathematics and more basic than the special sciences (of nature and mind). It studies positive phenomena in general, phenomena available to any person at any waking moment, and does not settle questions by resorting to special experiences. He divided such philosophy into (1) phenomenology (which he also called phaneroscopy or categorics), (2) normative sciences (esthetics, ethics, and logic), and (3) metaphysics; his views on them are discussed in order below.   === Theory of categoriesEdit ===  On May 14, 1867, the 27-year-old Peirce presented a paper entitled "On a New List of Categories" to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which published it the following year. The paper outlined a theory of predication, involving three universal categories that Peirce developed in response to reading Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel, categories that Peirce applied throughout his work for the rest of his life. Peirce scholars generally regard the "New List" as foundational or breaking the ground for Peirce's "architectonic", his blueprint for a pragmatic philosophy. In the categories one will discern, concentrated, the pattern that one finds formed by the three grades of clearness in "How To Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878 paper foundational to pragmatism), and in numerous other trichotomies in his work. "On a New List of Categories" is cast as a Kantian deduction; it is short but dense and difficult to summarize. The following table is compiled from that and later works. In 1893, Peirce restated most of it for a less advanced audience.  *Note: An interpretant is an interpretation (human or otherwise) in the sense of the product of an interpretive process.   === Aesthetics and ethicsEdit === Peirce did not write extensively in aesthetics and ethics, but came by 1902 to hold that aesthetics, ethics, and logic, in that order, comprise the normative sciences. He characterized aesthetics as the study of the good (grasped as the admirable), and thus of the ends governing all conduct and thought.   == Philosophy: logic, or semioticEdit ==   === Logic as philosophicalEdit === Peirce regarded logic per se as a division of philosophy, as a normative science based on esthetics and ethics, as more basic than metaphysics, and as "the art of devising methods of research". More generally, as inference, "logic is rooted in the social principle", since inference depends on a standpoint that, in a sense, is unlimited. Peirce called (with no sense of deprecation) "mathematics of logic" much of the kind of thing which, in current research and applications, is called simply "logic". He was productive in both (philosophical) logic and logic's mathematics, which were connected deeply in his work and thought. Peirce argued that logic is formal semiotic, the formal study of signs in the broadest sense, not only signs that are artificial, linguistic, or symbolic, but also signs that are semblances or are indexical such as reactions. Peirce held that "all this universe is perfused with signs, if it is not composed exclusively of signs", along with their representational and inferential relations. He argued that, since all thought takes time, all thought is in signs and sign processes ("semiosis") such as the inquiry process. He divided logic into: (1) speculative grammar, or stechiology, on how signs can be meaningful and, in relation to that, what kinds of signs there are, how they combine, and how some embody or incorporate others; (2) logical critic, or logic proper, on the modes of inference; and (3) speculative or universal rhetoric, or methodeutic, the philosophical theory of inquiry, including pragmatism.   ==== Presuppositions of logicEdit ==== In his "F.R.L." [First Rule of Logic] (1899), Peirce states that the first, and "in one sense, the sole", rule of reason is that, to learn, one needs to desire to learn and desire it without resting satisfied with that which one is inclined to think. So, the first rule is, to wonder. Peirce proceeds to a critical theme in research practices and the shaping of theories: ...there follows one corollary which itself deserves to be inscribed upon every wall of the city of philosophy: Do not block the way of inquiry. Peirce adds, that method and economy are best in research but no outright sin inheres in trying any theory in the sense that the investigation via its trial adoption can proceed unimpeded and undiscouraged, and that "the one unpardonable offence" is a philosophical barricade against truth's advance, an offense to which "metaphysicians in all ages have shown themselves the most addicted". Peirce in many writings holds that logic precedes metaphysics (ontological, religious, and physical). Peirce goes on to list four common barriers to inquiry: (1) Assertion of absolute certainty; (2) maintaining that something is absolutely unknowable; (3) maintaining that something is absolutely inexplicable because absolutely basic or ultimate; (4) holding that perfect exactitude is possible, especially such as to quite preclude unusual and anomalous phenomena. To refuse absolute theoretical certainty is the heart of fallibilism, which Peirce unfolds into refusals to set up any of the listed barriers. Peirce elsewhere argues (1897) that logic's presupposition of fallibilism leads at length to the view that chance and continuity are very real (tychism and synechism). The First Rule of Logic pertains to the mind's presuppositions in undertaking reason and logic, presuppositions, for instance, that truth and the real do not depend on yours or my opinion of them but do depend on representational relation and consist in the destined end in investigation taken far enough (see below). He describes such ideas as, collectively, hopes which, in particular cases, one is unable seriously to doubt.   ==== Four incapacitiesEdit ====  In three articles in 1868–69, Peirce rejected mere verbal or hyperbolic doubt and first or ultimate principles, and argued that we have (as he numbered them): No power of Introspection. All knowledge of the internal world comes by hypothetical reasoning from known external facts. No power of Intuition (cognition without logical determination by previous cognitions). No cognitive stage is absolutely first in a process. All mental action has the form of inference. No power of thinking without signs. A cognition must be interpreted in a subsequent cognition in order to be a cognition at all. No conception of the absolutely incognizable. (The above sense of the term "intuition" is almost Kant's, said Peirce. It differs from the current looser sense that encompasses instinctive or anyway half-conscious inference.) Peirce argued that those incapacities imply the reality of the general and of the continuous, the validity of the modes of reasoning, and the falsity of philosophical Cartesianism (see below). Peirce rejected the conception (usually ascribed to Kant) of the unknowable thing-in-itself and later said that to "dismiss make-believes" is a prerequisite for pragmatism.   ==== Logic as formal semioticEdit ==== Peirce sought, through his wide-ranging studies through the decades, formal philosophical ways to articulate thought's processes, and also to explain the workings of science. These inextricably entangled questions of a dynamics of inquiry rooted in nature and nurture led him to develop his semiotic with very broadened conceptions of signs and inference, and, as its culmination, a theory of inquiry for the task of saying 'how science works' and devising research methods. This would be logic by the medieval definition taught for centuries: art of arts, science of sciences, having the way to the principles of all methods. Influences radiate from points on parallel lines of inquiry in Aristotle's work, in such loci as: the basic terminology of psychology in On the Soul; the founding description of sign relations in On Interpretation; and the differentiation of inference into three modes that are commonly translated into English as abduction, deduction, and induction, in the Prior Analytics, as well as inference by analogy (called paradeigma by Aristotle), which Peirce regarded as involving the other three modes. Peirce began writing on semiotic in the 1860s, around the time when he devised his system of three categories. He called it both semiotic and semeiotic. Both are current in singular and plural. He based it on the conception of a triadic sign relation, and defined semiosis as "action, or influence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative influence not being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs". As to signs in thought, Peirce emphasized the reverse:  To say, therefore, that thought cannot happen in an instant, but requires a time, is but another way of saying that every thought must be interpreted in another, or that all thought is in signs.  Peirce held that all thought is in signs, issuing in and from interpretation, where 'sign' is the word for the broadest variety of conceivable semblances, diagrams, metaphors, symptoms, signals, designations, symbols, texts, even mental concepts and ideas, all as determinations of a mind or quasi-mind, that which at least functions like a mind, as in the work of crystals or bees — the focus is on sign action in general rather than on psychology, linguistics, or social studies (fields which he also pursued). Inquiry is a kind of inference process, a manner of thinking and semiosis. Global divisions of ways for phenomena to stand as signs, and the subsumption of inquiry and thinking within inference as a sign process, enable the study of inquiry on semiotics' three levels: Conditions for meaningfulness. Study of significatory elements and combinations, their grammar. Validity, conditions for true representation. Critique of arguments in their various separate modes. Conditions for determining interpretations. Methodology of inquiry in its mutually interacting modes. Peirce uses examples often from common experience, but defines and discusses such things as assertion and interpretation in terms of philosophical logic. In a formal vein, Peirce said:  On the Definition of Logic. Logic is formal semiotic. A sign is something, A, which brings something, B, its interpretant sign, determined or created by it, into the same sort of correspondence (or a lower implied sort) with something, C, its object, as that in which itself stands to C. This definition no more involves any reference to human thought than does the definition of a line as the place within which a particle lies during a lapse of time. It is from this definition that I deduce the principles of logic by mathematical reasoning, and by mathematical reasoning that, I aver, will support criticism of Weierstrassian severity, and that is perfectly evident. The word "formal" in the definition is also defined.     —Peirce, "Carnegie Application", The New Elements of Mathematics v. 4, p. 54.   === SignsEdit ===  A list of noted writings by Peirce on signs and sign relations is at Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)#References and further reading.   ==== Sign relationEdit ==== Peirce's theory of signs is known to be one of the most complex semiotic theories due to its generalistic claim. Anything is a sign — not absolutely as itself, but instead in some relation or other. The sign relation is the key. It defines three roles encompassing (1) the sign, (2) the sign's subject matter, called its object, and (3) the sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of effect called its interpretant (a further sign, for example a translation). It is an irreducible triadic relation, according to Peirce. The roles are distinct even when the things that fill those roles are not. The roles are but three; a sign of an object leads to one or more interpretants, and, as signs, they lead to further interpretants. Extension × intension = information. Two traditional approaches to sign relation, necessary though insufficient, are the way of extension (a sign's objects, also called breadth, denotation, or application) and the way of intension (the objects' characteristics, qualities, attributes referenced by the sign, also called depth, comprehension, significance, or connotation). Peirce adds a third, the way of information, including change of information, to integrate the other two approaches into a unified whole. For example, because of the equation above, if a term's total amount of information stays the same, then the more that the term 'intends' or signifies about objects, the fewer are the objects to which the term 'extends' or applies. Determination. A sign depends on its object in such a way as to represent its object — the object enables and, in a sense, determines the sign. A physically causal sense of this stands out when a sign consists in an indicative reaction. The interpretant depends likewise on both the sign and the object — an object determines a sign to determine an interpretant. But this determination is not a succession of dyadic events, like a row of toppling dominoes; sign determination is triadic. For example, an interpretant does not merely represent something which represented an object; instead an interpretant represents something as a sign representing the object. The object (be it a quality or fact or law or even fictional) determines the sign to an interpretant through one's collateral experience with the object, in which the object is found or from which it is recalled, as when a sign consists in a chance semblance of an absent object. Peirce used the word "determine" not in a strictly deterministic sense, but in a sense of "specializes," bestimmt, involving variable amount, like an influence. Peirce came to define representation and interpretation in terms of (triadic) determination. The object determines the sign to determine another sign — the interpretant — to be related to the object as the sign is related to the object, hence the interpretant, fulfilling its function as sign of the object, determines a further interpretant sign. The process is logically structured to perpetuate itself, and is definitive of sign, object, and interpretant in general.   ==== Semiotic elementsEdit ==== Peirce held there are exactly three basic elements in semiosis (sign action): A sign (or representamen) represents, in the broadest possible sense of "represents". It is something interpretable as saying something about something. It is not necessarily symbolic, linguistic, or artificial—a cloud might be a sign of rain for instance, or ruins the sign of ancient civilization. As Peirce sometimes put it (he defined sign at least 76 times), the sign stands for the object to the interpretant. A sign represents its object in some respect, which respect is the sign's ground. An object (or semiotic object) is a subject matter of a sign and an interpretant. It can be anything thinkable, a quality, an occurrence, a rule, etc., even fictional, such as Prince Hamlet. All of those are special or partial objects. The object most accurately is the universe of discourse to which the partial or special object belongs. For instance, a perturbation of Pluto's orbit is a sign about Pluto but ultimately not only about Pluto. An object either (i) is immediate to a sign and is the object as represented in the sign or (ii) is a dynamic object, the object as it really is, on which the immediate object is founded "as on bedrock". An interpretant (or interpretant sign) is a sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of idea or effect, an interpretation, human or otherwise. An interpretant is a sign (a) of the object and (b) of the interpretant's "predecessor" (the interpreted sign) as a sign of the same object. An interpretant either (i) is immediate to a sign and is a kind of quality or possibility such as a word's usual meaning, or (ii) is a dynamic interpretant, such as a state of agitation, or (iii) is a final or normal interpretant, a sum of the lessons which a sufficiently considered sign would have as effects on practice, and with which an actual interpretant may at most coincide. Some of the understanding needed by the mind depends on familiarity with the object. To know what a given sign denotes, the mind needs some experience of that sign's object, experience outside of, and collateral to, that sign or sign system. In that context Peirce speaks of collateral experience, collateral observation, collateral acquaintance, all in much the same terms.   ==== Classes of signsEdit ==== Among Peirce's many sign typologies, three stand out, interlocked. The first typology depends on the sign itself, the second on how the sign stands for its denoted object, and the third on how the sign stands for its object to its interpretant. Also, each of the three typologies is a three-way division, a trichotomy, via Peirce's three phenomenological categories: (1) quality of feeling, (2) reaction, resistance, and (3) representation, mediation. I. Qualisign, sinsign, legisign (also called tone, token, type, and also called potisign, actisign, famisign): This typology classifies every sign according to the sign's own phenomenological category—the qualisign is a quality, a possibility, a "First"; the sinsign is a reaction or resistance, a singular object, an actual event or fact, a "Second"; and the legisign is a habit, a rule, a representational relation, a "Third". II. Icon, index, symbol: This typology, the best known one, classifies every sign according to the category of the sign's way of denoting its object—the icon (also called semblance or likeness) by a quality of its own, the index by factual connection to its object, and the symbol by a habit or rule for its interpretant. III. Rheme, dicisign, argument (also called sumisign, dicisign, suadisign, also seme, pheme, delome, and regarded as very broadened versions of the traditional term, proposition, argument): This typology classifies every sign according to the category which the interpretant attributes to the sign's way of denoting its object—the rheme, for example a term, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of quality; the dicisign, for example a proposition, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of fact; and the argument is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of habit or law. This is the culminating typology of the three, where the sign is understood as a structural element of inference. Every sign belongs to one class or another within (I) and within (II) and within (III). Thus each of the three typologies is a three-valued parameter for every sign. The three parameters are not independent of each other; many co-classifications are absent, for reasons pertaining to the lack of either habit-taking or singular reaction in a quality, and the lack of habit-taking in a singular reaction. The result is not 27 but instead ten classes of signs fully specified at this level of analysis.   === Modes of inferenceEdit ===  Borrowing a brace of concepts from Aristotle, Peirce examined three basic modes of inference — abduction, deduction, and induction — in his "critique of arguments" or "logic proper". Peirce also called abduction "retroduction", "presumption", and, earliest of all, "hypothesis". He characterized it as guessing and as inference to an explanatory hypothesis. He sometimes expounded the modes of inference by transformations of the categorical syllogism Barbara (AAA), for example in "Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis" (1878). He does this by rearranging the rule (Barbara's major premise), the case (Barbara's minor premise), and the result (Barbara's conclusion): Peirce 1883 in "A Theory of Probable Inference" (Studies in Logic) equated hypothetical inference with the induction of characters of objects (as he had done in effect before). Eventually dissatisfied, by 1900 he distinguished them once and for all and also wrote that he now took the syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical extension and comprehension as being less basic than he had thought. In 1903 he presented the following logical form for abductive inference:  The surprising fact, C, is observed; But if A were true, C would be a matter of course, Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.  The logical form does not also cover induction, since induction neither depends on surprise nor proposes a new idea for its conclusion. Induction seeks facts to test a hypothesis; abduction seeks a hypothesis to account for facts. "Deduction proves that something must be; Induction shows that something actually is operative; Abduction merely suggests that something may be." Peirce did not remain quite convinced that one logical form covers all abduction. In his methodeutic or theory of inquiry (see below), he portrayed abduction as an economic initiative to further inference and study, and portrayed all three modes as clarified by their coordination in essential roles in inquiry: hypothetical explanation, deductive prediction, inductive testing.   === PragmatismEdit ===  Peirce's recipe for pragmatic thinking, which he called pragmatism and, later, pragmaticism, is recapitulated in several versions of the so-called pragmatic maxim. Here is one of his more emphatic reiterations of it:  Consider what effects that might conceivably have practical bearings you conceive the objects of your conception to have. Then, your conception of those effects is the whole of your conception of the object.  As a movement, pragmatism began in the early 1870s in discussions among Peirce, William James, and others in the Metaphysical Club. James among others regarded some articles by Peirce such as "The Fixation of Belief" (1877) and especially "How to Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878) as foundational to pragmatism. Peirce (CP 5.11–12), like James (Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, 1907), saw pragmatism as embodying familiar attitudes, in philosophy and elsewhere, elaborated into a new deliberate method for fruitful thinking about problems. Peirce differed from James and the early John Dewey, in some of their tangential enthusiasms, in being decidedly more rationalistic and realistic, in several senses of those terms, throughout the preponderance of his own philosophical moods. In 1905 Peirce coined the new name pragmaticism "for the precise purpose of expressing the original definition", saying that "all went happily" with James's and F.C.S. Schiller's variant uses of the old name "pragmatism" and that he coined the new name because of the old name's growing use in "literary journals, where it gets abused". Yet he cited as causes, in a 1906 manuscript, his differences with James and Schiller and, in a 1908 publication, his differences with James as well as literary author Giovanni Papini's declaration of pragmatism's indefinability. Peirce in any case regarded his views that truth is immutable and infinity is real, as being opposed by the other pragmatists, but he remained allied with them on other issues. Pragmatism begins with the idea that belief is that on which one is prepared to act. Peirce's pragmatism is a method of clarification of conceptions of objects. It equates any conception of an object to a conception of that object's effects to a general extent of the effects' conceivable implications for informed practice. It is a method of sorting out conceptual confusions occasioned, for example, by distinctions that make (sometimes needed) formal yet not practical differences. He formulated both pragmatism and statistical principles as aspects of scientific logic, in his "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" series of articles. In the second one, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear", Peirce discussed three grades of clearness of conception: Clearness of a conception familiar and readily used, even if unanalyzed and undeveloped. Clearness of a conception in virtue of clearness of its parts, in virtue of which logicians called an idea "distinct", that is, clarified by analysis of just what makes it applicable. Elsewhere, echoing Kant, Peirce called a likewise distinct definition "nominal" (CP 5.553). Clearness in virtue of clearness of conceivable practical implications of the object's conceived effects, such as fosters fruitful reasoning, especially on difficult problems. Here he introduced that which he later called the pragmatic maxim. By way of example of how to clarify conceptions, he addressed conceptions about truth and the real as questions of the presuppositions of reasoning in general. In clearness's second grade (the "nominal" grade), he defined truth as a sign's correspondence to its object, and the real as the object of such correspondence, such that truth and the real are independent of that which you or I or any actual, definite community of inquirers think. After that needful but confined step, next in clearness's third grade (the pragmatic, practice-oriented grade) he defined truth as that opinion which would be reached, sooner or later but still inevitably, by research taken far enough, such that the real does depend on that ideal final opinion—a dependence to which he appeals in theoretical arguments elsewhere, for instance for the long-run validity of the rule of induction. Peirce argued that even to argue against the independence and discoverability of truth and the real is to presuppose that there is, about that very question under argument, a truth with just such independence and discoverability. Peirce said that a conception's meaning consists in "all general modes of rational conduct" implied by "acceptance" of the conception—that is, if one were to accept, first of all, the conception as true, then what could one conceive to be consequent general modes of rational conduct by all who accept the conception as true?—the whole of such consequent general modes is the whole meaning. His pragmatism does not equate a conception's meaning, its intellectual purport, with the conceived benefit or cost of the conception itself, like a meme (or, say, propaganda), outside the perspective of its being true, nor, since a conception is general, is its meaning equated with any definite set of actual consequences or upshots corroborating or undermining the conception or its worth. His pragmatism also bears no resemblance to "vulgar" pragmatism, which misleadingly connotes a ruthless and Machiavellian search for mercenary or political advantage. Instead the pragmatic maxim is the heart of his pragmatism as a method of experimentational mental reflection arriving at conceptions in terms of conceivable confirmatory and disconfirmatory circumstances—a method hospitable to the formation of explanatory hypotheses, and conducive to the use and improvement of verification. Peirce's pragmatism, as method and theory of definitions and conceptual clearness, is part of his theory of inquiry, which he variously called speculative, general, formal or universal rhetoric or simply methodeutic. He applied his pragmatism as a method throughout his work.   ==== Theory of inquiryEdit ====   ===== Critical common-sensismEdit ===== Critical common-sensism, treated by Peirce as a consequence of his pragmatism, is his combination of Thomas Reid's common-sense philosophy with a fallibilism that recognizes that propositions of our more or less vague common sense now indubitable may later come into question, for example because of transformations of our world through science. It includes efforts to work up in tests genuine doubts for a core group of common indubitables that vary slowly if at all.   ===== Rival methods of inquiryEdit ===== In The Fixation of Belief (1877), Peirce described inquiry in general not as the pursuit of truth per se but as the struggle to move from irritating, inhibitory doubt born of surprise, disagreement, and the like, and to reach a secure belief, belief being that on which one is prepared to act. That let Peirce frame scientific inquiry as part of a broader spectrum and as spurred, like inquiry generally, by actual doubt, not mere verbal, quarrelsome, or hyperbolic doubt, which he held to be fruitless. Peirce sketched four methods of settling opinion, ordered from least to most successful: The method of tenacity (policy of sticking to initial belief) — which brings comforts and decisiveness but leads to trying to ignore contrary information and others' views as if truth were intrinsically private, not public. The method goes against the social impulse and easily falters since one may well notice when another's opinion seems as good as one's own initial opinion. Its successes can be brilliant but tend to be transitory. The method of authority — which overcomes disagreements but sometimes brutally. Its successes can be majestic and long-lasting, but it cannot regulate people thoroughly enough to withstand doubts indefinitely, especially when people learn about other societies present and past. The method of the a priori — which promotes conformity less brutally but fosters opinions as something like tastes, arising in conversation and comparisons of perspectives in terms of "what is agreeable to reason." Thereby it depends on fashion in paradigms and goes in circles over time. It is more intellectual and respectable but, like the first two methods, sustains accidental and capricious beliefs, destining some minds to doubt it. The method of science — wherein inquiry supposes that the real is discoverable but independent of particular opinion, such that, unlike in the other methods, inquiry can, by its own account, go wrong (fallibilism), not only right, and thus purposely tests itself and criticizes, corrects, and improves itself. Peirce held that, in practical affairs, slow and stumbling ratiocination is often dangerously inferior to instinct and traditional sentiment, and that the scientific method is best suited to theoretical research, which in turn should not be trammeled by the other methods and practical ends; reason's "first rule" is that, in order to learn, one must desire to learn and, as a corollary, must not block the way of inquiry. Scientific method excels the others finally by being deliberately designed to arrive — eventually — at the most secure beliefs, upon which the most successful practices can be based. Starting from the idea that people seek not truth per se but instead to subdue irritating, inhibitory doubt, Peirce showed how, through the struggle, some can come to submit to truth for the sake of belief's integrity, seek as truth the guidance of potential conduct correctly to its given goal, and wed themselves to the scientific method.   ===== Scientific methodEdit ===== Insofar as clarification by pragmatic reflection suits explanatory hypotheses and fosters predictions and testing, pragmatism points beyond the usual duo of foundational alternatives: deduction from self-evident truths, or rationalism; and induction from experiential phenomena, or empiricism. Based on his critique of three modes of argument and different from either foundationalism or coherentism, Peirce's approach seeks to justify claims by a three-phase dynamic of inquiry: Active, abductive genesis of theory, with no prior assurance of truth; Deductive application of the contingent theory so as to clarify its practical implications; Inductive testing and evaluation of the utility of the provisional theory in anticipation of future experience, in both senses: prediction and control. Thereby, Peirce devised an approach to inquiry far more solid than the flatter image of inductive generalization simpliciter, which is a mere re-labeling of phenomenological patterns. Peirce's pragmatism was the first time the scientific method was proposed as an epistemology for philosophical questions. A theory that succeeds better than its rivals in predicting and controlling our world is said to be nearer the truth. This is an operational notion of truth used by scientists. Peirce extracted the pragmatic model or theory of inquiry from its raw materials in classical logic and refined it in parallel with the early development of symbolic logic to address problems about the nature of scientific reasoning. Abduction, deduction, and induction make incomplete sense in isolation from one another but comprise a cycle understandable as a whole insofar as they collaborate toward the common end of inquiry. In the pragmatic way of thinking about conceivable practical implications, every thing has a purpose, and, as possible, its purpose should first be denoted. Abduction hypothesizes an explanation for deduction to clarify into implications to be tested so that induction can evaluate the hypothesis, in the struggle to move from troublesome uncertainty to more secure belief. No matter how traditional and needful it is to study the modes of inference in abstraction from one another, the integrity of inquiry strongly limits the effective modularity of its principal components. Peirce's outline of the scientific method in §III–IV of "A Neglected Argument" is summarized below (except as otherwise noted). There he also reviewed plausibility and inductive precision (issues of critique of arguments). 1. Abductive (or retroductive) phase. Guessing, inference to explanatory hypotheses for selection of those best worth trying. From abduction, Peirce distinguishes induction as inferring, on the basis of tests, the proportion of truth in the hypothesis. Every inquiry, whether into ideas, brute facts, or norms and laws, arises from surprising observations in one or more of those realms (and for example at any stage of an inquiry already underway). All explanatory content of theories comes from abduction, which guesses a new or outside idea so as to account in a simple, economical way for a surprising or complicated phenomenon. The modicum of success in our guesses far exceeds that of random luck, and seems born of attunement to nature by developed or inherent instincts, especially insofar as best guesses are optimally plausible and simple in the sense of the "facile and natural", as by Galileo's natural light of reason and as distinct from "logical simplicity". Abduction is the most fertile but least secure mode of inference. Its general rationale is inductive: it succeeds often enough and it has no substitute in expediting us toward new truths. In 1903, Peirce called pragmatism "the logic of abduction". Coordinative method leads from abducting a plausible hypothesis to judging it for its testability and for how its trial would economize inquiry itself. The hypothesis, being insecure, needs to have practical implications leading at least to mental tests and, in science, lending themselves to scientific tests. A simple but unlikely guess, if not costly to test for falsity, may belong first in line for testing. A guess is intrinsically worth testing if it has plausibility or reasonably objective probability, while subjective likelihood, though reasoned, can be misleadingly seductive. Guesses can be selected for trial strategically, for their caution (for which Peirce gave as example the game of Twenty Questions), breadth, or incomplexity. One can discover only that which would be revealed through their sufficient experience anyway, and so the point is to expedite it; economy of research demands the leap, so to speak, of abduction and governs its art. 2. Deductive phase. Two stages: i. Explication. Not clearly premised, but a deductive analysis of the hypothesis so as to render its parts as clear as possible. ii. Demonstration: Deductive Argumentation, Euclidean in procedure. Explicit deduction of consequences of the hypothesis as predictions about evidence to be found. Corollarial or, if needed, Theorematic. 3. Inductive phase. Evaluation of the hypothesis, inferring from observational or experimental tests of its deduced consequences. The long-run validity of the rule of induction is deducible from the principle (presuppositional to reasoning in general) that the real "is only the object of the final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead"; in other words, anything excluding such a process would never be real. Induction involving the ongoing accumulation of evidence follows "a method which, sufficiently persisted in," will "diminish the error below any predesignate degree." Three stages: i. Classification. Not clearly premised, but an inductive classing of objects of experience under general ideas. ii. Probation: direct Inductive Argumentation. Crude or Gradual in procedure. Crude Induction, founded on experience in one mass (CP 2.759), presumes that future experience on a question will not differ utterly from all past experience (CP 2.756). Gradual Induction makes a new estimate of the proportion of truth in the hypothesis after each test, and is Qualitative or Quantitative. Qualitative Gradual Induction depends on estimating the relative evident weights of the various qualities of the subject class under investigation (CP 2.759; see also CP 7.114–20). Quantitative Gradual Induction depends on how often, in a fair sample of instances of S, S is found actually accompanied by P that was predicted for S (CP 2.758). It depends on measurements, or statistics, or counting. iii. Sentential Induction. "...which, by Inductive reasonings, appraises the different Probations singly, then their combinations, then makes self-appraisal of these very appraisals themselves, and passes final judgment on the whole result".   ===== Against CartesianismEdit ===== Peirce drew on the methodological implications of the four incapacities — no genuine introspection, no intuition in the sense of non-inferential cognition, no thought but in signs, and no conception of the absolutely incognizable — to attack philosophical Cartesianism, of which he said that: 1. "It teaches that philosophy must begin in universal doubt" — when, instead, we start with preconceptions, "prejudices [...] which it does not occur to us can be questioned", though we may find reason to question them later. "Let us not pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts." 2. "It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is...in the individual consciousness" — when, instead, in science a theory stays on probation till agreement is reached, then it has no actual doubters left. No lone individual can reasonably hope to fulfill philosophy's multi-generational dream. When "candid and disciplined minds" continue to disagree on a theoretical issue, even the theory's author should feel doubts about it. 3. It trusts to "a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous premisses" — when, instead, philosophy should, "like the successful sciences", proceed only from tangible, scrutinizable premisses and trust not to any one argument but instead to "the multitude and variety of its arguments" as forming, not a chain at least as weak as its weakest link, but "a cable whose fibers", soever "slender, are sufficiently numerous and intimately connected". 4. It renders many facts "absolutely inexplicable, unless to say that 'God makes them so' is to be regarded as an explanation" — when, instead, philosophy should avoid being "unidealistic", misbelieving that something real can defy or evade all possible ideas, and supposing, inevitably, "some absolutely inexplicable, unanalyzable ultimate", which explanatory surmise explains nothing and so is inadmissible.   == Philosophy: metaphysicsEdit ==  Peirce divided metaphysics into (1) ontology or general metaphysics, (2) psychical or religious metaphysics, and (3) physical metaphysics. Ontology. Peirce was a Scholastic Realist, declaring for the reality of generals as early as 1868. Regarding modalities (possibility, necessity, etc.), he came in later years to regard himself as having wavered earlier as to just how positively real the modalities are. In his 1897 "The Logic of Relatives" he wrote:  I formerly defined the possible as that which in a given state of information (real or feigned) we do not know not to be true. But this definition today seems to me only a twisted phrase which, by means of two negatives, conceals an anacoluthon. We know in advance of experience that certain things are not true, because we see they are impossible.  Peirce retained, as useful for some purposes, the definitions in terms of information states, but insisted that the pragmaticist is committed to a strong modal realism by conceiving of objects in terms of predictive general conditional propositions about how they would behave under certain circumstances. Psychical or religious metaphysics. Peirce believed in God, and characterized such belief as founded in an instinct explorable in musing over the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits — and it is a belief in God not as an actual or existent being (in Peirce's sense of those words), but all the same as a real being. In "A Neglected Argument for the Reality of God" (1908), Peirce sketches, for God's reality, an argument to a hypothesis of God as the Necessary Being, a hypothesis which he describes in terms of how it would tend to develop and become compelling in musement and inquiry by a normal person who is led, by the hypothesis, to consider as being purposed the features of the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits (for example scientific progress), such that the thought of such purposefulness will "stand or fall with the hypothesis"; meanwhile, according to Peirce, the hypothesis, in supposing an "infinitely incomprehensible" being, starts off at odds with its own nature as a purportively true conception, and so, no matter how much the hypothesis grows, it both (A) inevitably regards itself as partly true, partly vague, and as continuing to define itself without limit, and (B) inevitably has God appearing likewise vague but growing, though God as the Necessary Being is not vague or growing; but the hypothesis will hold it to be more false to say the opposite, that God is purposeless. Peirce also argued that the will is free and (see Synechism) that there is at least an attenuated kind of immortality. Physical metaphysics. Peirce held the view, which he called objective idealism, that "matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws". Peirce asserted the reality of (1) absolute chance (his tychist view), (2) mechanical necessity (anancist view), and (3) that which he called the law of love (agapist view), echoing his categories Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, respectively. He held that fortuitous variation (which he also called "sporting"), mechanical necessity, and creative love are the three modes of evolution (modes called "tychasm", "anancasm", and "agapasm") of the cosmos and its parts. He found his conception of agapasm embodied in Lamarckian evolution; the overall idea in any case is that of evolution tending toward an end or goal, and it could also be the evolution of a mind or a society; it is the kind of evolution which manifests workings of mind in some general sense. He said that overall he was a synechist, holding with reality of continuity, especially of space, time, and law.   == Science of reviewEdit ==  Peirce outlined two fields, "Cenoscopy" and "Science of Review", both of which he called philosophy. Both included philosophy about science. In 1903 he arranged them, from more to less theoretically basic, thus: Science of Discovery. Mathematics. Cenoscopy (philosophy as discussed earlier in this article—categorial, normative, metaphysical), as First Philosophy, concerns positive phenomena in general, does not rely on findings from special sciences, and includes the general study of inquiry and scientific method. Idioscopy, or the Special Sciences (of nature and mind).  Science of Review, as Ultimate Philosophy, arranges "...the results of discovery, beginning with digests, and going on to endeavor to form a philosophy of science". His examples included Humboldt's Cosmos, Comte's Philosophie positive, and Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy. Practical Science, or the Arts. Peirce placed, within Science of Review, the work and theory of classifying the sciences (including mathematics and philosophy). His classifications, on which he worked for many years, draw on argument and wide knowledge, and are of interest both as a map for navigating his philosophy and as an accomplished polymath's survey of research in his time.   == See alsoEdit == Contemporaries associated with Peirce   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography has external links throughout to such materials as biographical and overview articles on Peirce at encyclopedias, study sites, etc.; individual works by Peirce; and collections, bibliographies, and Peirce's definitions in the Baldwin dictionary. Other useful sets of links: Existential graph references and external links. Pragmatism external links. Semiotics external links. Peirce sites

Charles Edward Spearman, FRS (10 September 1863 – 17 September 1945) was an English psychologist known for work in statistics, as a pioneer of factor analysis, and for Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. He also did seminal work on models for human intelligence, including his theory that disparate cognitive test scores reflect a single General intelligence factor and coining the term g factor.   == Biography == Spearman had an unusual background for a psychologist. In his childhood he was ambitious to follow an academic career. He first joined the army as a regular officer of engineers in the British Army. After 15 years he resigned to study for a PhD in experimental psychology. In Britain, psychology was generally seen as a branch of philosophy and Spearman chose to study in Leipzig under Wilhelm Wundt, because Spearman had no conventional qualifications and Leipzig had liberal entrance requirements. There he met Krueger and Wirth, both of whom he admired. He started in 1897, and after some interruption (he was recalled to the army during the South African War) he obtained his degree in 1906. He had already published his seminal paper on the factor analysis of intelligence (1904). Spearman met and impressed the psychologist William McDougall who arranged for Spearman to replace him when he left his position at University College London. Spearman stayed at University College until he retired in 1931. Initially he was Reader and head of the small psychological laboratory. In 1911 he was promoted to the Grote professorship of the Philosophy of Mind and Logic. His title changed to Professor of Psychology in 1928 when a separate Department of Psychology was created. When Spearman was elected to the Royal Society in 1924  the citation read "Dr. Spearman has made many researches in experimental psychology. His many published papers cover a wide field, but he is especially distinguished by his pioneer work in the application of mathematical methods to the analysis of the human mind, and his original studies of correlation in this sphere. He has inspired and directed research work by many pupils." Chief amongst these achievements was the discovery of the general factor in human intelligence,  and his subsequent development of a theory of "g"  and synthesis of empirical work on ability. Spearman was strongly influenced by the work of Francis Galton. Galton did pioneering work in psychology and developed correlation, the main statistical tool used by Spearman. In statistics, Spearman developed rank correlation (1904), a non-parametric version of the conventional Pearson correlation, as well as both the widely used correction for attenuation (1907), and the earliest version of a 'factor analysis' (Lovie & Lovie, 1996, p. 81) . His statistical work was not appreciated by his University College colleague Karl Pearson and there was a long feud between them. Although Spearman achieved most recognition in his day for his statistical work, he regarded this work as subordinate to his quest for the fundamental laws of psychology, and he is now similarly renowned for both. Charles Spearman always insisted that his work be applied in psychiatry and urged so in his Maudsley lecture to the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. While some work has been made on these lines by pupils and associates of his, the development of factor analysis as a tool of psychiatry followed a different path than he had intended. Regardless his indirect contributions towards psychiatry were considerable. Spearman's life both began and ended in the city of London. He had three daughters along with one son, who died early on in 1941 in Crete.   == Theory of intelligence == A record of Spearman's views on g (and also those of Godfrey Thomson and Edward Thorndike) was made in the course of the Carnegie-sponsored International Examinations Inquiry Meetings. Here, Spearman gives a compact summary of his findings and theory of g: When asked what G is, one has to distinguish between the meanings of terms and the facts about things. G means a particular quantity derived from statistical operations. Under certain conditions the score of a person at a mental test can be divided into two factors, one of which is always the same in all tests, whereas the other varies from one test to another; the former is called the general factor or G, while the other is called the speciﬁc factor. This then is what the G term means, a score-factor and nothing more. But this meaning is sufﬁcient to render the term well deﬁned so that the underlying thing is susceptible to scientiﬁc investigation; we can proceed to ﬁnd out facts about this score-factor, or G factor. We can ascertain the kind of mental operations in which it plays a dominant part as compared with the other or speciﬁc factor. And so the discovery has been made that G is dominant in such operations as reasoning, or learning Latin; whereas it plays a very small part indeed in such operation (sic) as distinguishing one tone from another. . . G tends to dominate according as the performance involves the perceiving of relations, or as it requires that relations seen in one situation should be transferred to another. . . . On weighing the evidence, many of us used to say that this G appears to measure some form of mental energy. But in the ﬁrst place, such a suggestion is apt to invite needless controversy. This can be avoided by saying more cautiously that G behaves as if it measured an energy. In the second place, however, there seems to be good reason for changing the concept of energy to that of "power" (which, of course, is energy or work divided by time). In this way, one can talk about mind power in much the same manner as about horse power. . . . . . .G is in the normal course of events determined innately; a person can no more be trained to have it in higher degree than he can be trained to be taller. (pp. 156 –157). There was also another co-factor as proposed by Spearman that was special intelligence. The special intelligence was for individuals who accomplished high success results in the some tests. However, later Spearman introduced group factor that was particular to those correlations that were not a result of factor g or s. His ideas were in 1938 criticized on paper by Louis L. Thurstone a psychologist saying that his experiments show that the correlation of intelligence can be categorized in seven primary categories. These categories were numerical, reasoning, spatial, perceptual, memory, verbal fluency and verbal comprehension. However Raymond B. Cattell in 1963 agreed with the concept theorized by Spearman but put forth his findings about intelligence analyses. His analyses were that intelligence is further subdivided in two divisions known as fluid and crystallized intelligence. As time progressed, Spearman increasingly argued that g was not, from a psychological point of view, a single ability but composed of two very different abilities which normally worked closely together. These he called "eductive" ability and "reproductive" ability. The former term comes from the Latin root "educere" – which means to "draw out" and thus refers to the ability to make meaning out of confusion. He claimed that to understand these different abilities "in their trenchent contrast, their ubiquitous cooperation, and their genetic interlinkage" would, for the study of "individual differences – and even cognition itself" – be "the very beginning of wisdom.". Despite Spearman arguing that g was what emerged from a large battery of tests, i.e., that it was not measured perfectly by any single test, the fact that g-theory suggested that much of ability could be captured in a single factor, and his suggestion that "the eduction of relations and correlates" underlay this general factor led to the quest for tests of this general ability. Raven's Progressive Matrices might be regarded as one of these although Raven himself clearly stated that his tests should not be regarded as "intelligence" tests. While arguing consistently that g accounted for much of individual differences in "ability" (as measured by tests which had "no place in schools"), Spearman also acknowledged that "Every normal man, woman, and child is … a genius at something … It remains to discover at what …" He thought that detecting these areas of genius required procedures very different from "any of the testing procedures at present in current usage", though he felt these to be capable of "vast improvement". While, like Arthur Jensen after him, Spearman felt that though g could be detected in any broad set of cognitive measures, he felt that the tests from which his g had emerged "had no place in schools" because they "deflected" teachers', pupils', parents' and politicians' attention from the business of education which, as the Latin root of the word implies, should be concerned with "drawing out" whatever talents a student may have . Spearman's model was influential, but was also critiqued by many authors, such as Godfrey Thomson. In particular the move from a psychological g to a biological g – that is a unitary biological mechanism or mechanisms has remained a matter of active research.   == Factor analysis == Factor analysis is a statistical test that is used to find relationships between multiple correlated measures and Spearman played a clear part in its development. Spearman coined the term factor analysis and used it extensively in analyzing multiple measures of cognitive performance. It was factor analytic data which led Spearman to postulate his original general and specific factor models of ability. Spearman applied mathematical procedures to psychological phenomena, and molded the outcome of his analysis into a theory – which has greatly influenced modern psychology. Factor analysis and its modern relations confirmatory factor analysis and structural equation modelling underlie much of modern behaviour research.   == See also == Theory of multiple intelligences   == References == ^ a b c d Thomson, Godfrey (1947). "Charles Spearman. 1863-1945". Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society 5 (15): 373. doi:10.1098/rsbm.1947.0006.  ^ a b Lovie, P.; Lovie, A. D. (1996). "Charles Edward Spearman, F.R.S. (1863-1945)". Notes and Records of the Royal Society 50: 75. doi:10.1098/rsnr.1996.0007.  ^ a b Spearman, C. (1904). ""General Intelligence," Objectively Determined and Measured". The American Journal of Psychology 15 (2): 201–292. doi:10.2307/1412107. JSTOR 1412107.  ^ Lovie, Pat (2005). "Spearman, Charles Edward". Encyclopedia of Statistics in Behavioral Science. doi:10.1002/0470013192.bsa634. ISBN 0470860804.  ^ a b Thomson, Godfrey (1947). "Charles Spearman". The Royal Society. pp. 373–385.  ^ Ogden, R. M.; Spearman, C. (1925). "The Nature of 'Intelligence' and the Principles of Cognition, 1923". The American Journal of Psychology 36 (1): 140–145. doi:10.2307/1413513.  ^ a b Spearman, Charles B. (2005). The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurement. The Blackburn Press. ISBN 1-932846-10-7.  ^ "The Lancet" A Chair of Anatomy. October 1945. pg. 440 ^ Deary, I. J.; Lawn, M.; Bartholomew, D. J. (2008). ""A conversation between Charles Spearman, Godfrey Thomson, and Edward L. Thorndike: The International Examinations Inquiry Meetings 1931-1938": Correction to Deary, Lawn, and Bartholomew (2008)". History of Psychology 11 (3): 163. doi:10.1037/1093-4510.11.3.163.  ^ Edward Roy; Bernstein, Douglas A.; Penner, Louis A.; Clarke-Stewart, Alison (2007). Psychology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-87407-0.  ^ Spearman, C. (1925). "Some Issues in the Theory of "g" (including the Law of Diminishing Returns)". Nature 116 (2916): 436. doi:10.1038/116436a0.  ^ Williams, R. H., Zimmerman, D. W., Zumbo, B. D. & Ross, D. (2003). Charles Spearman: British Behavioral Scientist. Human Nature Review. 3: 114–118 ^ Spearman, C. (1950). Human Ability, Macmillan, London. ^ "The Chair of Anatomy". The Lancet 246 (6371): 440–440. October 1945. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(45)91700-4.    == Further reading == Spearman, C. (1987). "The proof and measurement of association between two things. By C. Spearman, 1904". The American journal of psychology 100 (3–4): 441–471. doi:10.2307/1422689. PMID 3322052.  Spearman, C. (2010). "The proof and measurement of association between two things". International Journal of Epidemiology 39 (5): 1137–1150. doi:10.1093/ije/dyq191. PMID 21051364.  Spearman, C. (1907). "Demonstration of Formulæ for True Measurement of Correlation". The American Journal of Psychology 18 (2): 161–169. doi:10.2307/1412408.  Gregory, Robert J. (2011). Psychological Testing: History, Principles, and Applications (Sixth ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. ISBN 978-0-205-78214-7. Lay summary (7 November 2010).  Mackintosh, N. J. (1998). IQ and Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-852367-3. Lay summary (9 August 2010).  Charles Spearman at Human Intelligence   == External links == There is a photograph of Spearman at Charles Spearman on the Portraits of Statisticians page.

Christopher Stewart "Chris" Wallace (26 October 1933 – 7 August 2004) was an Australian computer scientist (and physicist, who also contributed to a variety of other areas) notable for having devised: The minimum message length principle (Wallace and Boulton, 1968, WB1968) — an information-theoretic principle in statistics, econometrics, machine learning, inductive inference and knowledge discovery which can be seen both as a mathematical formalisation of Occam's Razor and as an invariant Bayesian method of model selection and point estimation, The Wallace tree multiplier (1964) (see multiplication ALU), a variety of random number generators, a theory in physics and philosophy that entropy is not the arrow of time, a refrigeration system (from the 1950s, whose design is still in use in 2010), hardware for detecting and counting cosmic rays, design of computer operating systems, the notion of universality probability in mathematical logic, and a vast range of other works - see, e.g., "Christopher Stewart WALLACE (1933-2004) memorial special issue". Computer Journal 51 (5): 523–607. 5 September 2008. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxm117.  and its ``Foreword re C. S. Wallace , pp 523-560. He was appointed Foundation Chair of Information Science at Monash University in 1968 at the age of 34 (before the Department was later re-named Computer Science), and Professor Emeritus in 1996. Wallace was a fellow of the Australian Computer Society and in 1995 he was appointed a fellow of the ACM "For research in a number of areas in Computer Science including fast multiplication algorithm, minimum message length principle and its applications, random number generation, computer architecture, numerical solution of ODE's, and contribution to Australian Computer Science."[1] Wallace received his PhD (in Physics) from the University of Sydney in 1959. He was married to Judy Ogilvie, the first operator of SILLIAC, one of Australia's first computers which was launched on the 12 of September 1956 at the University of Sydney [2]. He also engineered one of the world's first Local Area Networks in the mid-1960s [3].   == External links == Tribute to IT pioneer Chris Wallace — 13 October 2004 Remembering Emeritus Professor Chris Wallace (Information Technology), 2008 Innovative studios honour Monash pioneer — 2 November 2011 Christopher S. Wallace publications, and searchable publications database Wallace, C.S. (posthumous, 2005), Statistical and Inductive Inference by Minimum Message Length, Springer (Series: Information Science and Statistics), 2005, XVI, 432 pp., 22 illus., Hardcover, ISBN 0-387-23795-X. (Links to chapter headings, table of contents and sample pages.) "Christopher Stewart WALLACE (1933-2004) memorial special issue". Computer Journal 51 (5): 523–607. 5 September 2008. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxm117.  Dowe, D.L. (5 September 2008). "Foreword re C. S. Wallace". Computer Journal 51 (5): 523–560. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxm117.  (and here). (As far as we know, this cites and includes references to every paper which Chris Wallace ever wrote [and every thesis he ever supervised].) Chris Wallace Award for Outstanding Research Contribution — established by CORE (The Computing Research and Education Association of Australasia) - see also The Chris Wallace Award for Outstanding Research (for 2015) and CORE brief Chris Wallace bio'

Churchill Eisenhart (1913–1994) was a United States mathematician. He was Chief of the Statistical Engineering Laboratory (SEL), Applied Mathematics Division of the National Bureau of Standards (NBS). Eisenhart was the son of Luther Eisenhart, a prominent mathematician in his own right. Churchill Eisenhart was brought to the NBS from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1946 by Edward Condon, Director of the NBS, to establish a statistical consulting group to "substitute sound mathematical analysis for costly experimentation." He was allowed to recruit his own staff and, over the years, he brought many notable and accomplished statisticians to SEL. He served as its Chief from 1947 until his appointment as Senior Research Fellow in 1963. He retired in 1983 after which he formed the Standards Alumni Association, which he headed until his death in 1994. Over his career, Eisenhart was awarded the U.S. Department of Commerce Exceptional Service Award in 1957; the Rockefeller Public Service Award in 1958; and the Wildhack Award of the National Conference of Standards Laboratories in 1982. He was elected President of the American Statistical Association (ASA) in 1971 and received the Association's Wilks Memorial Medal in 1977. Eisenhart was honored with an Outstanding Achievements Award of the Princeton University Class of 1934 and with Fellowships in the ASA, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and the Institute of Mathematical Sciences. He was a long-time member of the Cosmos Club.   == References == NIST. "Realistic Evaluation of the Precision and Accuracy of Instrument Calibration Systems". Retrieved 2006-02-15.  Ingram Olkin (1992) A Conversation with Churchill Eisenhart. Statistical Science, 7, 512–530. Joseph M. Cameron; Joan R. Rosenblatt (1995) Churchill Eisenhart, 1913–1994, The American Statistician, 49, 243–244. Samuel S. Wilks Award Citation for 1977 An interview with Joseph Daly and Churchill Eisenhart about their experiences at Princeton 10 July 1984 An interview with Churchill Eisenhart about his experience at Princeton 10 July 1984 There is a photograph at Churchill Eisenhart on the page Portraits of Statisticians

Colin Peter McEvedy (6 June 1930 – 1 August 2005) was a British polymath scholar, psychiatrist, historian, demographer and non-fiction author.   == Early lifeEdit == Colin Peter McEvedy was born in Salford, Lancashire on the 6th of June 1930. He was the third son of Peter George McEvedy, a renowned surgeon, who was born in New Zealand. Colin was educated at Harrow School, where he was a scholar, and Magdalen College, Oxford.   == CareerEdit == McEvedy's profession was psychiatry, in which he had a distinguished career. He became perhaps better known, though, as a historian and demographer, and certainly so by the public at large. Between 1961 and 2002 he produced a number of historical atlases which, unlike most such atlases, feature fixed base-maps; in most cases, each atlas uses a single principal base-map, which is shown repeatedly, at many dates, as the atlas goes along, thus illustrating changes over the ages, from ancient down to modern, within the chosen area. The accompanying text, typically, is mostly a running commentary on what the maps of a given atlas show. Another feature of the atlases is McEvedy's witty and engaging writing-style, which he used on occasion to challenge established opinions among historians and demographers. Although he was not, strictly speaking, a professional in those fields, he became professionally respected in them, with his views making their way into standard textbooks. He died in London, committing suicide following a diagnosis of terminal leukaemia.   == Family lifeEdit == McEvedy had three daughters, Binky, Flora, and Allegra. Flora McEvedy is the author of The Step-Parents' Parachute, published by Piatkus Books in 2009. His youngest daughter, Allegra McEvedy, is a noted chef, co-founded the Leon Restaurants chain, and was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2008 Birthday Honours.   == PublicationsEdit == Penguin Historical Atlases The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History (1961) ISBN 0-14-070822-7 Revised as: The New Penguin Atlas of Medieval History (1992) ISBN 0-14-051249-7  The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History (1967) ISBN 0-14-051151-2 Revised as: The New Penguin Atlas of Ancient History (2002) ISBN 0-14-051348-5  The Penguin Atlas of Modern History (1972) ISBN 0-14-051153-9 The Penguin Atlas of Recent History (1982) ISBN 0-14-051154-7 Revised as: The New Penguin Atlas of Recent History (2002) ISBN 0-14-051504-6  The Penguin Atlas of North American History (1988) ISBN 0-14-051128-8 The Penguin Atlas of African History (1980, 2nd ed. 1995) ISBN 0-14-051321-3 The Penguin Historical Atlas of the Pacific (1998) ISBN 0-14-025428-5 The Atlas of World History (with Sarah McEvedy) From the Beginning to Alexander the Great (1970) ISBN 0-298-79125-0 The Classical World (1973) ISBN 0-298-79126-9 The Dark Ages (1972) ISBN 0-298-79127-7 Unpublished Volumes: The Medieval World The European Expansion Revolutions Colonial Empires The Modern Age Other Books The Atlas of World Population History (with Richard Jones) (1978) ISBN 0-14-051076-1 Rise of the World's Cities (1984) ISBN 0-87196-773-1 World History Factfinder (1984) ISBN 0-02-583190-9 Cities of the Classical World: An Atlas and Gazetteer of 120 Centres of Ancient Civilization, (posthumous; edited by Douglas Stuart Oles) (2011 November 3), ISBN 978-1-84614-427-1 (hardcover), Allen Lane (imprint of Penguin Books, UK), Penguin Press/Classics (US). Articles "The Bubonic Plague" Scientific American February 1988   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Obituary in The Independent Obituary in The Times Obituary in the British Medical Journal Colin McEvedy at Library of Congress Authorities, with 22 catalogue records

David John Finney FRS, CBE (born 3 January 1917), is a British statistician and Professor Emeritus of Statistics at the University of Edinburgh. He was Director of the Agricultural Research Council's Unit of Statistics from 1954 to 1984 and a former President of the Royal Statistical Society and of the Biometric Society. He was a pioneer in the development of systematic monitoring of drugs for detection of adverse reactions.   == Childhood and education == Finney was born in Latchford, Warrington. In his interview with MacNeill, Finney describes his background: "My family were never wealthy but never in want". His paternal grandfather was a schoolmaster, and his father was an accountant in the steel industry. David was the eldest child; he had no sisters. Finney was educated at the coeducational Lymm Grammar School and Manchester Grammar School, where he won a Cambridge scholarship. He read mathematics and statistics at Clare College, University of Cambridge from 1934 to 1938. He was awarded a postgraduate scholarship for statistical work in agriculture under Ronald Fisher at the Galton Laboratory, University College London, where he worked on statistical estimation for human genetics.   == Career == He became assistant to Frank Yates at Rothamsted Experimental Station in 1939, where there was great emphasis on increasing productivity of agriculture and he was involved in the design of field experiments and the interpretation of their results. In 1945, he joined the University of Oxford as the first holder of the post of Lecturer in the Design and Analysis of Scientific Experiment. He married in 1950 and with his wife and 9-month old daughter, left Oxford in 1952 for New Delhi where, for a year, he acted as a consultant to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation on the development of the Central Research Organisation in New Delhi. After returning from India, he moved to the University of Aberdeen where he became Reader in Statistics and also established a Unit of Statistics funded by the Agricultural Research Council, which was to provide a service for Scotland modelled on that provided by Rothamsted for England. The Agricultural Research Council moved the Unit of Statistics to the University of Edinburgh in 1966 and Finney, who moved to Edinburgh with it, became the first Professor of Statistics at the university and well as being the Director of the Unit of Statistics. He served as president of the Royal Statistical Society in 1973–4. He retired from his position at Edinburgh in 1984. During the 1960s he became involved in the field of drug safety, providing important advice both to the fledgling UK system of medicines safety and to efforts by WHO to create an international system of pharmacovigilance. In 2002 he returned to contact with the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, which published an anthology of his writings about statistical methods and drug safety. He was also involved with Bill Inman in the setting-up of the Drug Safety Research Unit.   == Works == Probit Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1947 Statistical methods in biological assay, Hafner, 1952; Griffin, 1971, ISBN 978-0-85264-014-2 Experimental design and its statistical basis, University of Chicago Press, 1955 Statistics for mathematicians: an introduction, Oliver & Boyd, 1968   == References ==  MacNeill, I. (1993). "A Conversation With David J. Finney". Statistical Science 8 (2): pp. 187–201. doi:10.1214/ss/1177011012. Retrieved 2007-09-22.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link) Joyce, H. (December 2005). "Experimental design and systematic monitoring". significance 2 (4): pp. 171–173. doi:10.1111/j.1740-9713.2005.00131.x. Retrieved 2007-09-22.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link) "David J.Finney" (HTML). Biographical Notes (1984). Instituto Vasco of Estadística (EUSTAT). Retrieved 2007-09-22.  D. J. Finney at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Darrell Huff (July 15, 1913 – June 27, 2001) was an American writer, and is best known as the author of How to Lie with Statistics (1954), the best-selling statistics book of the second half of the twentieth century. Huff was born in Gowrie, Iowa, and educated at the University of Iowa, (BA 1938, MA 1939). Before turning to full-time writing in 1946, Huff served as editor of Better Homes and Gardens and Liberty magazine. As a freelancer, Huff produced hundreds of "How to" feature articles and wrote at least sixteen books, most of which concerned household projects. One of his biggest projects was a prize-winning home in Carmel-by-the-Sea, California, where he lived until his death. Stanford historian Robert N. Proctor wrote that Huff "was paid to testify before Congress in the 1950s and then again in the 1960s, with the assigned task of ridiculing any notion of a cigarette-disease link. On March 22, 1965, Huff testified at hearings on cigarette labeling and advertising, accusing the recent Surgeon General's report of myriad failures and 'fallacies'." First and foremost, though, Huff is credited with introducing statistics to a generation of college and high-school students on a level that was meaningful, available, and practical, while still managing to teach complex mathematical concepts. His most famous text, How to Lie with Statistics, is still being translated into new languages. His books have been published in over 22 languages, and continue to be used in classrooms the world over.   == Selected bibliography ==   === Books === Huff, D. (1944). Pictures by Pete: A Career Story of a Young Commercial Photographer. Dodd, Mead, New York. Huff, D. (1945). Twenty Careers of Tomorrow. WhittleseyHouse, McGraw–Hill, New York. Huff, D. (1946). The Dog that Came True (illust. C. Moran and D. Thorne). Whittlesey House, McGraw–Hill, New York. (Adapted from a short story by Darrell Huff which appeared in Woman's Day.) Huff, D. (1954) How to Lie with Statistics (illust. I. Geis), Norton, New York, ISBN 0-393-31072-8 Huff, D. (1959). How to Take a Chance: The Laws of Probability (illust. I. Geis). Norton, New York. Huff, D. (1961). Score: The Strategy of Taking Tests (illust. C. Huff ). Appleton–Century Crofts, New York. Huff, D. (1964). Cycles in Your Life—The Rhythms of War, Wealth, Nature, and Human Behavior. Or Patterns in War, Wealth, Weather, Women, Men, and Nature (illust. A. Kovarsky). Norton, New York. Huff, D. (1968). How to Work With Concrete and Masonry (illust. C. and G. Kinsey). Popular Science Publishing, New York. Huff, D. (1972). How to Figure the Odds on Everything (illust. J. Huehnergarth). Dreyfus, New York. Huff, D. (1972). How to Save on the Home You Want (with F. Huff and the editors of Dreyfus Publications; illust. R. Doty). Dreyfus, New York. Huff, D. (1996). The Complete How to Figure It. Using Math in Everyday Life (illust. C. Kinsey; design K. M. Huff ). Norton, New York. Huff, D. and Corey, P. (1957). Home Workshop Furniture Projects. Fawcett, New York. Huff, D. and Huff, F. (1963). How to Lower Your Food Bills. Your Guide to the Battle of the Supermarket. Macfadden–Bartell, New York. Huff, D. and Huff, F. (1970). Complete Book of Home Improvement (illust. G. and C. Kinsey and Bray–Schaible Design, Inc.). Popular Science Publishing, New York.   === Articles === Huff, D. (1954). "How to Spot Statistical Jokers". The New York Times, August 22, 1954, p. SM13. Huff, D. (1962). "Living high on $6500 a year". The Saturday Evening Post 235 60–62. (Reprinted in Mother Earth News, January 1970) Huff, D. (1978). "Calcu-letter. News of pocket calculators—and how to have fun with them". Popular Science 212 (3), March 1978. p. 6   == See also == Exaggeration Lies, damned lies, and statistics   == Notes and references ==

David Bradley Allison (born 1963) is an American obesity researcher, biostatistician, and psychologist. He is Distinguished Professor, Quetelet Endowed Professor of Public Health, and Associate Dean for Science of the School of Public Health at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB).   == Career ==   === Education === 1985 – B.A., Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York 1987 – M.A., Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York 1990 – PhD., Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York 1991 – Post-Doc, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 1994 – Fellowship, Columbia University and St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center According to data analyzed by the journal Nature, Allison has ranked in the top 10 for most federally funded grants. Allison has been described as one of the leading skeptics regarding commonly issued nutrition advice. Author Judith Stern wrote "He is also known for challenging conventional ideas, exploring novel hypotheses, and holding himself and others to rigorous standards of evidence." Although Allison has had some critics regarding his stance on questioning the link between consuming any one particular food and obesity, he has been defended by others and praised for his strong adherence to solid scientific practice.  Allison is the founding Field Chief Editor of Frontiers in Genetics. He also serves as a frequent consultant and expert witness in the legal setting.   == Alleged conflicts of interest == In 2008, Allison resigned as president-elect of the Obesity Society after signing an affidavit opposing a law that would have required calorie counts to be listed on restaurant menus. The New York Times reported that Allison's affidavit "ran counter to the conventional thinking in his field" and provoked criticism from some members of the Society. In 2011, ABC News ran a story about Allison. The story quoted him as saying there was too little "solid evidence" to support a link between soft drink consumption and obesity. The article noted that "...critics say his skepticism stems from his financial ties to entities such as Coca-Cola, Pepsi and the American Beverage Association..." Allison was featured in the 2014 documentary film Fed Up, which criticized his research for being funded by food companies. Allison responded that "the film-makers’ behavior seems counter to thoughtful dialogue," although he added that he had not seen the film yet and so could not provide a detailed response.    == References ==   == External links == Full CV

David Harold Blackwell (April 24, 1919 – July 8, 2010) was Professor Emeritus of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley, and is one of the eponyms of the Rao–Blackwell theorem. Born in Centralia, Illinois, he was the first African American inducted into the National Academy of Sciences, and the first black tenured faculty member at UC Berkeley.   == Career == Blackwell entered the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign with the intent to teach elementary school mathematics. In 1938 he earned his bachelor's degree in mathematics, a master's degree in 1939, and was awarded a Ph.D. in mathematics in 1941 at the age of 22, all by the University of Illinois. He did a year of post-doctoral studies as a fellow at Institute for Advanced Study in 1941–42. At the Institute, he met John von Neumann and von Neumann asked Blackwell to discuss his Ph.D. thesis with him. Blackwell, who believed that von Neumann was just being polite and not genuinely interested in his work, did not approach him until von Neumann himself asked him again a few months later. According to Blackwell on this meeting, "He (von Neumann) listened to me talk about this rather obscure subject and in ten minutes he knew more about it than I did." He departed when he was prevented from attending lectures or undertaking research at nearby Princeton University, which the IAS has historically collaborated with in research and scholarship activities. Seeking a permanent position, he wrote letters of application to 105 Historically Black Colleges and Universities; he felt at the time that a black teacher would be limited to teaching only at black colleges. He also sought a position at the University of California, Berkeley, and was interviewed by statistician Jerzy Neyman. While Neyman supported his appointment, race-based objections prevented his appointment at that time. He was offered a post at Southern University at Baton Rouge, which he held in 1942–43, followed by a year as an Instructor at Clark College in Atlanta. He then moved to Howard University in 1944 and within three years was appointed full professor and head of the Mathematics Department. He remained at Howard until 1954. He took a position at University of California Berkeley as a visiting professor in 1954, and was hired by UC Berkeley as a full professor in the newly created Statistics Department in 1955, becoming the Statistics department chair in 1956. He spent the rest of his career at UC Berkeley, retiring in 1988. Blackwell was also a pioneer in textbook writing and game theory. Blackwell wrote one of the first Bayesian textbooks, his 1969 Basic Statistics. Blackwell was also a member of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity (Tau chapter – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign).   == Quotation ==   == Honors and awards == Invited Speaker at the International Congress of Mathematicians, 1954 President, Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 1956 National Academy of Sciences, 1965 American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1968 President of the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1975-1977 Honorary Fellow, Royal Statistical Society, 1976 Vice President, American Statistical Association, 1978 John von Neumann Theory Prize, 1979 R. A. Fisher Lectureship, 1986 The Berkeley Citation, 1988 National Medal of Science (posthumously), 2014   == See also == C. R. Rao   == References ==   == External links == bio sketch from the American Statistical Association bio sketch from the Mathematical Association of America Dr. David Blackwell Biography Packet (5.21MB) provided by the Department of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley. David Blackwell's oral history video excerpts at The National Visionary Leadership Project On Google scholar David Blackwell, Scholar of Probability, Dies at 91 New York Times David Blackwell at the Mathematics Genealogy Project A volume dedicated to David H. Blackwell, Celebratio Mathematica

David E. Bloom, Ph.D. (born October 16, 1955) is an American author, professor, economist, and demographer. He is Professor of Economics and Demography at the Harvard School of Public Health, and director of the Program on the Global Demography of Aging. Bloom has written and published over 250 articles and books focusing on health, demography, education, and labor. He has been a contributing editor of American Demographics and an associate editor of the Review of Economics and Statistics. He has also served as a referee for over 50 academic journals, and has been a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors of Science Magazine since August 1991. He has been honored with an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and the Galbraith Award for teaching. He was also a Fulbright Scholar in India (1982–1983) and a Scholar-in-Residence at the Russell Sage Foundation (1989–1990).   == Personal background == David E. Bloom was born on October 16, 1955 in New York City. He attended the New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Cornell University, graduating in 1976 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Industrial and Labor Relations. In 1978, he earned his Masters degree in Economics from Princeton University and his Ph.D. in Economics and Demography from Princeton in 1981. Bloom is married to Lakshmi Reddy Bloom, with whom he has two children, Sonali, a Yale University graduate, and Sahil, a Stanford University graduate.   == Professional background ==   === Academia === Throughout his career, Bloom has taught university courses at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Primary areas of focus have included labor and development economics, global health and demographics, and statistics and econometrics. Following his graduation from Princeton, Bloom joined the public policy faculty of Carnegie Mellon University, School of Urban and Public Affairs, where he served as an assistant professor of Economics for academic years ending in 1981 and 1982. In July 1982, he joined the staff of Harvard University, Department of Economics, where he served as an Assistant Professor of Economics through June 1985. The following month, he served as the Paul Sack Associate Professor of Political Economy through June 1987. Bloom began working as a Professor of Economics at Columbia University, Department of Economics in July 1987, where he remained through the end of the 1996 academic year. During this time, he remained as Visiting Professor of Economics at Harvard, until March 1988. During the 1989–1990 academic year, Bloom joined the Russell Sage Foundation, where he served as the Scholar-in-Residence. He then served as the chair of the Department of Economics at Columbia from July 1990 to December 1993. In July 1995, Bloom began serving as the Acting Executive Director of the Harvard Institute for International Development. In July 1996, he served as the Deputy Director, while simultaneously serving as the Director of the Education and Social Development Group, remaining there through June 1999. Following the end of the 1996 academic year at Columbia, Bloom joined the staff of Harvard School of Public Health, where he served as the Professor of Population and Health Economics for three years, before being named the Clarence James Gamble Professor of Economics and Demography, where he has remained since June 1999. He is the Chair of Harvard's Department of Global Health and Population, and director of the Program on the Global Demography of Aging. He is also a Faculty Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, where he participates in the programs on labor studies, health economics, and aging.   === Research interests === Bloom's primary areas of research include labor economics, health, demography, and the environment. He has written numerous articles, reports, and books presenting comparative studies between health status and economic growth, along with the effects of population change on economic development. He has also researched and presented the factors that determine wages, fringe benefits, and total family income. Additional focus has included: adjudication of labor disputes measurements of discrimination emerging world labor market effects of rapid population growth economics of municipal solid waste sociology and economics of marriage and fertility global spread and economic impacts of HIV/AIDS   === Consulting === Throughout his career, Bloom has provided consulting services to several national and international organizations, including the World Bank, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Labor Organization, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Asian Development Bank. He is also a member of the American Arbitration Association's Labor Arbitration Panel.   === Publishing === Bloom has written and published over 250 articles and books focusing on health, demography, education, and labor. He has been a contributing editor of American Demographics and an associate editor of the Review of Economics and Statistics. He has also served as a referee for over 50 academic journals, and has been a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors of Science Magazine since August 1991.   == Board memberships == Bloom is an Adjunct Trustee of amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research and member of the Board of Directors of Population Services International, which addresses HIV/AIDS on a global scale. He additionally serves as a member of the World Economic Forum's Global Health Advisory Board and its Global Agenda Councils on Population Growth and on Ageing. In April 2005, he was elected Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Along with fellow member, Joel Cohen, he serves as a co-director of an American Academy of Arts and Sciences educational project.   == Honors and awards == Fulbright Scholar in India (1982–1983) Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship (1986) J.K. Galbraith Prize for excellence in teaching (1987) Russell Sage Foundation (Scholar-in-Residence 1989–1990) Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2005) Paul G. Rogers Society for Global Health Research Ambassador (2009)   == Published works == Bloom, David E.; and Trahan, Jane T. Flexible Benefits and Employee Choice: Highlights of the Literature, Work in America Institute, 1986. ISBN 978-0080295183 Bloom, David E.; Canning, David; and Sevilla, Jaypee. Demographic Dividend: New Perspective on Economic Consequences Population Change, Rand Publishing, 2003. ISBN 978-0833029263 Bloom, David E.; Craig, Patricia H.; and Malaney, Pia N. The Quality of Life in Rural Asia, Asian Development Bank Press, 2001. ISBN 978-0195924541   == References ==   == External links == Official website

David F. Duncan (born in Kansas City, Missouri on June 26, 1947) is president of Duncan & Associates, a firm providing consultation on research design and data collection for behavioral and policy studies. He is also Clinical Associate Professor in the Department of Community Health at Brown University School of Medicine.   == Education == He graduated with a B.A. in psychology from the University of Missouri–Kansas City, and completed graduate work in criminology at Sam Houston State University. He earned the degree of Doctor of Public Health from the University of Texas at Houston with an interdisciplinary concentration in behavioral sciences, epidemiology, biostatistics, and program and policy evaluation. He later earned a postdoctoral diploma in alcoholism early intervention and treatment effectiveness research from Brown University.   == Work == Duncan is best known for his contributions in the field of drug abuse, which have often been highly controversial. In 1974, he and Edward Khantzian of Harvard Medical School, in separate publications, proposed what has come to be known as the self-medication hypothesis of addiction. Both authors proposed that addiction arose out of the use of drugs to medicate a preexisting disorder or problem. Duncan's version of the hypothesis is distinguished by its identification of addiction with negative reinforcement. Duncan argued that all of the characteristics commonly cited as typical of addiction, such as persistence in the face of negative consequences and high probability of relapse, are all common in any negatively reinforced behaviors. He was also one of the first people to develop the strategy of harm reduction. He has argued that harm reduction approaches to addictions, HIV or other public health concerns are instances of the traditional public health practice of tertiary prevention—prevention of deaths or disability that might otherwise occur due to a health problem. Duncan first applied this approach in his work with adolescent drug abusers in Houston, Texas in the early 1970s and soon afterward with heroin addicts. In 1983 he and Robert S. Gold published an argument for this approach, which they then called "cultivating drug use", using the word cultivating in its sense of the elimination of weeds and promotion of healthy growth. Duncan has also been involved in the development of computer assisted learning and particularly computer based health education. His leadership in this field began at the State University of New York at Brockport, where he collaborated with Robert S. Gold in developing the first course on computers in health education offered at any college. In 1980, he and Gold published two papers that spurred interest in the use of computers in health education. One of these papers was the first publication to suggest that microprocessors, as personal computers were then known, could be preferable to mainframe terminals for use in computer assisted learning. A few years later, Duncan and Gold, then at Southern Illinois University, taught the nation’s first college-level course on PC-based methods in education. Three years later, Duncan argued for the value of portable computers, which were just being introduced, for educational and data collection applications. He also pioneered the use of roleplaying games on the PC and internet for use in both health education and data collection.   == Career == Duncan was a consultant to President Clinton's White House Office of National Drug Control Policy during his tenure as Senior Study Director of the Substance Abuse Research Group of the Westat corporation. In his position at Westat he also provided consultation to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, National Academy of Science, United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, New York City Housing Authority, and SPSS Inc.. He served from 1996 to 1998 as Senior Public Health Epidemiologist in the Director's Office of the Rhode Island Department of Health where he was coordinator of health policy and Project Director of the state's Unified Needs Assessment Program for Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment. His varied career has included positions in both juvenile and adult corrections, as a deputy sheriff, and as a private detective. He has directed a halfway house for drug abusers, a comprehensive drug abuse treatment center, and a private school for emotionally disturbed children. He served as a research associate to the working group on substance abuse treatment for the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform chaired by First Lady Hillary Clinton in 1993. He has held academic appointments as Associate Professor of Health Science at the State University of New York at Brockport, Professor of Health Education at Southern Illinois University, Professor of Biology at the Community College of Rhode Island, Professor of Health and Environmental Research at the University of Cologne in Germany, and Associate Professor of Medical Science (Community Health) at Brown University. He has been a visiting lecturer at the University of Rochester, New York State School of Psychiatry, Columbia University's Teachers College and School of Public Health, New England Gerontology Academy, Trinity College (Dublin), Oxford University, German Academy of Public Health, University of Würzburg, and Universidad Complutense de Madrid. He is chair of the Council on Illicit Drugs and a member of the Board of Directors of the National Association for Public Health Policy. He chairs the Advisory Committee for the M.P.H. Program at Fort Valley State University. He is a member of the Corporation (governing body) of Butler Hospital, a psychiatric hospital in Providence, Rhode Island, and of the Board of Directors of the Bowling Green-Warren County Primary Care Center in Bowling Green, Kentucky. He was Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors of the New England Gerontology Academy. He is a past chairman of the Mental Health Section of the American Public Health Association, and has served on A.P.H.A.'s Governing Council and committees on Program, Membership, and Continuing Education.   == Personal history == David F. Duncan, using the pen-name Harold Celline, was convicted of importing child pornography. In 1989 he appealed the conviction for "knowingly receiving visual depictions of minors engaging in sexually explicit conduct, transported and shipped in interstate and foreign commerce, in violation of 18 U.S.C Sec. 2252(a)(2)." The conviction was affirmed. He went to prison.    == Books == Duncan, D. F., and Gold, R. S. (1982). Drugs and the Whole Person. New York: John Wiley and Sons. Duncan, D. F., and Gold, R. S. (1985). Drugs and the Whole Person (2nd Ed). New York: MacMillan. Duncan, D. F. (1988). Epidemiology: Basis for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. New York: MacMillan. CSAT Consensus Panel (2000). Substance Abuse Treatment for Persons with Child Abuse and Neglect Issues. (CSAT Treatment Improvement Protocol # 36) Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Treatrment. Hornik, R.; Judkins, D.; Golub, A.; Johnson, B.; and Duncan, D. F. (2000). Evaluation of the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign: Historical Trends in Drug Use and Design of the Phase III Evaluation. Washington, DC: White House Office of National Drug Control Policy. [1]   == References ==  Achalu, E.D. (2002). Self-Medication Hypothesis: A Review of the Two Major Theories and the Research Evidence. Addiction Info, p. 1. [2] [3] Addiction Technology Transfer Center of New England (2010). Faculty Biographies. Brown University. [4] Alumni Notes (11-12/1986). The Alcalde, 75(2), 42. [5] Becker, D. (3/29/2009). Dirty Drugs—An Interview of Prof. David F. Duncan. On Radio Station KPFT, Houston, Texas. [6] Becker, D. (4/22/2008). A Century of Lies—An Interview of David Duncan. On Radio Station KPFT, Houston, Texas. [7] Bibliography and Abstracts. [8] Duncan, D. F., & Gold, R. S. (1983). Cultivating drug use: A strategy for the 80s. Bulletin of the Society of Psychologists in Addictive Behaviors, 2, 143-147. [9] Duncan, D. F., Nicholson, T., Clifford, P., Hawkins, W., & Petosa, R. (1994). Harm reduction: An emerging new paradigm for drug education. Journal of Drug Education, 24, 281-290. [10] Grim, R. (Sept. 7, 2006). A White House drug deal gone bad. "Slate". [11] Jansen, F. W. (2005). The Self-Medication Hypothesis of David F. Duncan, Addiction Info. [12] Laflin, M.T. and Black, D.R. (2004). Viewpoint: Conversation with Dr. David F. Duncan. American Journal of Health Behavior, 28(2), 180-188. [13]   == External links == Duncan & Associates webpage publications by David F. Duncan The Self-Medication Hypothesis "Dirty Drugs": An Interview on Radio Station KPFT, Houston, Texas Drug Truth Site

David George Kendall FRS (15 January 1918 – 23 October 2007) was an English statistician and mathematician, known for his work on probability, statistical shape analysis, ley lines and queueing theory. He spent most of his academic life in the University of Oxford (1946–1962) and the University of Cambridge (1962–1985). He worked with M. S. Bartlett during World War II, and visited Princeton University after the war.   == Life and career == David George Kendall was born on 15 January 1918 in Ripon, West Riding of Yorkshire, and attended Ripon Grammar School before attending Queen's College, Oxford, graduating in 1939. He worked on rocketry during the war, before moving to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1946. In 1962 he was appointed the first Professor of Mathematical Statistics in the Statistical Laboratory, University of Cambridge; in which post he remained until his retirement in 1985. He was elected to a professorial fellowship at Churchill College, and he was a founding trustee of the Rollo Davidson Trust. In 1986, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science) by the University of Bath. Kendall was an expert in probability and data analysis, and pioneered statistical shape analysis including the study of ley lines. He defined Kendall's notation for queueing theory. The Royal Statistical Society awarded him the Guy Medal in Silver in 1955, followed in 1981 by the Guy Medal in Gold. In 1980 the London Mathematical Society awarded Kendall their Senior Whitehead Prize, and in 1989 their De Morgan Medal. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1964. He was married to Diana Fletcher from 1952 until his death. They had two sons and four daughters, including Wilfrid Kendall, professor in the Department of Statistics at the University of Warwick and reporter Bridget Kendall MBE.   == Selected bibliography == Kendall, David G. (1960), "Geometric ergodicity and the theory of queues", in Arrow, Kenneth J.; Karlin, Samuel; Suppes, Patrick, Mathematical models in the social sciences, 1959: Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium, Stanford mathematical studies in the social sciences, IV, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, pp. 176–195, ISBN 9780804700214.    == References ==   == External links == Janus: The Papers of Professor David Kendall Royal Society citation

Sir David John Spiegelhalter, OBE FRS (born 16 August 1953), is a British statistician and Winton Professor of the Public Understanding of Risk in the Statistical Laboratory at the University of Cambridge and a Fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge. Spiegelhalter is an ISI highly cited researcher.   == Education == Spiegelhalter studied at the University of Oxford (Bachelor of Arts 1974) and University College London. He gained his Master of Science 1975 and Doctor of Philosophy 1978, supervised by Adrian Smith.   == Career == Spiegelhalter was research assistant in Brunel University in 1976 and then visiting lecturer at the University of California, Berkeley, 1977–8. After his PhD, he was a research assistant for the Royal College of Physicians; he was based at the University of Nottingham, where his PhD supervisor, Adrian Smith, had been appointed a professor. From 1981 he was at the Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit at Cambridge. He has been an honorary lecturer at the University of Hong Kong since 1991. He has also been a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and the World Anti-Doping Agency. He played a leading role in the public inquiries into children's heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary and the murders by Harold Shipman. Between 2007 and 2012 he divided his work between the Cambridge Statistical Laboratory (three-fifths) and the Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit (two-fifths). He left the MRC in March 2012 and now works full-time at the Statistical Laboratory as the Winton Professor of the Public Understanding of Risk.  In 2012, Spiegelhalter hosted the BBC Four documentary Tails You Win: The Science of Chance which described the application of probability in everyday life. He also presented a 2013 Cambridge Science Festival talk, How to Spot a Shabby Statistic at the Babbage Lecture Theatre in Cambridge.   == Research == Spiegelhalter's research interests are in statistics including Bayesian approach to clinical trials, expert systems and complex modelling and epidemiology. Graphical models of conditional independence. He wrote several papers in the 1980s that showed how probability could be incorporated into expert systems, a problem that seemed intractable at the time. Spiegelhalter showed that while frequentist probability did not lend itself to expert systems, Bayesian probability most certainly did. Statistical software. In the 1990s Spiegelhalter led the Medical Research Council team that developed WinBUGS ("Bayesian analysis Using Gibbs Sampling"), a statistical-modeling system allowing hierarchical prior distributions. WinBUGS and its successor OpenBUGS specifies graphical models using acyclic directed graphs whose nodes are random variables, which are updated using Gibbs sampling (an updating method for Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation). Earlier Bayesian software had required that the probability distribution for the observed data be an exponential family and that the prior be its conjugate distribution. Allowing flexible choices of prior distributions simplified hierarchical modelling and helped to promote multilevel models, which became widely used in epidemiology and education. General issues in clinical trials, including cluster randomisation, meta-analysis and ethical monitoring. Monitoring and comparing clinical and public-health outcomes and their associated publication as performance indicators. Public understanding of risk, including promoting concepts such as the micromort (a one in a million chance of death) and microlife (a 30-minute reduction of life expectancy). Media reporting of statistics, risk and probability and the wider conception of uncertainty as going beyond what is measured to model uncertainty, the unknown and the unmeasurable.   == Honours == 1975 Fellow, Royal Statistical Society 1985 Guy Medal in Bronze, Royal Statistical Society 1990 Award for Outstanding Statistical Application, American Statistical Association 1993 Chartered Statistician, Royal Statistical Society 1994 Guy Medal in Silver, Royal Statistical Society 1994 Honorary Doctorate, Aalborg University, Denmark 2005 Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) 2006 Received an OBE in the Queen's Birthday Honours 2006 Appointed Honorary Professor of Biostatistics at University of Cambridge 2009 Weldon Memorial Prize and Medal 2010 Honorary Doctorate of Science, Plymouth University Spiegelhalter was knighted in the 2014 Birthday Honours for services to statistics.   == References ==

David van Dantzig (September 23, 1900 – July 22, 1959) was a Dutch mathematician, well known for the construction in topology of the dyadic solenoid.   == Biography == Born in Amsterdam in 1900, Van Dantzig started to study Chemistry at the University of Amsterdam in 1917, where Gerrit Mannoury lectured. He received his PhD at the University of Groningen in 1931 with a thesis entitled "Studien over topologische algebra" under supervision of Bartel Leendert van der Waerden. He was appointed professor at the Delft University of Technology in 1938, and at the University of Amsterdam in 1946. Among his doctoral students were Jan Hemelrijk (1950), Johan Kemperman (1950), David Johannes Stoker (1955), and Constance van Eeden (1958). In Amsterdam he was one of the founders of the Mathematisch Centrum. At the University of Amsterdam he was succeeded by Jan Hemelrijk. Originally working on topics in differential geometry and topology, after World War II he focused on probability, emphasizing the applicability to statistical hypothesis testing. In 1949 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.   == Publications == Books, a selection: 1931. Studien over topologische algebra. Doctoral thesis University of Groningen. 1832. Over de elementen van het wiskundig denken : voordracht. Rede Delft. Groningen : Noordhoff. 1938. Vragen en schijnvragen over ruimte en tijd : een toepassing van den wiskundigen denkvorm. Inaugurale rede Technische Hogeschool te Delft 1948. De functie der wetenschap : drie voordrachten, met discussie. With E.W. Beth and C.F.P. Stutterheim. 's-Gravenhage : Leopold Articles, a selection: D. van Dantzig, C. Scheffer "On hereditary time discrete stochastic processes, considered as stationary Markov chains, and the corresponding general form of Wald’s fundamental identity," Indag. Math. (16), No.4, (1954), p. 377–388   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "David van Dantzig", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . David van Dantzig at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Debabrata Basu (5 July 1924 – 24 March 2001) was an Indian statistician who made fundamental contributions to the foundations of statistics. Basu invented simple examples that displayed some difficulties of likelihood-based statistics and frequentist statistics; Basu's paradoxes were especially important in the development of survey sampling. In statistical theory, Basu's theorem established the independence of a complete sufficient statistic and an ancillary statistic. Basu was associated with the Indian Statistical Institute in India, and Florida State University in the United States.   == Biography == Debabrata Basu was born in Dacca, Bengal, unpartitioned India, now Dhaka, Bangladesh. His father, N. M. Basu, was a mathematician specialising in number theory. Young Basu studied mathematics at Dacca University. He took a course in statistics as part of the under-graduate honours programme in Mathematics but his ambition was to become a pure mathematician. After getting his master's degree from Dacca University, Basu taught there from 1947 to 1948. Following the partition of India in 1947, Basu made several trips to India. In 1948, he moved to Calcutta, where he worked for some time as an actuary in an insurance company. In 1950, he joined the Indian Statistical Institute as a research scholar under C.R. Rao. In 1950, the Indian Statistical Institute was visited by Abraham Wald, who was giving a lecture tour sponsored by the International Statistical Institute. Wald greatly impressed Basu. Wald had developed a decision-theoretic foundations for statistics in which Bayesian statistics was a central part, because of Wald's theorem characterising admissible decision rules as Bayesian decision rules (or limits of Bayesian decision rules). Wald also showed the power of using measure-theoretic probability theory in statistics. In 1953, after submitting his thesis to the University of Calcutta, Basu went as a Fulbright scholar to the University of California, Berkeley. There Basu had intensive discussions with Jerzy Neyman and "his brilliant younger colleagues" like Erich Leo Lehmann. Basu's theorem comes from this time. Basu thus had a good understanding of the decision-theoretic approach to statistics of Neyman, Pearson and Wald. In fact, Basu is described as having returned from Berkeley to India as a "complete Neyman Pearsonian" by J. K. Ghosh.  Basu met Ronald Fisher in the winter of 1954–1955; he wrote in 1988, "With his reference set argument, Sir Ronald was trying to find a via media between the two poles of Statistics – Berkeley and Bayes. My efforts to understand this Fisher compromise led me to the likelihood principle". In their festschrift for Basu, the editors Malay Ghosh and Patak write that  [Basu's] critical examination of both the Neyman–Pearsonian and the Fisherian modes of inference eventually forced him to a Bayesian point of view, via the likelihood route. The final conversion to Bayesianism came in January 1968, when Basu was invited to speak at a Bayesian Session in the Statistics Section of the Indian Science Congress. He confesses that, while preparing for these lectures, he became convinced that Bayesian inference did indeed provide one with a logical resolution of the underlying inconsistencies of both the Neyman–Pearson and the Fisherian theories. Since then, Dr. Basu became an ardent Bayesian and, in many of his foundation papers, pointed out the deficiencies of both the Neyman–Pearsonian and the Fisherian methods.  After 1968, Basu began writing polemical essays, which provided paradoxes to frequentist statistics, and which produced great discussion in statistical journals and at statistical meetings. Particularly stimulating papers were Basu's papers on the foundations of survey sampling. There is an extensive literature discussing Basu's problem of estimating the weight of the elephants at a circus with an enormous bull elephant named Jumbo and on the Fisher randomisation test. After teaching at the Indian Statistical Institute Basu moved to the United States and taught statistics at Florida State University from 1975 to 1990 when he was made an emeritus professor; he has supervised six students.   == Publications == Basu's main articles are reprinted with his comments in Basu, D. (1988). J. K. Ghosh, ed. Statistical information and likelihood : A collection of critical essays by Dr. D. Basu. Lecture Notes in Statistics 45. Springer. ISBN 0-387-96751-6. MR 953081.  Also Basu, D. (September 1980). "Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher Randomization Test". Journal of the American Statistical Association 75 (371): 575–582. doi:10.2307/2287648. JSTOR 2287648. MR 590687.    == References ==   == Further reading == "Special issue in memory of D. Basu". Sankhyā Ser. A (Calcutta: Indian Statistical Institute) 64 (3 (part 1 & 2)): vi–xiv+509–739, 741–899. 2002. MR 1985395.    == External links == Department of Statistics Florida State University Florida State Times obituary Debabrata Basu: another photograph on the Portraits of Statisticians page. For Basu's PhD students see Debabrata Basu at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Dennis Victor Lindley (25 July 1923 – 14 December 2013) was a British statistician, decision theorist and leading advocate of Bayesian statistics. Lindley grew up in the south-west London suburb of Surbiton. He was an only child and his father was a local building contractor. Lindley recalled (to Adrian Smith) that the family had "little culture" and that both his parents were "proud of the fact that they had never read a book." The school Lindley attended, Tiffin School, introduced him to "ordinary cultural activities." From there Lindley went to read mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge in 1941. During the war the degree course lasted only two years and, on finishing, Lindley had a choice between entering the armed forces and joining the Civil Service as a statistician. He chose the latter and, after taking a short course given by Oscar Irwin which he "did not understand", he joined a section of the Ministry of Supply doing statistical work under George Barnard. After the war Lindley spent some time at the National Physical Laboratory before returning to Cambridge for a further year of study. From 1948 to 1960 he worked at Cambridge, starting as a demonstrator and leaving as director of the Statistical Laboratory. In 1960 Lindley left to take up a new chair at Aberystwyth. In 1967 he moved to University College London. In 1977 Lindley took early retirement at the age of 54. From then until 1987 he travelled the world as an "itinerant scholar", and later continued to write and to attend conferences. He was awarded the Royal Statistical Society's Guy Medal in Gold in 2002. Lindley first encountered statistics as a set of techniques and in his early years at Cambridge he worked to find a mathematical basis for the subject. His lectures on probability were based on Kolmogorov's approach which at that time had no following in Britain. In 1954 Lindley met Savage who was also looking for a deeper justification of the ideas of Neyman, Pearson, Wald and Fisher. Both found that justification in Bayesian theory and they turned into critics of the classical statistical inference they had hoped to justify. Lindley became a great missionary for the Bayesian gospel. The atmosphere of the Bayesian revival is captured in a comment by Rivett on Lindley's move to University College London and the premier chair of statistics in Britain: "it was as though a Jehovah's Witness had been elected Pope."   == Publications ==  (with J. C. P. Miller) Cambridge Elementary Statistical Tables, Cambridge. 1953. Introduction to Probability and Statistics from a Bayesian Viewpoint, 2 volumes, Cambridge 1965. Bayesian Statistics : a Review, SIAM. 1971. Making Decisions, Wiley-Interscience. 1971. (with W.F. Scott) New Cambridge Elementary Statistical Tables, Cambridge. 1984. The bibliography in Freeman and Smith lists 118 articles up to 1993. "The Philosophy of Statistics," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), Vol. 49, No. 3, (2000), pp. 293–337. Understanding Uncertainty, Wiley-Interscience, 2006.   == 70th birthday tribute == Freeman, P. R.; Smith, A. F. M., eds. (1994). Aspects of Uncertainty: A Tribute to D. V. Lindley. Wiley. ISBN 0471943479.  This contains a biography and articles by various authors. Rivett, P. (May 1995). "Review of Aspects of Uncertainty". Journal of the Operational Research Society 46 (5): 663–665. doi:10.1057/jors.1995.91.    == Interviews == Smith, Adrian (August 1995). "A Conversation with Dennis Lindley". Statistical Science (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 10 (3): 305–319. doi:10.1214/ss/1177009940. JSTOR 2246016.  Joyce, Helen (June 2004). "Bayesian Thoughts" (PDF). Significance (Wiley-Blackwell) 1 (2): 73–75. doi:10.1111/j.1740-9713.2004.027.x.  O'Hagan, Tony. "Interview with Dennis Lindley". Royal Statistical Society. Retrieved 16 December 2013.    == References ==   == External links == Whittle, Peter. "The History of the Cambridge Statistical Laboratory". Statistical Laboratory, Cambridge. Retrieved 16 December 2013.  Lee, Peter M. "Portraits of Statisticians". University of York, Materials for the History of Statistics. Retrieved 16 December 2013.  Bernardo, José M. (2009). "The Valencia Story" (PDF). International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA) Newsletter. Retrieved 16 December 2013.

Sir Derek Wanless (29 September 1947 – 22 May 2012) was a former English banker and a former adviser to the Labour Party.   == Biography == Derek Wanless was born in Newcastle upon Tyne, where he was educated at the Royal Grammar School. From 1967-70, he was an undergraduate at King's College Cambridge, which he attended on a support grant from Westminster Bank (a constituent of the present NatWest Bank). He was an extraordinarily gifted mathematician and graduated as Senior Wrangler in 1970. On graduation he moved into banking, qualifying as a statistician, and attended the Program for Management Development at Harvard. He was a member of the Institute of Statisticians and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, of which he was President in 1999. He had joined Westminster Bank,a constituent of the present NatWest Bank in 1967, beginning with a Saturday job before becoming NatWest's Director of Personal Banking from 1986-1988. Then becoming the General Manager for UK Branch Business and UK Financial Services before, in 1992, taking on the role of Group Chief Executive until 1999, when he received a reported pay-off of £3,000,000. It was on Friday 8 October 1999, that BBC News reported that Derek Wanless had been ousted from his position as Chief Executive. Wanless was reportedly forced out by the bank's Non-Executive Directors, who replaced him with Sir David Rowland. Wanless had been criticised by City investors for taking the bank into investment banking, and failing to curtail high costs. As executive responsible for NatWest's card business, he led the team which invented Switch, the UK's debit card scheme. He led the NatWest Group immediately prior to its takeover, by the (then) relatively small Royal Bank of Scotland. In 2002 he carried out a review of the future funding of the National Health Service for Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer and in 2007 carried out a further review for the King's Fund. He was a Non-Executive Director of Northern Rock between 2000/2007, where he was Chairman of The Northern Rock's Audit and Risk committees. His position became highly contentious, following the incipient collapse of Northern Rock in September 2007. The Northern Rock's crisis was due to inadequate risk provision, and a 'run on the Bank' was only halted with promises of unlimited UK government support. Sir Derek was heavily criticised regarding his role in the Northern Rock affair by a committee of MPs sitting on the Commons Treasury Select Committee on 16 October 2007. Sir Derek's resignation was accepted by Northern Rock's newly appointed Chairman on 17 November 2007. He died of pancreatic cancer at the age of 64 in 2012.   == Affiliations == Sir Derek Wanless was a Freeman of the City of London, received a Knighthood in the 2005 New Year Honours and a Doctor of Civil Law, honoris causa from Durham University on 30 June 2005. He received an Honorary Doctorate in Business Administration (Hon DBA) from Sunderland University in July 2007. A further Honorary Doctorate was awarded by Coventry University in November 2007, which prompted a Daily Telegraph article questioning the value of such awards  The House of Commons Select Treasury Committee published its report into the Northern Rock affair on 24 January 2008. Wanless's role as Chairman of the Risk Committee, was criticised in the report. The report's conclusion is appended below, and the full report may be found as referenced.  #31. - The directors of Northern Rock were the principal authors of the difficulties that the company has faced since August 2007. It is right that members of the Board of Northern Rock have been replaced, though haphazardly, since the company became dependent on liquidity support from the Bank of England. The high-risk, reckless business strategy of Northern Rock, with its reliance on short- and medium-term wholesale funding and an absence of sufficient insurance and a failure to arrange standby facility or cover that risk, meant that it was unable to cope with the liquidity pressures placed upon it by the freezing of international capital markets in August 2007. Given that the formulation of that strategy was a fundamental role of the Board of Northern Rock, overseen by some directors who had been there since its demutualisation, the failure of that strategy must also be attributed to the Board. The non-executive members of the Board, and in particular the Chairman of the Board, the Chairman of the Risk Committee and the senior non-executive director, failed in the case of Northern Rock to ensure that it remained liquid as well as solvent, to provide against the risks that it was taking and to act as an effective restraining force on the strategy of the executive members.    == Key publications == 2007: Our Future Health Secured? A review of NHS funding and performance for the King's Fund 2006: Securing Good Health for Older People for the King's Fund with the Personal Social Services Research Unit (PSSRU) at The London School of Economics. 2004: Securing Good Health for the Whole Population for HM Treasury 2002: Securing Our Future Health: Taking a Long-Term View for HM Treasury   == References ==

Dietrich Stoyan (born 1940, Germany) — mathematician, statistician; student of Mathematics at Technical University Dresden; applied research at Deutsches Brennstoffinstitut Freiberg, 1967 PhD, 1975 Habilitation. Since 1976 at TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Rektor of that university in 1991—1997; he became famous by his statistical research of the diffusion of euro coins in Germany and Europe after the introduction of the euro in 2002.   == Research ==   === Queueing Theory === Qualitative theory, in particular inequalities, for queueing systems and related stochastic models. The books D. Stoyan: Comparison Methods for Queues and other Stochastic Models. J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1983 and A. Mueller and D. Stoyan: Comparison Methods for Stochastic Models and Risks, J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 2002 report on the results. The work goes back to 1969 when he discovered the monotonicity of the GI/G/1 waiting times with respect to the convex order.   === Stochastic Geometry === Stereological formulae, applications for marked point process, development of stochastic models. Successful joint work with Joseph Mecke led to the first exact proof of the fundamental stereological formulae. The book Stochastic Geometry and its Applications, by D. Stoyan, W.S. Kendall and J. Mecke reports on the results. The book of 1995 is the key reference for applied stochastic geometry.   === Spatial Statistics === Statistical methods for point processes, random sets and many other random geometrical structures such as fibre processes. Results can be found in the 1995 book on stochastic geometry and in the book, Fractals, Random Shapes and Point Fields by D. and H. Stoyan. (J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1994). A particular strength of Stoyan are second-order methods. At the moment Dietrich Stoyan is working (together with three colleagues) for a new book on point process statistics. He used packings of hard spheres as models for materials with the aim to solve mechanical problems for random heterogeneous materials. Stoyan is very active in demonstrating non-mathematicians and non-statisticians the potential of statistical and stochastic geometrical methods. In particular, he coorganized together with Klaus Mecke conferences where physicists, geometers and statisticians met. See the books Mecke Klaus R. and Stoyan D. (eds.): Statistical Physics and Spatial Statistics. Lecture Notes in Physics 554, Springer-Verlag, 2000 and Mecke Klaus R. and Stoyan D. (eds.): Morphology of Condensed Matter. Lecture Notes in Physics 600, Springer-Verlag, 2002.   == See also == Freiberg Freiberg University of Mining and Technology Stochastic geometry   == External links == Homepage

Donald Bruce Rubin is the John L. Loeb Professor of Statistics at Harvard University. He was hired by Harvard in 1984, and served as chair of the department from 1985-1994. He is most well known for the Rubin Causal Model, a set of methods designed for causal inference with observational data, and for his methods for dealing with missing data.   == Chronology == As an undergraduate Rubin attended the accelerated Princeton University PhD program where he was one of a cohort of 20 students mentored by the physicist John Wheeler (the intention of the program was to confirm degrees within 5 years of freshman matriculation). He switched to psychology and graduated in 1965. He began graduate school in psychology at Harvard with a National Science Foundation fellowship, but because his statistics background was considered insufficient, he was asked to take introductory statistics courses. Rubin felt insulted by this given his background in physics, so he decided to transfer to applied math, as he says in the introduction to Matched Sampling for Causal Effects. He received his M.A. in applied math in 1966, and spent the summer consulting for Princeton sociologist Robert Althauser on comparing the achievement of white and black students, where he first used a matching method. Rubin became a PhD student again, this time in Statistics under William Cochran at the Harvard Statistics Department. After graduating from Harvard in 1970, he began working at the Educational Testing Service in 1971, and served as a visiting faculty member at Princeton's new statistics department. He published his major papers on the Rubin causal model in 1974–1980, and a textbook on the subject with econometrician Guido Imbens to be published in May, 2015. Rubin later moved to the University of Wisconsin–Madison, the University of Chicago, and Harvard.   == Rubin causal model ==  The Rubin causal model is based on the idea of potential outcomes and the assignment mechanism: every unit has different potential outcomes depending on their "assignment" to a condition. For instance, someone may have one income at age 40 if they attend a private college and a different income at age 40 if they attend a public college; to measure the causal effect of going to a public versus a private college, the investigator should look at the outcome for the same individual in both alternative futures. It is obviously impossible to see both potential outcomes at once, and one of the potential outcomes is always missing. A randomized experiment works by assigning people randomly to (in this case) public or private college; because the assignment was random, the groups are (on average) equivalent, and the difference in income at age 40 can be attributed to the college assignment since that was the only difference between the groups. The assignment mechanism is the explanation for why some units received the treatment and others the control. In observational data, there is a non-random assignment mechanism: in the case of college attendance, people may choose to attend a private versus a public college based on their financial situation, parents' education, relative ranks of the schools they were admitted to, etc. If all of these factors can be balanced between the two groups of public and private college students, then in Rubin's model the effect of college attendance can be attributed to the college choice.   == Notes ==   == References == DB Rubin, "My introduction to matched sampling", in DB Rubin, Matched Sampling for Causal Effects, Cambridge, 2006.   == External links == Rubin's page on Harvard University Statistics Department website Donald Rubin at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Douglas Altman FMedSci (born London, UK, 12 July 1948) is a British statistician best known for his work on improving the reliability and reporting of medical research and for highly cited papers on statistical methodology. He is professor of statistics in medicine at the University of Oxford, founder and Director of Centre for Statistics in Medicine and Cancer Research UK Medical Statistics Group, and co-founder of the international Equator Network for health research reliability.   == Professional career == Doug Altman graduated in statistics from the University of Bath. His first job was in the Department of Community Medicine at St Thomas's Hospital Medical School. He then spent 11 years working for the Medical Research Council's Clinical Research Centre where he worked almost entirely as a statistical consultant in a wide variety of medical areas. In 1988 Doug Altman became head of the newly formed Medical Statistics Laboratory (now Medical Statistics Group) at Imperial Cancer Research Fund (now Cancer Research UK), and in 1995 also became founding director of the Centre for Statistics in Medicine (CSM) in Oxford. In 1998 he was made Professor of Statistics in Medicine by the University of Oxford. Altman is chief statistical advisor to the British Medical Journal (BMJ), where he is a member of the editorial "hanging committee", and co-convenor of the statistical Methods Group of the Cochrane Collaboration.   == Work on research integrity == Altman is regarded as a leading authority on the execution and reporting of health research, and has played a leading role in establishing better standards. He is one of the co-founders of the international EQUATOR health research reliability network, and a member of the CONSORT Group since 1999, a group dedicated to offering a standardised way for researchers to report trials. He is also one of the original authors of the IDEAL framework for improving surgical research.   == Contributions to statistical education == Altman's publications on statistical education, many co-authored with his long-standing collaborator Martin Bland, are well-known among the medical profession, being noted for their practical relevance and clarity. His textbook Practical Statistics for Medical Research, published in 1991, has sold 50,000 copies in hardback.   == Notable achievements == Altman is the author of over 450 papers in statistical methodology, with 11 being cited over 1,000 times. Among them is one Lancet paper, which has been cited over 23,000 times and is ranked 29th in the Nature/Web of Science Top 100 most-cited research papers of all time. Altman was awarded the Bradford Hill Medal by the Royal Statistical Society for his contributions to medical statistics in 1997, and a DSc from the University of London in the same year. In 2015 Altman was awarded a lifetime achievement award by the BMJ, where he was credited by the editor, Dr Fiona Godlee, with having "done more than anyone else to encourage researchers to fully report what they actually did, warts and all, rather than letting the best be the enemy of the good or, worse, pretending that research is perfect". Altman is also editor in chief of Trials , a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences and the Royal Statistical Society.   == Books authored == Altman, Douglas G. (1991). Practical Statistics for Medical Research. Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability (first ed.). Chapman & Hall. ISBN 978-1-58488-039-4.  Practical Statistics for Medical Research (1990). Douglas G. Altman ISBN 0-412-27630-5   === Books edited === Systematic Reviews in Healthcare: Meta-Analysis in Context (2001). Editors: Douglas G. Altman, Iain Chalmers, Gerd Antes, Michael Bradburn, Mike Clarke, Matthias Egger, George Davey Smith. ISBN 0-7279-1488-X Statistics With Confidence: Confidence Intervals and Statistical Guidelines (2000). Editors: Douglas G. Altman, David Machin, T. N. Bryant, Martin J. Gardner. ISBN 0-7279-0222-9 Systematic Reviews (1999). Editors: Douglas G. Altman, Iain Chalmers. ISBN 0-7279-0904-5 Statistics in Practice: Articles Published in the British Medical Journal. (1982). Editors: Sheila M. Gore, Douglas G. Altman. ISBN 0-7279-0085-4   === Peer-reviewed articles === List of the over 396 articles by Doug Altman available through PubMed. David M, Kenneth FS and Altman DG for the CONSORT Group. (2001) Revised recommendations for improving the quality of reports of parallel group randomized trials. Lancet 14, 1191-4. Bland JM, Altman DG. (1986) Statistical methods for assessing agreement between 2 methods of clinical measurement. Lancet i, 307-310. A reprint is available HERE BMJ Statistical Notes - A series of short articles on the use of statistics by Doug Altman and his longtime collaborator Martin Bland. Altman DG, Bland JM. (1983) Measurement in medicine - the analysis of method comparison studies. The Statistician 32, 307-317. Bland JM, Altman DG. (1999) Measuring agreement in method comparison studies. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 8, 135-160. Bland JM, Altman DG. (1995) Comparing methods of measurement - why plotting difference against standard method is misleading. Lancet 346, 1085-1087.   == References ==   == External links == Doug Altman's profile at ISI Highly Cited Researcher website Doug Altman's profile at the Centre for Statistics in Medicine CONSORT Statement webpage

Dudley Ryder, 2nd Earl of Harrowby KG, PC, FRS (19 May 1798 – 19 November 1882), styled Viscount Sandon between 1809 and 1847, was a British politician. He held office under Lord Palmerston as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in 1855 and as Lord Privy Seal between 1855 and 1857.   == Background and education == Harrowby was born in London, the son of Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby, and Lady Susan (d. 1838), daughter of Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford. He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford.   == Political career == Harrowby was elected Member of Parliament for Tiverton in 1819, a seat he held until 1831  before switching to represent Liverpool until 1847. He served as a Lord of the Admiralty in 1827 and as Secretary to the Board of Control under Lord Grey between 1830 and 1831. He remained out of office for a long time, but in 1855, eight years after he had succeeded his father as Earl of Harrowby, he was appointed Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster by Lord Palmerston, becoming a Privy Counsellor at the same time. In a few months he was transferred to the office of Lord Privy Seal, a position which he resigned in 1857. He was made a Knight of the Garter in 1859. Harrowby was also three times President of the Royal Statistical Society (1840–1842, 1849–1851, 1855–1857), chairman of the Maynooth commission and a member of other important royal commissions. He was regarded as among the most stalwart and prominent defenders of the Church of England.   == Family ==  Lord Harrowby married Lady Frances, daughter of John Stuart, 1st Marquess of Bute, in 1823. She died in March 1859. Harrowby remained a widower until his death at Sandon Hall on 19 November 1882, aged 84. He was succeeded in the earldom by his eldest son, Dudley.   == References ==   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links ==  "Ryder, Dudley (1798-1882)". Dictionary of National Biography. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.  Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Earl of Harrowby

Edwin James George Pitman (29 October 1897 – 21 July 1993) was an Australian mathematician who made significant contributions to statistics and probability theory. In particular, he is remembered primarily as the originator of the Pitman permutation test, Pitman nearness and Pitman efficiency. Pitman was born in Melbourne in 29 October 1897, and attended University of Melbourne, residing at Ormond College, where he graduated with First Class Honours. In 1926 he was appointed Professor of Mathematics at the University of Tasmania, which he held until his retirement in 1962. He was a founding member and second President of the Australian Mathematical Society. He was also active within the Statistical Society of Australia, which in 1978 named the Pitman medal in his honour. His work the Pitman measure of closeness or Pitman nearness concerning the exponential families of probability distributions has been studied extensively since the 1980s by C. R. Rao, Pranab K. Sen, and others. The Pitman–Koopman–Darmois theorem states that only exponential families of probability distributions admit a sufficient statistic whose dimension remains bounded as the sample size grows.   == Terminology == For "the sum of squares of deviations from the mean," he coined the term squariance. For "the logarithm of the likelihood" he coined the term loglihood. However, neither of these terms caught on.   == Pitman's published work (selected) == Sufficient statistics and intrinsic accuracy, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 32, (1936), 567–579. The "closest" estimates of statistical parameters. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 33 (1937), 212–222. Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations. Suppl.J .R. Statist. Soc. 4, (1937), 119–130. Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations. II. The correlation coefficient test. Suppl. J. R. Statist. Soc. 4, (1937), 225–232. Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations. III. The analysis of variance test. Biometrika 29, (1938), 322–335. The estimation of the location and scale parameters of a continuous population of any given form, Biometrika 30, (1939) 391–421. Tests of hypotheses concerning location and scale parameters. Biometrika 31, (1939) 200–215. Statistics and science. Journal of the American Statistical Association 25, (1957), 322–330. Some remarks on statistical inference. Proc. Int. Res. Seminar, Berkeley (Bernoulli–Bayes–Laplace Anniversary Volume), (1965), 209–216. New York: Springer-Verlag.   == Autobiography == Pitman contributed a chapter, "Reminiscences of a mathematician who strayed into statistics", to the volume Joseph M. Gani (ed.) (1982) The Making of Statisticians, New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90684-3   == References == ^ Sen, Pranab K.; Keating, J. P.; Mason, R. L. (1993). Pitman's measure of closeness: A comparison of statistical estimators. Philadelphia: SIAM.  Williams, Evan J. (1994). "Edwin James George Pitman 1897–1993" (from Australian Science Archives Project). Historical Records of Australian Science 10 (2).  Sprent, P. "E. J. G. Pitman, 1897–1993". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 157 (1): 153–154. JSTOR 2983511.

Edith Abbott (September 26, 1876 – July 28, 1957) was an American economist, social worker, educator, and author. Abbott was born in Grand Island, Nebraska. Her younger sister was Grace Abbott.   == Education == Born September 25, 1876 in Grand Island, Nebraska, Edith was the daughter of Otheman Abbott and Elizabeth Griffin. In 1893, Abbott graduated from Brownell Hall, a girls' boarding school in Omaha. However, her family could not afford to send her to college, so she began teaching from the University of Nebraska in 1901. After two more years as a teacher, Abbott attended the University of Chicago and received a PhD in economics in 1905. In 1906, Abbott received a Carnegie Fellowship and continued her studies at University College London, and the London School of Economics. She learned from social reformers Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb, who championed new approaches to dealing with poverty. The Webbs influenced the direction of Abbott's career. The Webbs were in favour of repealing the British "poor laws" that they viewed as demeaning to people in poverty, and they supported establishing programs to eliminate poverty. While studying in London, Abbott lived part of the time in a social reformers' settlement in a poverty-stricken area of the East End, where she gained experience in social work. The next year, Abbott returned to the United States and taught economics for a year at Wellesley College.   == Early career == Abbott also worked as an assistant to Sophonisba Breckinridge, then director of social research at the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy. In that position, Abbott contributed to studies of juvenile delinquents and truants. She also created studies on women in industry and problems in the penal system. She lived with her sister, Grace, at Hull House from 1908 to 1920, associating with the men and women who worked in support of Jane Addams and her social reform causes. In 1920, Abbott and Breckinridge helped arrange the transfer of the School of Civics and Philanthropy to the University of Chicago, where it was renamed to the School of Social Service Administration. The school was the first university-based graduate school of social work. In 1924, Abbott became the school's dean, the first US woman to become the dean of an American graduate school. She served in that position until 1942, and she emphasized the importance of formal education in social work and the need to include field experience as part of that training. In 1926, Abbott helped establish the Cook County Bureau of Public Welfare. Abbott published research into several social issues: Women in Industry (1910) The Real Jail Problem (1915) Together with Breckinridge, she published the following studies: The Delinquent Child and the Home (1912) Truancy and Non-Attendance in the Chicago Schools (1917) The two women launched the influential journal Social Service Review in 1927, in addition to launching the University of Chicago Social Service Series of books and monographs, "making use of case records and public documents in a novel and striking way", as in the classics Immigration: Select Documents and Case Records (1924) and Historical Aspects of the Immigration Problem: Select Documents (1926).   == Later career == Abbott was a prominent immigration expert, working for reforms that would end exploitation of immigrants. She was appointed chair of the Committee on Crime and the Foreign Born of the Wickersham National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement (1929–31). In 1935, Abbott helped draft the Social Security Act. From 1942 to 1953, Abbott taught and edited the Social Service Review, which she had co-founded with Breckinridge in 1927. Abbott was known to be a confidant and special consultant to Harry Hopkins, adviser to President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Abbott was also notable for being appointed to a single case on the California Supreme Court in 1950, making her the first woman to sit on the state's supreme court. During her career, Abbott wrote over 100 books and articles on a variety of topics. For this reason, she was known as the "passionate statistician." In her writing, Abbott stressed the importance and the essential need of a public welfare administration, the need for a more humane social welfare system, the responsibility of the state in relation to social problems, and the social aspects of legislation. Abbott spent her last years with her brother Arthur in the family home in Grand Island, where she died of pneumonia in 1957. She left the bulk of her estate to the Grand Island Public Library. She also left a trust for a collection of non-fiction books in memory of her mother, Elizabeth Abbott.   == Publications == Women in industry; a study in American economic history. New York; London: D. Appleton and Co., 1910.   == References ==   == External links == Harvard University Library Open Collections Program. Women Working, 1870–1930, Edith Abbott (1876–1957). A full-text searchable online database with complete access to publications written by Edith Abbott. Edith and Grace Abbott, Papers at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Abbott Family papers at Nebraska State Historical Society

Edward Henry Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby KG, PC, FRS (21 July 1826 – 21 April 1893), known as Lord Stanley from 1851 to 1869, was a British statesman. He served as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs twice, from 1866 to 1868 and from 1874 to 1878.   == Background and education == He was born to Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby, who led the Conservative Party from 1846–1868 and served as Prime Minister three times, and Emma Caroline Bootle-Wilbraham, daughter of Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Baron Skelmersdale, and was the older brother of Frederick Arthur Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby. The Stanleys were one of the richest landowning families in England. Lord Stanley, as he was styled before acceding to the earldom, was educated at Eton, Rugby and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a first in classics and became a member of the society known as the Cambridge Apostles.   == Political career == In March 1848 he unsuccessfully contested the borough of Lancaster, and then made a long tour in the West Indies, Canada and the United States. During his absence he was elected member for King's Lynn, which he represented till October 1869, when he succeeded to the peerage. He took his place, as a matter of course, among the Conservatives, and delivered his maiden speech in May 1850 on the sugar duties. Just before, he had made a very brief tour in Jamaica and South America. In 1852 he went to India, and while travelling in that country he was appointed under-secretary for foreign affairs in his father's first administration. On 11 March 1853, he was commissioned a captain in the 3rd Royal Lancashire Militia. From the outset of his career he was known to be more politically sympathetic to the Liberals rather than the Conservatives, and in 1855 Lord Palmerston offered him the post of Secretary of State for the Colonies. He was much tempted by the proposal, and hurried down to Knowsley to consult his father, who called out when he entered the room, "Halo, Stanley! what brings you here?—Has Dizzy cut his throat, or are you going to be married?" When the object of his sudden appearance had been explained, the Conservative chief received the courteous suggestion of the prime minister with anything but favour, and the offer was declined. On 13 May 1856, he was appointed to the Royal Commission on the purchase of commissions in the British army. In his father's second administration Lord Stanley held, at first, the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies (1858), but became President of the Board of Control on the resignation of Lord Ellenborough. He had the charge of the India Bill of 1858 in the House of Commons, became the first Secretary of State for India, and left behind him in the India Office an excellent reputation as a man of business. After the revolution in Greece and the disappearance of King Otto, the people most earnestly desired to have Queen Victoria's second son, Prince Alfred, for their king. He declined the honour, and they then took up the idea that the next best thing they could do would be to elect some great and wealthy English noble, not concealing the hope that although they might have to offer him a Civil List he would decline to receive it. Lord Stanley was the prime favourite as an occupant of this bed of thorns, and it has been said that he was actually offered the crown. That, however, is not true; the offer was never formally made.   === Foreign minister === After the fall of the Russell government in 1866 he became Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in his father's third administration. He compared his conduct in that great post to that of a man floating down a river and fending off from his vessel, as well as he could, the various obstacles it encountered. He thought that that should be the normal attitude of an English foreign minister, and probably in the circumstances of the years 1866–1868 it was the right one. He enunciated the policy of Splendid isolation in 1866 : it is the duty of the Government of this country, placed as it is with regard to geographical position, to keep itself upon terms of goodwill with all surrounding nations, but not to entangle itself with any single or monopolizing alliance with any one of them; above all to endeavor not to interfere needlessly and vexatiously with the internal affairs of any foreign country." He arranged the collective guarantee of the neutrality of Luxembourg in 1867, negotiated a convention about the Alabama, which, however, was not ratified, and most wisely refused to take any part in the troubles in Crete. In 1874 he again became Foreign Secretary in Disraeli's government. He acquiesced in the purchase of the Suez Canal shares, a measure then considered dangerous by many people, but ultimately most successful; he accepted the Andrassy Note, but declined to accede to the Berlin Memorandum. Derby's conduct during the Eastern Crisis was mysterious to many of his contemporaries and for some time thereafter. The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica could still state that Derby's "part in the later phases of the Russo-Turkish struggle has never been fully explained, for with equal wisdom and generosity he declined to gratify public curiosity at the cost of some of his colleagues. A later generation will know better than his contemporaries what were the precise developments of policy which obliged him to resign. He kept himself ready to explain in the House of Lords the course he had taken if those whom he had left challenged him to do so, but from that course they consistently refrained." The fact of the matter was that Derby's hope for peace with Russia led him (and his wife) to share Cabinet secrets with the Russian ambassador, Pyotr Shuvalov, in hopes of averting war with Russia. Robert Blake commented that "Derby surely must be the only Foreign Secretary in British history to reveal the innermost secrets of the Cabinet to the ambassador of a foreign power in order to frustrate the presumed intentions of his own Prime Minister." Derby resigned in January 1878 when the Cabinet resolved to send the British fleet through the Dardanelles, but when that action soon proved unnecessary, Derby was allowed to withdraw his resignation. However, he resigned again and finally in the same year when the Cabinet agreed to call up the reserve. By October 1879 it was clear enough that he had thrown in his lot with the Liberal Party, but it was not till March 1880 that he publicly announced this change of allegiance. He did not at first take office in the second Gladstone government, but became Colonial Secretary in December 1882, holding this position till the fall of that government in the summer of 1885. In 1886 the old Liberal party was run on the rocks and went to pieces. Lord Derby became a Liberal Unionist, and took an active part in the general management of that party, leading it in the House of Lords till 1891, when Lord Hartington became Duke of Devonshire. In 1892 he presided over the Labour Commission. He served as President of the first day of the 1881 Co-operative Congress.   == Personal life == Lord Derby married Lady Mary, daughter of George Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr and widow of James Gascoyne-Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Salisbury, in 1870. They had no children. Derby's health never recovered from an attack of influenza which he had in 1891, and he died at Knowsley on 21 April 1893, aged 66. He was succeeded in the earldom by his younger brother, Frederick. Lady Derby died in December 1900.   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Saintsbury, George. The earl of Derby (1892) online Wilson, Keith M., ed. British foreign secretaries and foreign policy: from Crimean War to First World War (Routledge Kegan & Paul, 1987)   === Primary sources === Derby, Edward Henry Stanley. Disraeli, Derby, and the Conservative Party: Journals and Memoirs of Edward Henry, Lord Stanley, 1849-1869 (Harvester Press, 1978)   == External links ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   Hamilton, John Andrew (1898). "Stanley, Edward Henry". In Lee, Sidney. Dictionary of National Biography 54. London: Smith, Elder & Co.  Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Earl of Derby

Edward Rolf Tufte(/ˈtʌfti/; born March 14, 1942) is an American statistician and professor emeritus of political science, statistics, and computer science at Yale University. He is noted for his writings on information design and as a pioneer in the field of data visualization.   == BiographyEdit == Edward Rolf Tufte was born in 1942 in Kansas City, Missouri, to Virginia Tufte and Edward E. Tufte (1912-1999). He grew up in Beverly Hills, California, where his father was a longtime city official, and graduated from Beverly Hills High School. He received a BS and MS in statistics from Stanford University and a PhD in political science from Yale. His dissertation, completed in 1968, was entitled The Civil Rights Movement and Its Opposition. He was then hired by Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School, where he taught courses in political economy and data analysis while publishing three quantitatively inclined political science books. In 1975, while at Princeton, Tufte was asked to teach a statistics course to a group of journalists who were visiting the school to study economics. He developed a set of readings and lectures on statistical graphics, which he further developed in joint seminars he taught with renowned statistician John Tukey, a pioneer in the field of information design. These course materials became the foundation for his first book on information design, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. After difficult negotiations with mainline publishers failed, Tufte decided to self-publish Visual Display in 1982 where he worked closely with graphic designer Howard Gralla. He financed the work by taking out a second mortgage on his home. The book quickly became a commercial success and secured his transition from political scientist to information expert. On March 5, 2010, President Barack Obama appointed Tufte to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act's Recovery Independent Advisory Panel "to provide transparency in the use of Recovery-related funds".   == WorkEdit == Tufte is an expert in the presentation of informational graphics such as charts and diagrams, and is a fellow of the American Statistical Association. He has held fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation and the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. His work habits are forward-looking and he is intensely critical in the self-editing process. He pulls in and casts out ideas from books, journals, posters, auction catalogs, and other less common sources. He invites others to critique his work in-progress and may nurture dozens of ideas over months in various states of growth and fruition. He deletes almost every photograph he takes. Over time, he deletes most of what he writes on his own forum, ET Notebooks. Every printing of every book corrects numerous small blemishes, ranging from color registration to kerning and hinting. This pattern of work is repeated in his sculpture: he digs through sources ranging from other art and other genres (most notably Feynman diagrams), to flea markets, nuclear power plants, and fields of grass. He is in search of forms and ideas from which to build models, table pieces, and occasionally larger landscape pieces. Even some nominally finished, large scale works are reworked heavily. But at the same time, some random sculptural equivalents of brush strokes or artifacts of a piece's former life are retained, a degree of wabi-sabi, as may be seen in Rocket Science (circa 2006–9, Hogpen Hill, Connecticut).   === Information designEdit ===  Tufte's writing is important in such fields as information design and visual literacy, which deal with the visual communication of information. He coined the word chartjunk to refer to useless, non-informative, or information-obscuring elements of quantitative information displays. Tufte's other key concepts include what he calls the lie factor, the data-ink ratio, and the data density of a graphic. He uses the term "data-ink ratio" to argue against using excessive decoration in visual displays of quantitative information. In Visual Display, Tufte explains, "Sometimes decorations can help editorialize about the substance of the graphic. But it's wrong to distort the data measures—the ink locating values of numbers—in order to make an editorial comment or fit a decorative scheme." Tufte encourages the use of data-rich illustrations that presented all available data. When such illustrations are examined closely, every data point has a value, but when they are looked at more generally, only trends and patterns can be observed. Tufte suggests these macro/micro readings be presented in the space of an eye-span, in the high resolution format of the printed page, and at the unhurried pace of the viewer's leisure. He uses several historical examples to make his case. These include John Snow's cholera outbreak map, Charles Joseph Minard's Carte Figurative, early space debris plots, Galileo Galilei's Sidereus Nuncius, and Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial. For instance, the listing of the names of deceased soldiers on the black granite of Lin's sculptural memorial is shown to be more powerful as a chronological list rather than as an alphabetical one. The sacrifice each fallen individual has made is thus highlighted within the overall time scope of the war. In Sidereus Nuncius Galilei presents the nightly observations of the moons of Jupiter in relation to the body itself, intervowen with the two-month narrative record.   === Criticism of PowerPointEdit === Tufte has criticized the way Microsoft PowerPoint is typically used. In his essay "The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint," Tufte criticizes many aspects of the software: Its use to guide and reassure a presenter, rather than to enlighten the audience; Its unhelpfully simplistic tables and charts, resulting from the low resolution of early computer displays; The outliner's causing ideas to be arranged in an unnecessarily deep hierarchy, itself subverted by the need to restate the hierarchy on each slide; Enforcement of the audience's lockstep linear progression through that hierarchy (whereas with handouts, readers could browse and relate items at their leisure); Poor typography and chart layout, from presenters who are poor designers or who use poorly designed templates and default settings (in particular, difficulty in using scientific notation); Simplistic thinking—from ideas being squashed into bulleted lists; and stories with beginning, middle, and end being turned into a collection of disparate, loosely disguised points—presenting a misleading facade of the objectivity and neutrality that people associate with science, technology, and "bullet points". Tufte cites the way PowerPoint was used by NASA engineers in the events leading to the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster as an example of the many problems. The software style is designed to persuade rather than to inform people of technical details. Tufte's analysis of a NASA PowerPoint slide is included in the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s report—including an engineering detail buried in small type on a crowded slide with six bullet points, that if presented in a regular engineering white paper, might have been noticed and the disaster prevented. Instead, Tufte argues that the most effective way of presenting information in a technical setting, such as an academic seminar or a meeting of industry experts, is by distributing a brief written report that can be read by all participants in the first 5 to 10 minutes of the meeting. Tufte believes that this is the most efficient method of transferring knowledge from the presenter to the audience and then the rest of the meeting is devoted to discussion and debate.   === Small multipleEdit === One method Tufte encourages to allow quick visual comparison of multiple series is the small multiple, a chart with many series shown on a single pair of axes that can often be easier to read when displayed as several separate pairs of axes placed next to each other. He suggests this is particularly helpful when the series are measured on quite different vertical (y-axis) scales, but over the same range on the horizontal x-axis (usually time).   === SparklineEdit === Although Tufte is said to have invented sparklines, in actuality he invented only the name and popularized it as technique. Sparklines are a condensed way to present trends and variation, associated with a measurement such as average temperature or stock market activity, often embedded directly in the text; for example: The Dow Jones index for February 7, 2006 . These are often used as elements of a small multiple with several lines used together. Tufte explains the sparkline as a kind of "word" that conveys rich information without breaking the flow of a sentence or paragraph made of other "words" both visual and conventional. To date, the earliest known implementation of sparklines was done by interaction designer Peter Zelchenko and programmer Mike Medved in early 1998.   === SculptureEdit === Beyond his academic endeavors over the years, Tufte has created sculptures, often large outdoor ones made of metal or stone, which were first primarily exhibited on his own rural Connecticut property. In 2009–10, some of these artworks were exhibited at the Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum in Ridgefield, Connecticut, in the one-man show Edward Tufte: Seeing Around. The Tufte sculpture garden in Woodbury, Connecticut is open to the public one day per year. In 2010, "the man known as 'ET'... opened a gallery, ET Modern, in New York City's Chelsea Art District" at 11th Avenue and 20th Street. The gallery closed in 2013 "after 3.5 good years".   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Works on political economyEdit ===   === Works of analytic designEdit ===   === ExhibitionsEdit === Visual Explanations: Prints and Sculptures, 2000–1, New York: Artists Space . Escaping Flatland, Los Angeles: Architecture+Design Museum, 7 November 2002 – 13 February 2003 . Seeing Around, June 13, 2009, to April 11, 2010, Ridgefield, Connecticut: Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum .   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Tufte, Edward Rolf, Website . "The Data Artist", Salon, 1997-03-10 . Tufte, Edward Rolf (2007), "Intelligent Designs", Magazine (article) (Stanford University's Alumni) . Pen and Parchment – The Beautiful Evidence of Medieval Drawings (video), The Metropolitan Museum of Art , 47 min. Swartz, Aaron, The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint (MS PowerPoint) (Presentation) . Robison, Wade; Boisjoly, Roger; Hoeker, David; Young, Stefan (2002) [1996], "Representation and Misrepresentation: Tufte and the Morton Thiokol Engineers on the Challenger", Science and Engineering Ethics (Online Ethics Center for Engineering) 8: 59–81, doi:10.1007/s11948-002-0033-2, retrieved 2013-04-17  sharply criticizes Tufte's analysis of pre-disaster non-employment of graphics in Visual Explanations. Robison was a Rochester Institute of Technology professor; Boisjoly a directly involved Thiokol engineer; Hoeker and Young freshman RIT students. Alternative link. Ivy League Rock and Roll – A day with Edward Tufte (review of a Tufte seminar, including discussion of his work) . Art Directors Club (biography, portrait and images of work) . Edward Tufte's 'Beautiful Evidence' (review), Yuri web . "Portrait of the artist", News (UK: The BBC) . Tufte, Edward Rolf (2011-06-29), "How the government conveys information", The Washington Post (interview) . ET Modern museum/gallery .

Edward Wegman is an American statistician and a professor of statistics at George Mason University. He holds a Ph.D. in mathematical statistics and is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Senior Member of the IEEE, and past chair of the National Research Council Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics. In addition to his work in the field of statistical computing, Wegman contributed a report to a Congressional hearing on climate change at the request of Republican Rep. Joe Barton. Wegman's report supported criticisms of the methodology of two specific paleoclimate studies into the temperature record of the past 1000 years, and argued that climate scientists were excessively isolated from the statistical mainstream. Subsequently, significant portions of Wegman's report were found to have been copied without attribution from a variety of sources, including Wikipedia, and a publication based on the report was retracted.   == Career == Wegman, a St. Louis, Missouri native, received a B.S. in mathematics from Saint Louis University in 1965. He then went to graduate school at the University of Iowa, where he earned an M.S. in 1967 and a Ph.D. in 1968, both in mathematical statistics. He held a faculty position at the University of North Carolina for ten years. In 1978, Wegman joined the Office of Naval Research, in which he headed the Mathematical Sciences Division. Later, Wegman served as the first program director of the Ultra High Speed Computing basic research program for the Strategic Defense Initiative's Innovative Science and Technology Office. He joined the faculty of George Mason University in 1986 and developed a master’s degree program in statistical science. Wegman is credited with coining the phrase "computational statistics" and developing a high-profile research program around the concept that computing resources could transform statistical techniques. He also has been the associate editor of seven academic journals, a member of numerous editorial boards, and the author of more than 160 papers and five books. Wegman is a member of the American Statistical Association, a former president of the International Association for Statistical Computing, and a past chairman of the Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics for the United States National Academy of Sciences. Wegman received the 2002 Founders Award from the American Statistical Association for "over thirty years of exceptional service and leadership to the American Statistical Association."   == Energy and Commerce hearing & plagiarism allegations ==  In 2006, Republican Congressman Joe Barton chose Wegman to assist the House Energy and Commerce Committee in its inquiry criticizing the multi-proxy paleoclimate reconstructions which had been dubbed the "Hockey stick graph". Wegman produced a report and offered testimony supporting published papers disputing the methodology and data used by the climate scientists. The legitimacy of this investigation was disputed, and Sherwood Boehlert as chairman of the United States House Committee on Science, Space and Technology arranged for an investigation by the National Research Council, the North Report which found that the Wegman committee's conclusions lacked substance. In October 2010, George Mason University (GMU) announced they were conducting a formal investigation into charges of plagiarism and misconduct related to the Wegman Report. In November 2010, USA Today reported that the "review of the 91-page report, by three experts... found repeated instances of passages lifted word for word and what appear to be thinly disguised paraphrases" of wording taken from the textbook Paleoclimatology: Reconstructing Climates of the Quaternary, as well as erroneous citations of data. Wegman criticized the "speculation and conspiracy theory" in the original allegations, and said that "these attacks are unprecedented" in his long career. A Nature editorial in May 2011 called the delays in GMU's inquiry "disheartening," as "long misconduct investigations do not serve anyone, except perhaps university public-relations departments that might hope everyone will have forgotten about a case by the time it wraps up," and urged resolution "as speedily as possible while allowing time for due process." In May 2011 the journal Computational Statistics and Data Analysis retracted a 2008 social network analysis based on the Wegman Report by Yasmin Said, Wegman, and others, because the paper used portions of other authors' writings without sufficient attribution. The lawyer for both authors said they stood by their work. Subsequently, USA Today reported additional concerns about separate 2009 review article authored by Wegman and Said which contained material copied without attribution from Wikipedia. Wegman, his attorney, and George Mason University declined to comment on the allegations. Ultimately, an investigation by George Mason University was completed in February 2012. The investigation found that regarding the Congressional Wegman Report, "no misconduct was involved"; while "extensive paraphrasing of another work did occur, in a background section... the work was repeatedly referenced and the committee found that the paraphrasing did not constitute misconduct". A separate university committee examining Said & Wegman's 2008 publication, based on the Wegman report, found "that plagiarism occurred in contextual sections of the article, as a result of poor judgment for which Professor Wegman, as team leader, must bear responsibility." The university's reports were not made public, but it was announced that Wegman was to receive an "official letter of reprimand" as a consequence. The decision was decried by Raymond S. Bradley, one of the scientists whose work had been copied without attribution by Said & Wegman; Bradley argued that the findings would encourage GMU students to think it acceptable to copy work without attribution. Writing in American Scientist in 2013, Andrew Gelman described Wegman as "perhaps the most prominent statistician to have repeatedly published material written by others without attribution."   == References ==   == External links == University faculty page Wegman's resume

Edwin Thompson Jaynes (July 5, 1922 – April 30, 1998) was the Wayman Crow Distinguished Professor of Physics at Washington University in St. Louis. He wrote extensively on statistical mechanics and on foundations of probability and statistical inference, initiating in 1957 the MaxEnt interpretation of thermodynamics, as being a particular application of more general Bayesian/information theory techniques (although he argued this was already implicit in the works of Gibbs). Jaynes strongly promoted the interpretation of probability theory as an extension of logic. In 1963, together with Fred Cummings, he modeled the evolution of a two-level atom in an electromagnetic field, in a fully quantized way. This model is known as the Jaynes–Cummings model. A particular focus of his work was the construction of logical principles for assigning prior probability distributions; see the principle of maximum entropy, the principle of transformation groups and Laplace's principle of indifference. Jaynes' posthumous book, Probability Theory: The Logic of Science (2003) gathers various threads of modern thinking about Bayesian probability and statistical inference, develops the notion of probability theory as extended logic, and contrasts the advantages of Bayesian techniques with the results of other approaches. This book was published posthumously in 2003 (from an incomplete manuscript that was edited by Larry Bretthorst). An unofficial list of errata is hosted by Kevin S. Van Horn.   == Notes ==   == External links == Edwin Thompson Jaynes at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Edwin Thompson Jaynes. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University Press, (2003). ISBN 0-521-59271-2. Early (1994) version (fragmentary) of Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Book no longer downloadable for copyright reasons. A comprehensive web page on E. T. Jaynes's life and work. ET Jaynes' obituary at Washington university http://bayes.wustl.edu/etj/articles/entropy.concentration.pdf Jaynes' analysis of Rudolph Wolf's dice data

Elizur Wright (12 February 1804 – 22 November 1885) was an American mathematician and abolitionist. He is sometimes described as the "father of life insurance" for his pioneering work on actuarial tables. He is also sometimes called the "father of insurance regulation", as he campaigned that life insurance companies must keep reserves, and served as Massachusetts Insurance Commissioner.   == Early life == Wright was born in South Canaan, Connecticut, as part of a devout Christian family who held anti-slavery beliefs and instilled in him a strict moral character. His father, also named Elizur (1762-1845), graduated at Yale in 1781, and was known for his mathematical learning and devotion to the Calvinist faith. In 1810 the family moved to Tallmadge, Ohio, and the younger Elizur worked on the farm and attended an academy that was conducted by his father. The famous abolitionist John Brown attended the Academy in Tallmadge with Elizur. His home was often the refuge for fugitive slaves. In 1826, the younger Wright graduated from Yale and began to teach: first for two years in Groton, Massachusetts, then at Hudson, Ohio, as a mathematics and natural philosophy professor at Western Reserve College (1829-1833). It was during this time that Wright first encountered the writings of William Lloyd Garrison. Garrison's pamphlet, "Thoughts on African Colonization," persuaded Wright to believe that slavery should immediately be abolished, and that the American Colonization Society's effort to deport free blacks to an African colony was immoral and ineffective.   == Abolitionist == Along with Lewis Tappan, Arthur Tappan, Theodore Weld, James Birney, and other like-minded individuals, Wright founded the American Anti-Slavery Society at a convention in Philadelphia in December 1833, the year Wright had moved to New York City. Wright became the national secretary of the organization for five years. At this time, the American Anti-Slavery Society espoused the immediate abolition of slavery, called for an end to all racial prejudice and equality for all. To effect this change, members practiced a policy of "moral suasion," an appeal to people's ethics in an attempt to get them to embrace abolitionism and renounce slavery as sinful. Wright edited a large number of publications, including Human Rights (1834-1835), The Emancipator and the Quarterly Anti-Slavery Magazine (1835-1838). His continued opposition to slavery incurred the enmity of its advocates, and his house was once besieged by a mob, and an attempt was made to kidnap him and convey him to North Carolina. In 1838, he moved to Boston, where he became editor of the Massachusetts Abolitionist in April 1839. In 1846 he established the Chronotype newspaper, which he conducted until it was absorbed by the Commonwealth (1850), of which also he was for a time the editor. He was also involved in "The Great Postal Campaign" – a project whose job was to distribute abolitionist material across the country. The Anti-Slavery Society was successful in recruiting agents throughout the country to spread their message, but when Garrison and others began to broaden the scope of the Society to include women's rights and took on an anti-religion, anti-government tone, Wright and others objected and began to split from the Society in 1840. Wright became involved with the newly created Liberty Party and began to separate from the evangelists and the religious anti-slavery movements, believing that government intervention was the way to abolition. Wright was arrested and charged for aiding in the 1851 escape of Shadrach Minkins, the first black man to be seized in New England under the Fugitive Slave Act. He was not convicted. Wright was also indicted and tried for libel in consequence of his severe words for the liquor interests while publishing the Chronotype. Wright eventually became estranged from the abolitionist movement. Moreover, due partially to disappointment in his church's lack of support for the abolitionist cause, and to a slowly growing desire to find secular solutions to social problems, the formerly pious and devout Congregationalist. Eventually, Wright became an atheist.   == Business == Between 1853 and 1858, besides editing the Railroad Times, he gave his attention to invention and mechanics, constructing a spike-making machine, a water faucet, and an improvement in pipe coupling. He patented the last two, and manufactured them for a short time. According to Frank Preston Stearns, Wright became interested in life insurance as a mathematical study and read "the best works on life insurance ... with the same ardor with which young ladies devour an exciting novel." In the spring of 1852 an insurance broker "placed an advertising booklet in his hand... Elizur Wright looked it over and perceived quickly enough that no company could undertake to do what this one pretended to and remain solvent. The booklet served him for an editorial," and he embarked on a successful crusade to reform the insurance industry. He developed actuarial tables and the mathematics for calculating life insurance premiums. He campaigned for valuation laws requiring life insurance companies to hold sufficient reserves to guarantee that benefits would be paid, and nonforfeiture laws requiring the companies to provide cash surrender values. He also served as state commissioner of insurance for Massachusetts, from 1858 to 1866.[1] He devised a new formula for finding the values of policies of various terms, known as the “accumulation formula,” and, in order to facilitate his work, invented and afterward patented (1869) the “arithmeter,” a mechanical contrivance for multiplication and division, based on the logarithmic principle, a form of cylindrical slide rule.   == Public parks == Wright, a member of the Forestry Association, was instrumental in obtaining the Massachusetts Forestry Act of 1882. He initiated and promoted plans for making Middlesex Fells, an area north of Boston bordering Malden and Melrose, into a public park; although he did not succeed during his lifetime, the plan was carried out later and Middlesex Fells is Middlesex Fells Reservation to this day.   == Other activities == Wright served as an officer of the National Liberal League.   == Writings == La Fontaine, Fables (verse translation, 2 vols. 8vo, Boston, 1841; 2nd ed., New York, 1859) John Greenleaf Whittier, Ballads, and other Poems (introduction, London, 1844) A Curiosity of Law (1866) Savings Banks Life Insurance (1872) The Politics and Mysteries of Life Insurance (1873) Myron Holley, and what he did for Liberty and True Religion (1882) In addition, he wrote many pamphlets and reports.   == Notes ==   == References == James, Brewer, Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists and American Slavery, retrieved 2008-03-01   Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920). "Wright, Elizur". Encyclopedia Americana.  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Wilson, James Grant; Fiske, John, eds. (1889). "Wright, Elizur". Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography. New York: D. Appleton.    == Further reading == Wright, Philip Green and Elizabeth Quincy, Elizur Wright, the Father of modern Life Insurance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1937.   == External links == Works by Elizur Wright at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Elizur Wright at Internet Archive The Fables of La Fontaine, translated by Elizur Wright; Project Gutenberg text. Cambridge Sketches by Frank Preston Stearns; has a section on Elizur Wright. Actuary Hall of Fame contains a brief account of Wright's life. Elizur Wright Business Papers at Baker Library Historical Collections, Harvard Business School. Elizur Wright Papers, Manuscript Division, The Library of Congress.

Elżbieta Pleszczyńska (born 20 March 1933) is a Polish full professor of statistics, activist of disability rights movement.   == Biography == M.Sc in mathematics at University of Warsaw, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry in 1956. She held position at Institute of Mathematics PAS until 1972. She received her Ph.D. in 1965 in the area of discriminant analysis ("Power of Test, and Separability of Hypothesis in Statistical Design of Experiments"). Her habilitation thesis, titled "Trend Estimation Problems in Time Series Analysis", was accepted in 1973. In 1967/8 she was visiting researcher in University of Wales (Great Britain), and in 1971/2 in University of Montreal. In 1973 she moved to the Institute of Computer Science, PAS. In 1977, 1979 and 1989 she was awarded by the Polish Academy of Science. In 1981 she visited Italy invited by CNR. In the 1990s she started (together with her team) so called grade data analysis, a science of applying copula and rank methods to problems of correspondence and cluster analysis together with outlier detection. (The adjective grade here honors statisticians of the first half of the 20th century, who called cumulative distribution functions in this way.) In 1993 the President of the Republic of Poland awarded Elżbieta Pleszczyńska with the Full Professor title in the area of mathematics. In 2000 she was an invited consultant of the Cambridge University. In the Institute of Computer Science PAS, she had been leader of the Statistical Data Analysis division for many years. According to the Polish law, professors in PAS must retire at the age of 70. Retirement in 2003, although a bit confusing, didn't stop her scientific and social activity.   === Scientific views === Prof. Pleszczyńska is known for her criticism of the classic statistical approach. Classic parametric methods, like Pearson correlation coefficient, or least squares method produce comparable results only for comparable distribution types (in practice multivariate normal distribution is being assumed). Parametric statistical tests are derived from distribution assumptions. Classic methods fail if the input data contain strong outliers, and interpretation of their results should be different for different distribution types. In practice, the underlying assumptions are often not checked, moreover they are always violated – there is no normal distribution in the real world, because every real variable is limited (for example people cannot be –170 cm or +2 km tall), and the normal distribution implies positive probability density for every real number. In most cases the real distribution is skewed or discrete, which doesn't prevent people from using normal distribution methods. The extend of this violation can be measured, but its maximum accepted level is just a convention, not mathematics. The parametric methods always work out of their conditions of use. However, their results are othen considered valid, which leads to "scientific" validation of false hypothesis. For the reasons mentioned above, Elżbieta Pleszczyńska is a strong advocate of explorative data analysis and non-parametric statistics, like Spearman's rho, Kendall's tau, or grade data analysis.   === Selected works === Kowalczyk, Teresa; Pleszczyńska, Elżbieta; Ruland, Fred (2004). Grade Models and Methods for Data Analysis with Applications for the Analysis of Data Populations. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing 151. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer Verlag. ISSN 1434-9222, ISBN 3-540-21120-9.  Pleszczyńska, Elżbieta; Szczesny, Wiesław (2002). Grade exploratory methods applied to some medical data sets. 22, 1. Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering. pp. 17–30.  Pleszczyńska, Elżbieta; Szczesny, Wiesław; Grzegorek, Maria (June 2002). Clustering Respondents in Clinical Databases Using Ordered Grade Clustering. Warszawa: in: Bobrowski L., Doroszewski J., Victor N. (eds.), Lecture Notes of the ICB Seminars Statistics and Clinical Practice, International Center of Biocybernetics, 64–69.  Bromek, T. (1991). Pleszczyńska, E., ed. Statistical inference. Theory and practice. Warszawa, Kluwer Dordrecht: PWN.    == Social work == Elżbieta Pleszczyńska has cofounded Foundation Supporting Physically Disabled Mathematicians and Computer Specialists in Warsaw (September 1990). For many years she has been the Foundation chairman. The Foundation under her leadership is mainly interested in professional rehabilitation of physically disabled (not only mathematicians and specialists), based on computer techniques, like telework. Pleszczyńska has been continuously focusing attention of the public opinion on rights of disable people, in her periodical reports.   == Private life == She has a son – journalist – and two grandchildren. She lives in Warsaw Wola district.   == References == ^ a b c d e f g (in English) http://gradestat.ipipan.waw.pl/english/tworcy.html#pleszczynska ^ a b (in Polish) http://www.impan.gov.pl/Rada/Awanse/dr.html ^ Kowalczyk, Teresa; Elżbieta Pleszczyńska; Fred Ruland (2004). Grade Models and Methods for Data Analysis with Applications for the Analysis of Data Populations. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing 151. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer Verlag.  ^ Example: Kendall, Maurice G. (1948). Rank Correlation Methods. London: Charles Griffin & Company Limited. pp. 108–109.  ^ (in Polish) http://www.pan.pl/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=45&Itemid=246&limit=1&limitstart=7, art. 84, 1 ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/recentpub/2004.html ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/recentpub/2005.html ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/recentpub/2007.html ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/publishing/printer/pub2008pr.html ^ Książyk, Janusz B. (2005). Olaf Matyja; Elżbieta Pleszczyńska; Marek Wiech, eds. Analiza danych medycznych i demograficznych przy użyciu programu GradeStat. Warszawa: Instytut Podstaw Informatyki PAN, Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka. pp. 7 (preface by prof. Pleszczyńska). ISBN 83-922508-0-X.  ^ a b (in English) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr_en/ ^ (in Polish) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/doeuropy5/czesc2.htm#15_lat ^ (in Polish) http://www.cs.put.poznan.pl/archiwumpti/download/Biuletyny/199103.pdf ^ (in Polish) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/doeuropy4/brosz2000_3.htm ^ (in Polish)http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/doeuropy6/art70.html ^ (in Polish)http://fpmiinr.idn.org.pl/rada.html ^ (in Polish) http://www.niepelnosprawni.pl/ledge/x/11055 ^ (in Polish) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/publikacje.html   == External links == "The Foundation for Helping Physically Disabled Mathematicians and Computer Scientists – Warsaw". Retrieved September 9, 2008.  "Strona dla Eli Pleszczyńskiej – z okazji imienin" (in Polish). Retrieved September 9, 2008.

Emil Julius Gumbel (18 July 1891, Munich – 10 September 1966, New York City) was a German mathematician and political writer. Born in Munich, he graduated from the University of Munich shortly before the outbreak of the First World War. He was Professor of Mathematical Statistics at the University of Heidelberg. Following the murder of a friend, he attended the trial where he saw that the judge completely ignored evidence against the Brown Shirts Nazis. Horrified, he ardently investigated many similar political murders that had occurred and published his findings in Four Years of Political Murder in 1922. In 1928, he published Causes of Political Murder and also tried to create a political group to counter Nazism. Gumbel was also one of the 33 signers of the 1932 Dringender Appell. Among the Nazi's most-hated public intellectuals, he was forced out of his position in Heidelberg in 1932. Gumbel then moved to France, where he taught in Paris and Lyon, and then to the United States in 1940. He taught at the École Libre Des Hautes Études in Paris and at the New School for Social Research and Columbia University in New York City until his death in 1966. As a mathematician, Gumbel was instrumental in the development of extreme value theory, along with Leonard Tippett and Ronald Fisher. In 1958, Gumbel published a key book on the topic: Statistics of Extremes. He derived and analyzed the probability distribution that is now known as the Gumbel distribution in his honor. When he died, Gumbel's papers were made a part of The Emil J. Gumbel Collection, Political Papers of an Anti-Nazi Scholar in Weimar and Exile. These papers include reels of microfilm that document his activities against the Nazis.   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Brenner, Arthur David. Emil J. Gumbel: Weimar German Pacifist and Professor. ISBN 0-391-04101-0.  Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century. ISBN 0-8050-7134-2.    == External links == Works by Emil Julius Gumbel at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Emil Julius Gumbel at Internet Archive Emil Julius Gumbel Papers at University of Chicago Library Emil J. Gumbel Collection at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York Drawing depicting E. J. Gumbel

Emmanuel Jean Candès (born 27 April 1970) is a professor of mathematics, statistics, and electrical engineering (by courtesy) at Stanford University, where he is also the Barnum-Simons Chair in Mathematics and Statistics.   == Academic biography == Candès earned a M.Sc. from the École Polytechnique in 1993. He did his graduate studies at Stanford, where he earned a Ph.D. in statistics in 1998 under the supervision of David Donoho and immediately joined the Stanford faculty as an assistant professor of statistics. He moved to the California Institute of Technology in 2000, where in 2006 he was named the Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of Applied and Computational Mathematics. He returned to Stanford in 2009.   == Research == Candès' early research concerned nonlinear approximation theory. In his Ph.D. thesis, he developed generalizations of wavelets called curvelets and ridgelets that were able to capture higher order structures in signals. This work has had significant impact in image processing and multiscale analysis, and earned him the Popov prize in approximation theory in 2001. In 2004, Candès wrote a paper with Terence Tao that kicked off the field of compressed sensing: the recovery of sparse signals from a few carefully constructed, and seemingly random measurements. Many researchers have since contributed to this field, which has brought us the idea of a camera that can record pictures while needing only one sensor, and tools for designing distributed sensors that can communicate cheaply.   == Awards and honors == In 2001 Candès received an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. He was awarded the James H. Wilkinson Prize in Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing in 2005. In 2001, he received the Vasil A. Popov Prize as well as the National Science Foundation's highest honor: the Alan T. Waterman Award for research described by the NSF as "nothing short of revolutionary". In 2010 Candès and Terence Tao were awarded the George Pólya Prize. In 2011, Candès was awarded the ICIAM Collatz Prize Candès has also received the Lagrange Prize in Continuous Optimization, awarded by the Mathematical Optimization Society (MOS) and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM). He was also presented with the Dannie Heineman Prize by the Academy of Sciences at Göttingen in 2013. In 2014 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. In 2015 he will receive the George David Birkhoff Prize of the AMS / SIAM.   == References ==   == External links == Candès' web page at Stanford.

Emmanuel Todd (born 16 May 1951) is a French historian, anthropologist, demographer, sociologist and political scientist at the National Institute of Demographic Studies (INED) in Paris. His research examines the different types of families worldwide and how there are matching beliefs, ideologies and political systems, and the historical events involving these things.   == Life and works == Born in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Yvelines, Emmanuel Todd is the grandson of the writer Paul Nizan, the son of the journalist Olivier Todd (fr), and the father of the historian David Todd. Todd is of Jewish descent. The historian Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, who pioneered microhistory, was a friend of the family and gave him his first history book. Aged 10, Todd wanted to become an archeologist. He studied at the Lycée international de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, where he was a member of the Communist Youth. He then studied political science at the Paris Institute of Political Studies and went on to prepare a Ph.D. in history at the Trinity college of the University of Cambridge with Peter Laslett. He defended his doctoral thesis on Seven peasant communities in pre-industrial Europe. A comparative study of French, Italian and Swedish rural parishes (18th and early 19th century) in 1976. Todd attracted attention in 1976 when he, at 25 years old, predicted the fall of the Soviet Union, based on indicators such as increasing infant mortality rates: La chute finale: Essais sur la décomposition de la sphère Soviétique (The Final Fall: An Essay on the Decomposition of the Soviet Sphere). He then worked for a time in the literary service of Le Monde daily, then returned to research, working on the hypothesis of a determination of ideologies and religious or political beliefs by familial systems (Explanation of Ideology: Family Structure & Social System, 1983). He then wrote, among other books, The Invention of Europe (1990) and The Fate of Immigrants (1994), in which he defended the "French model" of integration of immigrants.  Todd was opposed to the Maastricht Treaty in the 1992 referendum. In 1995, he wrote a memo for the Fondation Saint-Simon, which became famous — the media thereafter attributed to him the paternity of the expression "fracture sociale" (social crack or social gap), used by Jacques Chirac during the 1995 electoral campaign in order to distinguish himself from his rival Édouard Balladur. Todd, however, has rejected this paternity, and attributed the expression to Marcel Gauchet. In After the Empire: The Breakdown of the American Order (2001), Todd claims that many indices that he has examined (economic, demographic and ideological) show both that the United States has outlived its status as sole superpower, and that much of the rest of the world is becoming "modern" (declining birth rates etc.) far more rapidly than predicted. Controversially, he proposes that many US foreign policy moves are designed to mask what he sees as the redundancy of the United States. In his analysis, Putin's Russia emerges as probably a more trustworthy partner in today's world than the US. The book has been much-read although many of its more original ideas have been received with scepticism. In spite of his opposition to the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, Todd expressed himself in favour of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe in the referendum of 2005, advocating a protectionist framework at the European level for the future policies of the Union. In A Convergence of Civilizations: The Transformation of Muslim Societies Around the World (2007), written with fellow demographist Youssef Courbage, Todd criticized Samuel P. Huntington's thesis of a clash of civilizations, pointing instead to indices of a convergence in styles of life and in values among civilisations. Throughout much of this time he was working on "The Origins of Family Systems", which he has described as "his life's work". The first volume was published in 2011. He describes how in researching the book he has, over 40 years, "read more anthropology monographs than most anthropologists." He has described the book as "completed", with only the stage of writing up its second and final volume remaining. His 2015 work Qui est Charlie? Sociologie d'une crise réligieuse has become his most controversial and his most popular essay. In it, he claims that the 11th of January, 2015 marches to show solidarity with the victims of recent terrorist attacks in France were not an expression of positive French values but of racist and reactionary elements in France. The work has been accused by politicians of a seeming willingness to look aside from the reality of Islamist terrorism  while some readers accuse it of a reliance on unsupported a priori arguments while failing to consider other, more relevant political factors. The book aroused copious and emotional hostility, including a critique by the Prime Minister of France, Manuel Valls. Todd claims to have written quickly, partly out of frustration and not in a purely academic style, though he defends his arguments' basis in his decades of French demographic research.   == Quotes ==   == Essays ==   === With an English translation === The Final Fall: An Essay on the Decomposition of the Soviet Sphere (La chute finale: Essais sur la décomposition de la sphère Soviétique), 1976. Explanation of Ideology: Family Structure & Social System, 1985, translated by David Garrioch (La Troisième planète, 1983). The causes of progress: culture, authority, and change, 1987 (L'enfance du monde, 1984). The Making of Modern France: Ideology, Politics and Culture, 1988 (La Nouvelle France, 1988). After the Empire: The Breakdown of the American Order {literally, The Decomposition of the American System, compare with 1976 title} (Après l’Empire : essai sur la décomposition du système américain), 2001 in French, translated 2003/2004. A Convergence of Civilizations: The Transformation of Muslim Societies Around the World, with Youssef Courbage, 2007. Who is Charlie? Xenophobia and the New Middle Class, (Polity Press, 2015) (Qui est Charlie? Sociologie d'une crise religieuse, 2015).   === Without an English translation === The Fool And The Proletariat (Le Fou et le Prolétaire), Éditions Robert Laffont, Paris, 1979. On the pre-1914 elites of Europe, which led to WWI and totalitarianism. The Invention Of France (L'Invention de la France), with Hervé Le Bras (fr), Éditions Pluriel-Hachettes, Paris, 1981. The Invention of Europe (L'invention de l'Europe), 1990. The Fate [Destiny] of Immigrants (Le destin des immigrés), 1994. The Economic Illusion: Essays on the stagnation of developed societies (L'illusion économique. Essai sur la stagnation des sociétés développées), 1998. The Diversity Of The World: Family and Modernity (La Diversité du monde : Famille et modernité), Éditions du Seuil, coll. L'histoire immédiate, Paris, 1999. After Democracy (Après la démocratie), Gallimard.fr, Paris, 2008. Allah n'y est pour rien !, Paris, Le Publieur, coll. Arrêt sur images.net, 2011. The Origin Of Family Systems, Volume One: Eurasia (L'origine des systèmes familiaux, Tome 1: L'Eurasie), Gallimard.fr, Paris, 2011. Le mystère français, with Hervé Le Bras (fr), Paris, Le Seuil, coll. « La République des idées », Paris, 2013.   == Footnotes ==   == External links == Protectionism and Democracy, Interview with Emmanuel Todd, by Karim Emile Bitar (french), published in L'ENA hors les murs, the ENA alumni magazine. Emmanuel Todd: The Specter of a Soviet-Style Crisis translation of an interview with Le Figaro The Conceited Empire interview with Martin A. Senn & Felix Lautenschlager for The New Zuricher Interview with Emmanuel Todd, by Michael Monninger Extract from Prospect, June 2003 see also this excerpt Emmanuel Todd interview on the 'French riots' translation of an interview with Le Monde Google Video: Charlie Rose interview of Emmanuel Todd Interview starts at 38:48 in the video.[dead link] Original source -- http://www.charlierose.com/view/interview/2002 [live link but non-working video] Relevant clip -- http://youtube.com/watch?v=5OgoL8p6DtI as cited by http://www.elitetrader.com/vb/printthread.php?threadid=51993 web interview (in french) arrêt sur images 2014 Interview with Oliver Berruyer

Eric Ghysels (born in 1956 in Brussels) is a Belgian economist with particular interest in finance and time series econometrics who works in the field of financial econometrics, and is currently the Edward M. Bernstein Distinguished Professor of Economics at the University of North Carolina and a Professor of Finance at the Kenan-Flagler Business School .   == Biography == Ghysels was born in Brussels, Belgium, as the son of Pierre Ghysels (a civil servant) and Anna Janssens (a homemaker). He completed his undergraduate studies in economics (Supra Cum Laude) at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel in 1979. He obtained a Fulbright Fellowship from the Hoover Foundation, Belgian American Educational Foundation in 1980, and finished his PhD at the Kellogg Graduate School of Management of Northwestern University in 1984. Ghysels is a fellow of the American Statistical Association and co-founded with Robert Engle the Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE). He is also co-editor of the Journal of Financial Econometrics. In 2008-2009 Ghysels was resident scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and has since been a regular visitor of the bank as well as several other central bank institutions around the world working mostly on topics pertaining to Mixed data sampling regression models and filtering methods. Ghysels is also a research fellow at CIRANO, Extramural Fellow at CentER - Tilburg University, research affiliate at the Volatility Institute - New York University Stern School of Business and in 2011 Fernand Braudel Senior Fellow at European University Institute, Florence, Italy.   == Research == Ghysels' most recent research focuses on Mixed data sampling (MIDAS) regression models and filtering methods with applications in finance and other fields. He has also worked on diverse topics such as seasonality in economic times series, Generalized Method of Moment estimation and testing of asset pricing models, time varying betas, estimation of risk neutral and objective probability measures for the purpose of option pricing, among many other topics. Mixed data sampling or MIDAS regressions are econometric regression models can be viewed in some cases as substitutes for the Kalman filter when applied in the context of mixed frequency data.   == Publications == Recent work on Mixed data sampling (MIDAS) includes: Andreou, E, Eric Ghysels and A. Kourtellos (2010) Should macroeconomic forecasters use daily financial data and how?, Discussion Paper UNC. Andreou, E, Eric Ghysels and A. Kourtellos (2010) Forecasting with mixed-frequency data, Chapter prepared for Oxford Handbook on Economic Forecasting edited by Michael P. Clements and David F. Hendry Chen, Xilong, Eric Ghysels and Fangfang Wang, (2010), The HYBRID GARCH Class of Models, Discussion Paper UNC. Bai, J., Eric Ghysels and Jonathan Wright (2010), State Space Models and MIDAS Regressions, Discussion Paper UNC. Eric Ghysels and J. Wright (2009), Forecasting Professional Forecasters, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics Anderson, E., Eric Ghysels and J. Juergens (2009) The Impact of Risk and Uncertainty on Expected Returns, Journal of Financial Economics Eric Ghysels and B. Sohn (2009) Which Power Variation Predicts Volatility Well? Journal of Empirical Finance Andreou, E, Eric Ghysels and A. Kourtellos (2010) "Regression Models With Mixed Sampling Frequencies", Journal of Econometrics (Article in Press) Eric Ghysels, Santa-Clara, P. and Valkanov, R. (2005), There is a Risk-return Trade-off After All, Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 509-548. Eric Ghysels, Santa-Clara, P. and Valkanov, R. (2006) Predicting volatility: How to get most out of returns data sampled at different frequencies Journal of Econometrics 131, 59-95 Eric Ghysels, Sinko, A., Valkanov, R. (2007) MIDAS Regressions: Further Results and New Directions. Econometric Reviews, 26 (1), 53–90 Riccardo Colacito, Robert Engle and Eric Ghysels A Component Model of Dynamic Correlations, Journal of Econometrics (Article in Press) He has also published several books, including a monograph with Denise Osborn (University of Manchester) on the Econometric Analysis of Seasonal Time Series. Representative set of other publications: Ghysels, E. (1988) A Study Towards a Dynamic Theory of Seasonality for Economic Time Series, Journal of the American Statistical Association. Reprinted in Modelling Seasonality, S. Hylleberg (ed.), Oxford University Press, 181-192. Ghysels, E. and A. Hall, (1990), Are Consumption-Based Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Models Structural?, Journal of Econometrics 45, 121-139. Ghysels, E. and A. Hall, (1990), A Test for Structural Stability of Euler Conditions Parameters Estimated Via the Generalized Method of Moments Estimator, International Economic Review 31, 355-364. Ghysels, E. (1994), On the Economics and Econometrics of Seasonality.” Invited paper, 1990 World Congress of the Econometric Society, August 1990, in Advances in Econometrics I, C.A. Sims (ed.), Cambridge University Press, 257-316. Ghysels, E., C.W.J. Granger and P. Siklos (1995), Is Seasonal Adjustment a Linear or Nonlinear Data-Filtering Transformation? Invited JBES paper, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 139-152. Reprinted in Newbold, P. and S.J. Leybourne (2003) Recent Developments in Time Series, Edward Elgar. Reprinted in Essays in Econometrics: collected Papers of Clive W.J. Granger: Vol. I, Cambridge University Press Ghysels, E., A. Harvey and E. Renault, (1995), Stochastic Volatility, in Handbook of Statistics 14, Statistical Methods in Finance, G.S. Maddala and C. R. Rao (eds.), North Holland, Amsterdam. Ghysels, E. (1998), On Stable Factor Structures in the Pricing of Risk: Do Time-Varying Betas Help or Hurt? Journal of Finance 53, 549-573. Cao, C., Ghysels, E. and F. Hatheway, (2000), Price Discovery without Trading: The Case of the Nasdaq Pre-opening (NYSE Best Paper Award – Western Finance Association Meetings 1999, Santa Monica), Journal of Finance 55, 1339-1366. Chernov, M. and E. Ghysels, (2000), A Study Towards a Unified Approach to the Joint Estimation of Objective and Risk Neutral Measures for the Purpose of Options Valuation, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 407-458, Reprinted in Stochastic Volatility: Selected Readings, N. Shephard (ed.), Oxford University Press, 398-448, (All-Star JFE paper selection based on average yearly citations). Andreou, E. and E. Ghysels, (2002) Detecting multiple breaks in financial market volatility dynamics, Journal of Applied Econometrics 17, 579-600. Anderson, E., E. Ghysels and J. Juergens (2005), Do Heterogeneous Beliefs Matter for Asset Pricing?, Review of Financial Studies, 18, 875-924. Eriksson, A., E. Ghysels and F. Wang (2009), The Normal Inverse Gaussian Distribution and the Pricing of Derivatives, Journal of Derivatives, Spring   == External links == Eric Ghysels Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE) Journal of Financial Econometrics

Erich Leo Lehmann (20 November 1917 – 12 September 2009) was an American statistician, who made a major contribution to nonparametric hypothesis testing. He is one of the eponyms of the Lehmann–Scheffé theorem and of the Hodges–Lehmann estimator of the median of a population.   == Early life == Lehmann was born in Strasbourg, Alsace-Lorraine in 1917 to a family of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry. He grew up in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, until the Machtergreifung in 1933 his family fled to Switzerland to escape the Nazis. He graduated from high school in Zurich, and studied mathematics for two years at Trinity College, Cambridge. Following that, he emigrated to the United States, arriving in New York in late 1940. He enrolled in University of California, Berkeley as a post-graduate student—albeit without a prior degree—in 1941.   == Career == Lehmann obtained his MA in mathematics in 1942 and his PhD (under Jerzy Neyman) in 1946, at the University of California, Berkeley, where he taught from 1942. From August 1944 to August 1945 he worked as an operations analyst for the United States Air Force on Guam. He taught at Columbia University and at Princeton University during 1950–51, and then during 1951–1952 he was a visiting associate professor at Stanford University. He was an editor of "The Annals of Mathematical Statistics" and president of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of Science. In 1997, on the occasion of his eightieth birthday, the department of statistics at the University of California at Berkeley created the Erich Lehmann Fund in Statistics to support the students of the department.   == Selected publications ==   === Books === Testing Statistical Hypotheses, 1959 Basic Concepts of Probability and Statistics, 1964, co-author J. L. Hodges Elements of Finite Probability, 1965, co-author J. L. Hodges Lehmann, Erich L.; With the special assistance of H. J. M. D'Abrera (2006). Nonparametrics: Statistical methods based on ranks (Reprinting of 1988 revision of 1975 Holden-Day ed.). New York: Springer. pp. xvi+463. ISBN 978-0-387-35212-1. MR 2279708.   Theory of Point Estimation, 1983 Lehmann, Erich L. (1998). Elements of Large-Sample Theory. New York: Springer Verlag. ISBN 978-0-387-98595-4.  Reminiscences of a Statistician, 2007, ISBN 978-0-387-71596-4 Fisher, Neyman, and the Creation of Classical Statistics, 2011, ISBN 978-1-4419-9499-8 [published posthumously]   === Articles === Lehmann, E.L.; Scheffé, H. (1950). "Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation. I.". Sankhyā: the Indian Journal of Statistics 10 (4): 305–340. JSTOR 25048038. MR 39201.  Lehmann, E.L.; Scheffé, H. (1955). "Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation. II". Sankhyā: the Indian Journal of Statistics 15 (3): 219–236. JSTOR 25048243. MR 72410.  Hodges, J. L.; Lehmann, E. L. (1956). "The efficiency of some nonparametric competitors of the t-test". Annals of Mathematical Statistics 27 (2): 324–335. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177728261.  Hodges, J. L.; Lehmann, E. L. (1963). "Estimation of location based on ranks". Annals of Mathematical Statistics 34 (2): 598–611. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177704172.    == References ==   == Further reading == Brillinger, D. R. (2010). "Erich Leo Lehmann, 1917-2009". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 173 (3): 683–686. doi:10.1111/j.1467-985X.2010.00645_1.x.     == External links == Erich Leo Lehmann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Ernst Engel (March 26, 1821 – December 8, 1896) was a German statistician and economist, famous for the Engel curve and the Engel's law.   == BiographyEdit == Ernst was born in Dresden in 1821. He studied at the famous mining academy of Freiberg, in Saxony, and on completing his curriculum traveled in Germany and France. Immediately after the revolution of 1848, he was attached to the royal commission in Saxony appointed to determine the relations between trade and labor. In 1850, he was directed by the government to assist in the organization of the German Industrial Exhibition of Leipzig (the first of its kind). His efforts were so successful that, in 1854, he was induced to enter the government service, as chief of the newly instituted statistical department. He retired, however, from the office in 1858. He founded at Dresden the first Mortgage Insurance Society (Hypotheken-Versicherungsgesellschaft), and as a result of the success of his work, was summoned in 1860 to Berlin as director of the statistical department, in succession to Karl Friedrich Wilhelm Dieterici. In his new office, he made himself a name of worldwide reputation. Raised to the rank of Geheimer Regierungsrat, he retired in 1882 and lived henceforward in Serkowitz, today part of Radebeul near Dresden, where he died in 1896. His investigations into the social condition of the working classes were much noted.   == WorksEdit == Engel was a voluminous writer on the subjects with which his name is connected, but his statistical papers are mostly published in the periodicals which he himself established, namely, Preuss. Statistik (in 1861); Zeitschrift des Königlichen Preußischen Statistischen Bureaus, and Zeitschrift des Statistischen Bureaus des Königreichs Sachsen. Among his works were Die Methoden der Volkszählung (“Census methods,” 1861), Die Volkszählungen, ihre Stellung zur Wissenschaft und ihre Aufgabe in der Geschichte (“Censi, their place in science and role in history,” 1862), Land und Leute des Preussischen Staates (“The Prussian land and people,” 1863), and Das Zeitalter des Dampfes (“The era of steam,” 1881).   == BibliographyEdit == Heinrich Strecker, Rolf Wiegert (1997) “Engel, (Christian Lorenz) Ernst,” pp. 280–3 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Photograph of Engel on Portraits of Statisticians  "Engel, Ernst". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.

Ernst Louis Étienne Laspeyres (November 28, 1834 – August 4, 1913) was Professor ordinarius of economics and statistics or State Sciences and cameralistics (public finance and administration) in Basel, Riga, Dorpat (now Tartu), Karlsruhe, and finally for 26 years in Gießen. Laspeyres was the scion of a Huguenot family of originally Gascon descent which had settled in Berlin in the 17th century, and he emphasised the Occitan pronunciation of his name as a link to his Gascon origins. Laspeyres is mainly known today for his 1871 development of the index number formula method for determining price increases, used for calculating the rate of inflation. A type of this calculation is known today as the Laspeyres Index. In addition to his accomplishments in price indices, Laspeyres may be counted as one of the fathers of business administration as an academic-professional discipline in Germany, and as one of the main unifiers of economics and statistics by “developing ideas which are today by and large nationally and internationally reality: quantification and operationalization of economics; expansion of official statistics; cooperation of official statistics and economic research; and integration of the economist and the statistician in one person.” (Rinne 1983) In economics, Laspeyres was to some extent a representative of the Historical School and certainly of Kathedersozialismus.   == BibliographyEdit == Books by Laspeyres Wechselbeziehungen zwischen Volksvermehrung und Höhe des Arbeitslohns, 1860 Geschichte der Volkswirtschäftlichen Anschauungen der Niederländer und ihrer Literatur zur Zeit der Republik, 1863 Der Einfluß der Wohnung auf die Sittlichkeit, 1869 Articles by Laspeyres “Mitteilungen aus Pieter de la Courts Schriften. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der niederländischen Nationalökonomik des 17. Jahrhunderts” in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1862 “Hamburger Warenpreise 1851-1860 und die kalifornisch-australische Geldentdeckung seit 1848. Ein Beitrag zur Lehre von der Geldentwertung” in Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 1884 “Die Berechnung einer mittleren Warenpreissteigerung” in Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 1871 “Welche Waren werden im Verlaufe der Zeiten immer teurer? – Statistische Studien zur Geschichte der Preisen” in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1872 “Statistische Untersuchungungen über die wirtschaftliche und soziale Lage der sogenannte arbeitenden Klassen” in Concordia Zeitschrift für die Arbeiterfrage, 1875 “Die Kathedersocialisten und die statistischen Congresse. Gedanken zur Begründung einer nationalökonomischen Statistik und einer statistischen Nationalökonomie” in Deutsche Zeit- und Streit-Fragen, 1875 “Zur wirtschaftlichen Lage der ländlichen Arbeiter im deutschen Reich” in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1876 “Preise (Die Bewegungen der Warenpreise in der zweiten Hälfte des 19. Jahrhunderts)”, voce nell'enciclopedia Meyers Konversations-Lexikon, 1883 “Statistischen Untersuchungen zur Frage der Steuerüberwälzung” in Finanz-Archiv, 1901 “Einzelpreise und Durchschnittspreise vegetalischer und animalischer Produkte in Preußen während der 75 Jahre 1821 bis 1895” in Zeitschrift, Prussia, Statistisches Bureau, 1901   == ReferencesEdit == Spoerer, M. (2008). "The Laspeyres-Paradox: tax overshifting in nineteenth century Prussia". Cliometrica 2 (3): 173–193. doi:10.1007/s11698-007-0018-0.  Drechsler, W. (2000). "Etienne Laspeyres' History of the Economic Thought of the Netherlanders: A Law & Economics Classic?". European Journal of Law and Economics 10 (3): 235–242. doi:10.1023/A:1026595431775.  Diewert, W. Erwin (2008). "Laspeyres, Ernst Louis Etienne (1834–1913)". In Steven N. Durlauf; Lawrence E. Blume. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2nd ed.). The Macmillan Press. pp. 133–134. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0934. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.  Rinne, Horst (1981). “Ernst Louis Etienne Laspeyres, 1834–1913”. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, vol. 196, pp. 194–215. Rinne, Horst (1983). “Étienne Laspeyres” in Neue Deutsche Biographie, vol. 13. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 660–661.

Ernst Filip Oskar Lundberg (2 June 1876 - 31 December 1965) Swedish actuary, and mathematician. Lundberg is one of the founders of mathematical risk theory and worked as managing director of several insurance companies. According to Harald Cramér, "Filip Lundberg's works on risk theory were all written at a time when no general theory of stochastic processes existed, and when collective reinsurance methods, in the present sense of the word, were entirely unknown to insurance companies. In both respects his ideas were far ahead of their time, and his works deserve to be generally recognized as pioneering works of fundamental importance."   == Biography == Born in 1876, Filip Lundberg's father, Philip Lundberg, was a school teacher in mathematics who died just three months after Lundberg was born. Filip's first ambition was to follow his father's career in mathematics. He studied mathematics at the University of Uppsala, graduating in 1896 and receiving his Licentiate in 1898. However, instead of becoming a teacher, Filip joined a newly founded insurance company. In 1903 Lundberg went on to defend his doctoral thesis on the probability and collective risk. He soon moved to a second company where he was appointed actuary and at the age of 28 became its managing director. From 1904 to the 1930s Lundberg s activities were divided between his everyday life and trying to understand the relationship between the concepts 'collective' and 'risk'. Lundberg's results are described in his academic publications between the years 1909 and 1930. His major work on the ruin problem were published in 1926 and 1928. From 1910 on he was a leading voice in debates about the life insurance industry and a prolific writer and debater. Lundberg advocated a cautious approach to the insurance business which emphasized consolidation before expansion. Lundberg went on to become a leader of the industry, managing other companies, serving as chairman of the Association of Swedish Life Insurance Companies for ten years and sitting on government committees on insurance. Filip Lundberg left his last position within Swedish insurance, as chairman of the board of Eir, in the same year that his collective risk theory was definitively clarified. Filip Lundberg died in 1965.   == Work == In parallel to his business career Lundberg worked on a theory of collective risk. In 1903 he finished his doctoral thesis, Approximations of the Probability Function/Reinsurance of Collective Risks. This introduced the compound Poisson process and involved work on the central limit theorem. Cramér writes that the thesis has a reputation for being impossible to understand but, that looked at now, "one cannot help being struck by his ability to deal intuitively with concepts and methods that would have to wait another thirty years before being put on a rigorous foundation." Cramér mentions later work by Andrey Kolmogorov and William Feller but it was Cramér himself who developed Lundberg's ideas on risk and linked them to the emerging theory of stochastic processes. Focardi & Fabozzi describes Lundberg's thesis as a milestone in actuarial mathematics. It was the first to define a collective theory of risk and to apply a sophisticated probabilistic formulation to the insurance ruin problem. Lundberg’s work anticipated many future developments of probability theory, including what was later to be known as the theory of point processes. Lundbergs theory, together with that of French mathematician Louis Bachelier, was in advance of its time and inspired the subsequent development of probability theory. But the type of mathematics implied by his work could not be employed completely until the development of digital computers. Because he published many of his major works in Swedish, Lundberg's work went unnoticed by the actuarial community for nearly 30 years. However, eventually Lundberg's ideas became known largely through the work of Cramér and his students. Although Lundberg published some work in German, the international scientific language of the time, Lundberg's thesis and most of his subsequent writings were in Swedish. His mathematical language did not travel easily, either.   == Discussions == Cramér, H. (1969). "Historical review of Filip Lundberg's works on risk theory". Scandinavian Actuarial Journal 1969: 6–9. doi:10.1080/03461238.1969.10404602.  K. Englund and A. Martin-Löf (2001) Ernst Filip Oskar Lundberg, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 308–311. New York: Springer. Focardi, Sergio M. & Fabozzi, Frank J. (2004). The Mathematics of Financial Modeling and Investment Management, pp. 80–81. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. Å. Grenholm et al. (1969). Filip Lundberg: Förgrundsman i svensk livförsäkring.   == See also == Ruin theory Harald Cramer Louis Bachelier   == External links == There is a photograph at Lundberg, Ernst Filip Oskar on the Portraits of Statisticians page. A biography of Lundberg can be found at the StatProb Encyclopedia Ernest Filip Oskar Lundberg

Francis Amasa Walker (July 2, 1840 – January 5, 1897) was an American economist, statistician, journalist, educator, academic administrator, and military officer in the Union Army. Walker was born into a prominent Boston family, the son of the economist and politician Amasa Walker, and he graduated from Amherst College at the age of 20. He received a commission to join the 15th Massachusetts Infantry and quickly rose through the ranks as an assistant adjutant general. Walker fought in the Peninsula Campaign and was wounded at the Battle of Chancellorsville but subsequently participated in the Bristoe, Overland, and Richmond-Petersburg Campaigns before being captured by Confederate forces and held at the infamous Libby Prison. In July 1866, he was nominated by President Andrew Johnson and confirmed by the United States Senate for the award of the honorary grade of brevet brigadier general United States Volunteers, to rank from March 13, 1865, when he was age 24. Following the war, Walker served on the editorial staff of the Springfield Republican before using his family and military connections to gain appointment as the Chief of the Bureau of Statistics from 1869 to 1870 and Superintendent of the 1870 census where he published an award-winning Statistical Atlas visualizing the data for the first time. He joined Yale University's Sheffield Scientific School as a professor of political economy in 1872 and rose to international prominence serving as a chief member of the 1876 Philadelphia Exposition, American representative to the 1878 International Monetary Conference, President of the American Statistical Association in 1882, and inaugural President of the American Economic Association in 1886, and vice president of the National Academy of Sciences in 1890. Walker also led the 1880 census which resulted in a twenty-two volume census, cementing Walker's reputation as the nation's preeminent statistician. As an economist, Walker debunked the wage-fund doctrine and engaged in a prominent scholarly debate with Henry George on land, rent, and taxes. Walker argued in support of bimetallism and although he was an opponent of the nascent socialist movement, he argued that obligations existed between the employer and the employed. He published his International Bimetallism at the height of the 1896 presidential election campaign in which economic issues were prominent. Walker was a prolific writer, authoring ten books on political economy and military history. In recognition of his contributions to economic theory, beginning in 1947, the American Economic Association recognized the lifetime achievement of an individual economist with a "Francis A. Walker Medal". Walker accepted the presidency of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1881, a position he held for fifteen years until his death. During his tenure, he placed the institution on more stable financial footing by aggressively fund-raising and securing grants from the Massachusetts government, implemented many curricular reforms, oversaw the launch of new academic programs, and expanded the size of the Boston campus, faculty, and student enrollments. MIT's Walker Memorial Hall, a former students' clubhouse and one of the original buildings on the Charles River campus, was dedicated to him in 1916.   == Background == Walker was born in Boston, Massachusetts, the youngest son of Hanna (née Ambrose) and Amasa Walker, a prominent economist and state politician. The Walkers had three children, Emma (born 1835), Robert (born 1837), and Francis. Because the Walkers' next-door neighbor was Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., the junior Walker and junior Holmes were playmates as young children and renewed their friendship later in life. The family moved from Boston to North Brookfield, Massachusetts in 1843 and remained there. As a boy he had both a noted temper as well as a magnetic personality.  Beginning his schooling at the age of seven, Walker studied Latin at various private and public schools in Brookfield before being sent to the Leicester Academy when he was twelve. He completed his college preparation by the time he was fourteen and spent another year studying Greek and Latin under the future suffragist and abolitionist Lucy Stone, and entered Amherst College at the age of fifteen. Although he had planned to matriculate at Harvard after his first year at Amherst, Walker's father believed his son was too young to enter the larger college and insisted he remain at Amherst. While he had entered with the class of 1859, Walker became ill during his first year there and fell back a year. He was a member of the Delta Kappa and Athenian societies as a freshman, joined and withdrew from Alpha Sigma Phi as a sophomore on account of "rowdyism", and finally joined Delta Kappa Epsilon. As a student, Walker was awarded the Sweetser Essay Prize and the Hardy Prize for extemporaneous speaking. He graduated in 1860 as Phi Beta Kappa with a degree in law. After graduation, he joined the law firm of Charles Devens and George Frisbie Hoar in Worcester, Massachusetts.   == Military service ==   === 15th Massachusetts Infantry === As tensions between the North and South increased over the winter of 1860–1861, Walker equipped himself and began drilling with Major Devens' 3rd Battalion of Rifles in Worcester and New York. Despite his older brother Robert serving in the 34th Massachusetts Infantry, his father objected to his youngest son mobilizing with the first wave of volunteers. Walker returned to Worcester but began to lobby William Schouler and Governor John Andrew to grant him a commission as a second lieutenant under Devens' command of the 15th Massachusetts. Following his 21st birthday and the First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861, Walker secured the consent of his father to join the war effort as well as assurances by Devens that he would receive an officer's commission. However, the lieutenancy never materialized and Devens instead offered Walker an appointment as a sergeant major, which he assumed on August 1, 1861, after re-tailoring his previously ordered lieutenant's uniform to reflect his enlisted status. However, by September 14, 1861, Walker had been recommended by Devens and reassigned to Brig. Gen. Darius N. Couch as assistant adjutant general and promoted to captain. Walker remained in Washington, D.C., over the winter of 1861–1862 and did not see combat until May 1862 at the Battle of Williamsburg. Walker also served at Seven Pines as well as at the Seven Days Battles of the Peninsula Campaign in the summer of 1862 under Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan in the Army of the Potomac.   === Second Army Corps ===  Walker remained at the Berkeley Plantation until his promotion on August 11 to major and transferral with General Couch to the II Corps of the Army of the Potomac. Although the II Corps later saw action at the battles of Antietam and Fredericksburg, the latter being under the new command of Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside, Walker and the Corps did not join Burnsides's Mud March over the winter. Walker was promoted to lieutenant colonel on January 1, 1863, and remained with the II Corps. He fought the Battle of Chancellorsville in May 1863, where his hand and wrist were shattered and neck lacerated by an exploding shell. A record of the 1880 Census indicated that he had "compound fracture of the metacarpal bones of the left hand resulting in permanent extension of his hand." Later in 1896, as the President of MIT, he would receive one of the first radiographs in the country, which documented the extent of the damage to his hand. He did not return to service until August 1863. Walker participated in the Bristoe Campaign and narrowly escaped encirclement during the Battle of Bristoe Station before withdrawing and encamping near the Berry Hill Plantation for much of the winter and spending some leave in the North. After extensive reorganization during the winter of 1863–1864, Walker and the Army of the Potomac fought in the Overland Campaign through May and June 1864. The Battle of Cold Harbor in early June took a substantial toll on the ranks of the II Corps and Walker injured his knee during the battle. In the ensuing Richmond-Petersburg Campaign, Walker was appointed a brevet colonel. However, on August 25, 1864, as he rode to find Maj. Gen. John Gibbon at the front during the Second Battle of Ream's Station, Walker was surrounded and captured by the 11th Georgia Infantry. On August 27, Walker was able to escape from a marching prisoner column with another prisoner but was recaptured by the 51st North Carolina Infantry after trying to swim across the Appomattox River and nearly drowning. After being held as a prisoner in Petersburg, he was transferred to the infamous Libby Prison in Richmond, where his older brother was also held. In October 1864, Walker was released with thirty other prisoners as a part of an exchange. Walker returned to North Brookfield to recuperate and resigned his commission on January 8, 1865, as a result of his injuries and health. At the end of the war, Maj. Gen. Winfield Scott Hancock recommended that Walker be brevetted as a brigadier general of U.S. Volunteers in recognition of his meritorious services during the war and especially his gallant conduct at Chancellorsville. On July 9, 1866, Walker was nominated by President Andrew Johnson for the award of the honorary grade of brevet brigadier general, U.S. Volunteers, to rank from March 13, 1865 (when he was age 24), for gallant conduct at the battle of Chancellorsville and meritorious services during the war. The U.S. Senate confirmed the award on July 23, 1866. After the war, Walker became a companion of the Massachusetts Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States.   == Postbellum activity == By late spring 1865, Walker regained sufficient strength and began to assist his father by lecturing on political economy at Amherst as well as assisting him in the preparation of The Science of Wealth. He also taught Latin, Greek, and mathematics at the Williston Seminary in Easthampton, Massachusetts until being offered an editorial position at the Springfield Republican by Samuel Bowles. At the Republican, Walker wrote on Reconstruction era politics, railroad regulation, and representation.   === 1870 Census === While his editorial career was moving forward, Walker called upon his own as well as his father's political contacts to secure an appointment under David Ames Wells as the Chief of the U.S. Bureau of Statistics and Deputy Special Commissioner of Internal Revenue in January 1869. On January 29, 1869, Major General J.D. Cox, who had also previously served in McClellan's army and was currently the Secretary of the Interior under President Grant's administration, notified the twenty-nine-year-old Walker that he was being nominated to become the Superintendent of the 1870 census. After he was confirmed by the Senate, Walker sought to strike a moderate reformist position free from the inefficient and unscientific methods of the 1850 and 1860 censuses; however, the required legislation was not passed and the census proceeded under the rules governing previous collections. Among the problems facing Walker included a lack of authority to determine, enforce, or control the marshals' personnel, methods, or timing all of which were regularly manipulated by local political interests. Additionally, the 1870 census would not only occur five years after Civil War but would also be the first in which emancipated African Americans would be fully counted in the census. Owing to the confluence of these problems, the Census was completed and tabulated several months behind schedule to much popular criticism, and led indirectly to a deterioration in Walker's health during the spring of 1871. Walker took leave to travel to England with Bowles that summer to recuperate and upon return that fall, despite an offer from The New York Times to join their editorial board with an annual salary of $8,000 ($143,300 in 2009), accepted Secretary Columbus Delano's offer to become the U.S. Commissioner of Indian Affairs in November 1871. The appointment was simultaneously a go-around to continue to fund Walker's federal responsibilities as Census superintendent despite Congress' cessation of appropriations for the position as well as a political opportunity to replace a scandal-ridden predecessor. Walker continued to work on the Census for several years thereafter, culminating in the publication of the Statistical Atlas of the United States that was unprecedented in its use of visual statistics and maps to report the results of the Census. The Atlas won him praise from both the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution as well as a First Class medal from the International Geographical Congress.   === Indian Bureau === Despite his Census-related efforts, Walker did not neglect his obligations as Indian Affairs Superintendent. In the post-war era, the government redoubled efforts to issue western land grants to settlers, ranchers, miners, and railroads which only served to heighten tensions with the Native American tribes who had already been displaced from their homelands as well as stripped of their ostensible sovereignty following an 1872 act of Congress. The U.S. Army and various Indian tribes engaged in open hostilities throughout the 1860s and 1870s. Walker harbored no benevolence for the Indians, characterizing them as "voluptuary," "garrulous," "lazy," "cowardly in battle," and "beggar-like" even after an expedition along the Platte River to meet various chieftains. Walker echoed Grant's recommendation that the Native Americans be secured on reservations of limited mineral or agricultural value so they could be educated and reformed. In November 1872, an eruption of settler-Indian violence in Oregon known as the Modoc War hastened Walker's disinterest in the position and he resigned as Commissioner on December 26, 1872 to take a faculty position at Yale. However, Walker also criticized his successors' graft, corruption, and abuse of power in subsequent years and published The Indian Question in 1874.   === Other engagements === 1876 was a busy year for Walker. Henry Brooks Adams sought to recruit Walker to be the Editor-in-Chief of his Boston Post after failing to recruit Horace White and Charles Nordhoff for the position. That spring, Walker was nominated to run for the Secretary of the State of Connecticut, running on a platform that would later be embodied by the "Mugwump" movement, but ultimately lost to Marvin H. Sanger by a margin of 7,200 votes out of 99,000 cast. In the summer, the faculty of Amherst attempted to recruit him to become the President, but the position went instead to the Rev. Julius Hawley Seelye to appease the more conservative trustees. Walker's rise to prominence was further accelerated by his appointment by Charles Francis Adams, Jr. as the Chief of the Bureau of Awards at the 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. Previous world expositions in Europe were fraught with national factionalism and a superabundance of awards. Walker imposed a much leaner operation replacing juries with judges and being more selective in awarding prizes. Walker won formal international recognition when he was named a "Knight Commander" by Sweden and Norway and a "Comendador" by Spain. He was also invited to serve as Assistant Commissioner General for the 1878 Paris Exposition. The Centennial Exposition affected Walker's later career by greatly increasing his interest in technical education as well as introducing him to MIT President John D. Runkle and Treasurer John C. Cummings.   === 1880 Census === Walker accepted a re-appointment as the superintendent of the 1880 Census because a new law, spearheaded by Congressman James A. Garfield, had been passed to allow him to appoint trained census enumerators free from political influence. Notably, the 1880 Census's results suggested population throughout the Southern states had increased improbably over Walker's 1870 census but an investigation revealed that the latter had been inaccurately enumerated. Walker publicized the discrepancy even as it effectively discredited the accuracy his 1870 work. The tenth Census resulted in the publication of twenty-two volumes, was popularly regarded as the best census of any up to that time, and definitively established Walker's reputation as the preeminent statistician in the nation. The Census was again delayed as a result of its size and was the subject of praise and criticism on its comprehensiveness and relevance. Walker also used the position as a bully pulpit to advocate for the creation of a permanent Census Bureau to not only ensure that professional statisticians could be trained and retained but that the information could be better popularized and disseminated. Following Garfield's 1880 election, there was wide speculation that he would name Walker to be Secretary of the Interior, but Walker had accepted the offer to become President of MIT in the spring of 1881 instead.   == Academic career ==  As his Census obligations diminished in 1872, Walker reconsidered becoming an editorialist and even briefly entertained the idea of becoming a shoe manufacturer with his brother-in-law back in North Brookfield. However, in October 1872, he was unanimously offered to fill Daniel Coit Gilman's vacated post at Yale's recently established Sheffield Scientific School led by the mineralogist George Jarvis Brush. While at Yale, Walker served as a member of the School Committee at New Haven (1877–1880) and the Connecticut Board of Education (1878–1881). Walker was awarded honorary or ad eundem degrees from Amherst (M.A. 1863, Ph.D. 1875, LL.D. 1882), Yale (M.A. 1873, LL.D. 1882), Harvard (LL.D. 1883), Columbia (LL.D. 1887), St. Andrews (LL.D. 1888), Dublin (LL.D. 1892), Halle (Ph.D. 1894), and Edinburgh (LL.D. 1896). He was elected as an honorary member of the Royal Statistical Society in 1875 and the National Academy of Sciences in 1878 where he served as the vice president from 1890 until his death. In addition to being elected as the president of the American Statistical Association in 1882, he helped found and launch the International Statistical Institute in 1885 and was named its "President-adjoint" in 1893. Walker also served as the inaugural president of the American Economic Association from 1885 to 1892. He took appointments as a lecturer at Johns Hopkins University (its first professor of economics) from 1877 to 1879, lecturer at Harvard University in 1882, 1883, and 1896, and trustee at Amherst College from 1879 to 1889.   === Wages-fund theory === Walker's scholarly contributions are widely recognized as having broadened, liberalized, and modernized economic and statistical theory with his contributions to wages, wealth distribution, money, and social economics. Although his arguments presage both neoclassical economics and institutionalism, he is not readily classified into either. As a Professor of Political Economy, his first major scholarly contribution was on his The Wages Question which set out to debunk the wage-fund doctrine as well as address the then-radical notion of obligations between the employer and the employed. His theory of wage distribution later came to be known as residual theory and set the stage for contributions by John Bates Clark on the marginal productivity theory. Despite Walker's advocacy of profit sharing and expansion of educational opportunities using trade and industrial schools, he was an avowed opponent of the nascent socialist movement and published critiques of Edward Bellamy's popular novel Looking Backward.   === Henry George debates === Beginning in 1879, Walker and the political economist Henry George engaged in a prominent debate over economic rents, land, money, and taxes. Based on a series of lectures delivered at Harvard, Walker published his Land and Its Rent in 1883 as a criticism of George's 1879 Progress and Poverty. Walker's position on international bimetallism influenced his arguments that the primary cause of economic depressions was not land speculation, but rather constriction of the money supply. Walker also criticized George's assumptions that technical progress was always labor saving and whether land held for speculation was unproductive or inefficient.   === Bimetallism === In August 1878, Walker represented the United States at the third International Monetary Conference in Paris while also attending the 1878 Exposition. Not only were the attempts by the United States to re-establish an international silver standard defeated, but Walker also had to scramble to complete the report on the Exposition in only four days. Although he returned to the U.S. in October disheartened by the failure of the conference and exhausted by his obligations at the Exposition, the trip had secured Walker a commanding national and international reputation. Walker published International Bimetallism in 1896 roundly critiquing the demonetization of silver out of political pressure and the impact of this change on prices and profits as well as worker employment and wages. Walker's reputation and position on the issue isolated him among public figures and made him a target in the press. The book was published in the midst of the 1896 presidential election pitting populist "silver" candidate William Jennings Bryan against the capitalist "gold" candidate William McKinley and the competing interpretations of the nation's leading economist's stance on the issue became a political football during the campaign. The presidential candidate and economist were not close allies as Walker advocated a double standard by all leading financial nations while Bryan argued for the United States' unilateral shift to a silver standard. The rift was heightened by the east-west divide on the issue as well as Walker's general distaste for political populism; Walker's position was supported by conservative bankers and statesmen like Henry Lee Higginson, George F. Hoar, John M. Forbes, and Henry Cabot Lodge.   === Other interests === Political Economy, the first edition published in 1883, was one of the most widely used textbooks of the 19th century as a component of the American Science Series. Robert Solow criticized the third edition (1888) for being devoid of facts, figures, and mostly full of off-the-cuff judgments on the practices and capacities of native Americans and immigrants, but generally embodying the state of the art of economics at the time. Walker also took an interest in demographics later in his career, particularly towards the issues of immigration and birth rates. He published The Growth of the United States in 1882 and Restriction on Immigration in 1896 arguing for increasing restrictions out of concern about the diminished industrial and intellectual capacity of the most recent wave of immigrants. Walker also argued that unrestricted immigration was the major reason behind nineteenth-century native American fertility decline, but while the argument was politically popular and became widely accepted in mobilizing restrictions on immigration, it rested upon a surprisingly facile statistical analysis that was later refuted. Writing on immigrants from southern Italy, Hungary, Austria, and Russia in The Atlantic, Walker claimed,  "The entrance into our political, social, and industrial life of such vast masses of peasantry, degraded below our utmost conceptions, is a matter which no intelligent patriot can look upon without the gravest apprehension and alarm. These people have no history behind them which is of a nature to give encouragement. They have none of the inherited instincts and tendencies which made it comparatively easy to deal with the immigration of the olden time. They are beaten men from beaten races; representing the worst failures in the struggle for existence. Centuries are against them, as centuries were on the side of those who formerly came to us. They have none of the ideas and aptitudes which fit men to take up readily and easily the problem of self-care and self-government, such as belong to those who are descended from the tribes that met under the oak-trees of old Germany to make laws and choose chieftains."  Based upon his experiences in the military, Walker published two books describing the history of the Second Army Corps (1886) as well as a biography of General Winfield Scott Hancock (1884). Walker was elected Commander of the Massachusetts Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States in 1883 was also the President of the National Military Historical Association.   == MIT presidency ==  Established in 1861 and opened in 1865, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) saw its financial stability severely undermined following the Panic of 1873 and subsequent Long Depression. Seventy-five-year-old founder William Barton Rogers was elected interim president in 1878 after John Daniel Runkle stepped down. Rogers wrote Walker in June 1880 to offer him the Presidency, and Walker evidently debated the opportunity for some time as Rogers sent follow-up inquiries in January and February 1881 requesting his committed decision. Walker ultimately accepted in early May and was formally elected President by the MIT Corporation on May 25, 1881, resigning his Yale appointment in June and his Census directorship in November. However, the assassination attempt on President Garfield in July 1881 and the ensuing illness before Garfield's death in September upset Walker's transition and delayed his formal introduction to the faculty of MIT until November 5, 1881. On May 30, 1882, during Walker's first Commencement exercises, Rogers died mid-speech where his last words were famously "bituminous coal".  MIT's inability to secure a more stable financial footing during this era can largely be attributed to the existence of the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard. Given the choice between funding technological research at the oldest university in the nation, or at an independent and adolescent institution, potential benefactors were indifferent or even hostile to funding MIT's competing mission. Earlier overtures from Harvard President Charles William Eliot towards consolidation of the two schools were rejected or disrupted by Rogers in 1870 and 1878. Despite his tenure at the analogous Sheffield School of Yale University, Walker remained committed to MIT's independence from a larger institution. Walker also repeatedly received overtures from Leland Stanford to become the first president of his new university in Palo Alto, California, but Walker remained committed to MIT owing to his Boston upbringing.   === Aid and expansion === In light of the difficulties in raising capital for these expansions and despite MIT's privately endowed status, Walker and other members of the Corporation lobbied the Massachusetts legislature for a $200,000 grant to aid in the industrial development of the Commonwealth ($4,446,000 in 2009 dollars). After intensive negotiations that called upon Walker's extensive connections and civic experience, in 1887 the legislature made a grant of $300,000 over two years to the Institute, which would lead to a total of $1.6 million in grants from the Commonwealth before the practice was discontinued in 1921.  Walker sought to erect a new building to address the increasingly cramped conditions of the original Boylston Street campus located near Copley Square, in the increasingly fashionable and crowded Back Bay neighborhood of Boston. Because the stipulations of the original land grant prevented MIT from covering more than two-ninths of its current lot, Walker announced his intention to build the industrial expansion on a lot directly across from the Trinity Church fully intending that expected opposition would lead to favorable terms for selling the proposed land and funding construction elsewhere. With the financial health of the Institute only beginning to recover, Walker began construction on the partially-funded expansion, fully expecting the immediacy of the project to be a persuasive tool for raising its funds. The strategy was only partially successful, as the 1883 building had laboratory facilities that were second-to-none but also lacked the outward architectural grandeur of its sister building and was generally considered an eyesore on its surroundings. Mechanical shops were moved out of the original Rogers Building in the mid-1880s to accommodate other programs, and in 1892 the Institute began construction on another Copley Square building. New programs were also launched under Walker's tenure: Electrical Engineering in 1882, Chemical Engineering in 1888, Sanitary Engineering in 1889, Geology in 1890, Naval Architecture in 1893.   === Reforms === Although Walker continued Census-related activities, he began to lecture on political economy as well as establishing a new general course of study (Course IX) emphasizing economics, history, law, English, and modern languages. Walker also set out to reform and expand the Institute's organization by creating a smaller Executive Committee, apart from the fifty-member Corporation, to handle regular administrative issues. Walker emphasized the importance of faculty governance by regularly attending their meetings and seeking their advice on major decisions.  Walker also sought to improve the state of student life and alumni relations by supporting the creation of a gymnasium, dormitories, and the Technology Club, which served to foster a stronger identity and loyalty among the largely commuter student body. He also won considerable praise from the student body by reducing the required time spent for recitation and preparation, limiting the faculty to examinations lasting no longer than three hours, expanding entrance examinations to other cities, starting a summer curriculum, and launching masters and doctoral graduate degree programs. These reforms were largely a response to Walker's on-going defense of the Institute and its curriculum from outside accusations of overwork, poor writing, inapplicable skills, and status as a "mere" trade school. Between 1881 and 1897, enrollments quadrupled from 302 to 1,198 students, annual degrees granted increased from 28 to 179, faculty appointments quadrupled from 38 to 156, and the endowment grew thirteenfold from $137,000 to $1,798,000 ($3,046,000 to $46,367,000 in 2009 dollars). While MIT is a private institution, Walker's extensive civic activities as President set the precedent for future presidents to use the post to fulfill civic and cultural obligations throughout Boston. He served as a member of the Massachusetts Board of Education (1882–1890), Boston School Committee (1885–1888), Boston Art Commission (1885–1897), Boston Park Commission (1890–1896), Massachusetts Historical Society (1883–1897), and a trustee of the Boston Public Library in 1896. Walker was committed to a variety of reforms in public and normal schools such as secular curricula, expanding the emphasis on arithmetic, reducing the emphasis on ineffectual home exercises, and increasing the pay and training of teachers.   == Personal life ==  Walker married Exene Evelyn Stoughton on August 16, 1865 (born October 11, 1840). They had five sons and two daughters together: Stoughton (b. June 3, 1866), Lucy (b. September 1, 1867), Francis (b. 1870–1871), Ambrose (b. December 28, 1870), Eveline (b. 1875–1876), Etheredge (b. 1876–1877), and Stuart (b. 1878–1879). Walker was an avid spectator and supporter of college football and baseball, and was a regular Yale enthusiast at the annual Harvard-Yale football game, even during his MIT presidency. Following a trip to a dedication in the "wilderness of Northern New York" in December 1896, Walker returned exhausted and ill. He died on January 5, 1897 as a result of apoplexy. His funeral service was conducted at Trinity Church, and Walker was buried at Walnut Grove cemetery in North Brookfield, Massachusetts. His grave can be found in Section 1 Lot 72.   == Legacy ==  Following Walker's death, alumni and students began to raise funds to construct a monument to him and his fifteen years as leader of the university. Although the funds were easily raised, plans were delayed for over two decades as MIT made plans to move to a new campus on the western bank of the Charles River in Cambridge. The new Beaux-Arts campus opened in 1916, and featured a neo-classical Walker Memorial building housing a gymnasium, students' club and lounge, and a commons room. Despite his prominence and leadership in the fields of economics, statistics, and political economy, Walker's Course IX on General Studies was dissolved shortly after his death, and a seventy-year debate followed over the appropriate role and scope of humanistic and social studies at MIT. Graduation requirements changed over the years, but have always included some number of courses in the humanities. Since 1975, all undergraduate students are required to take eight classes distributed across the MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences before receiving their degrees. To address continuing concerns about poor communications skills, a Communication Requirement has been added for two of the classes taken in a designated major to be "communication-intensive", including "substantial instruction and practice in oral presentation". Beginning in 1947, the American Economic Association recognized the lifetime achievement of an individual economist with a "Francis A. Walker Medal". The quinquennial award was discontinued in 1982 after the creation of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences effectively made it superfluous. The medal was awarded to Wesley Clair Mitchell in 1947, John Maurice Clark in 1952, Frank Knight in 1957, Jacob Viner in 1962, Alvin Hansen in 1967, Theodore Schultz in 1972, and Simon Kuznets in 1977.   == Principal works == The Indian Question (1874) The Wages Question: A treatise on Wages and the Wages Class (1876) Money (1878) Money in its Relation to Trade and Industry (1879) Political Economy (first edition, 1883) Land and its Rent (1883) History of the Second Army Corps (1886) Life of General Hancock (1894) The Making of the Nation (1895) International Bimetallism (1896)   == See also ==  List of American Civil War generals List of Massachusetts generals in the American Civil War   == Notes ==   == References == "Statisticians in History: Francis Amasa Walker". American Statistical Association. Retrieved 2009-06-18.  Adelstein, Richard P. (1988). "Mind and Hand: Economics and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology". In William J. Barber. Economists and higher learning in the nineteenth century. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 0-8195-5176-7.  Billings, John S. (1902). "Biographical Memoir of Francis Amasa Walker 1840–1897" (PDF). National Academy Press.  Cord, Steven B. (2003). "Walker: the General Leads the Charge". The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 62 (5): 231–243. doi:10.1111/j.0002-9246.2003.00262.x.  Dewey, Davis R. (1897). "Francis A. Walker as a Public Man". In Albert Shaw. The Review of Reviews, January–June 1897 XV. New York: The Review of Reviews Co. pp. 166–171.  Dunbar, Charles F. (July 1897). "The Career of Francis Amasa Walker". Quarterly Journal of Economics 11 (4): 436–448. JSTOR 1880719.  Eicher, John H.; Eicher, David J. (2001). Civil War High Commands. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-3641-3.  Fitzpatrick, Paul J. (1957). "Leading American Statisticians in the Nineteenth Century". Journal of the American Statistical Association 52 (279): 301–321. doi:10.2307/2280901.  Fonseca, Gonçalo L. "Francis Amasa Walker". History of Economic Thought. Retrieved 2009.  Hadley, Arthur Twining (1897). "Francis A. Walker's Contributions to Economic Theory". Political Science Quarterly (The Academy of Political Science) 12 (2): 295–308. doi:10.2307/2140123. JSTOR 2140123.  Harnwell, Susan L. (2008). "Francis Amasa Walker". 15th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry in the Civil War.  Hodgson, Dennis (1992). "Ideological Currents and the Interpretation of Demographic Trends: The Case of Francis Amasa Walker". Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 28 (1): 28–44. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(199201)28:1<28::AID-JHBS2300280103>3.0.CO;2-L.  Hunt, Jack R.; Brown (1990). Brevet Brigadier Generals in Blue. Gaithersburg, MD: Olde Soldier Books. ISBN 1-56013-002-4.  Kinnahan, Thomas P. (2008). "Charting Progress: Francis Amasa Walker's Statistical Atlas of the United States and Narratives of Western Expansion". American Quarterly 60 (2): 399–423. doi:10.1353/aq.0.0012.  Munroe, James P. (1923). A Life of Francis Amasa Walker. New York: Henry Holt & Company.  Newton, B. (1968). The Economics of Francis Amasa Walker: American Economics in Transition. New York: A. M. Kelley.  Parrington, Vernon Louis (1927). "Francis A. Walker". Main Currents in American Thought 3. Harcourt, Brace, and Co. pp. 111–117. ISBN 0-7812-5283-0.  Spencer, Joseph Jansen (1897). "General Francis A. Walker: A Character Sketch". In Albert Shaw. The Review of Reviews, January–June 1897 XV. New York: The Review of Reviews Co. pp. 159–166.  Solow, Robert M. (1987). "What do we know that Francis Amasa Walker didn't?". History of Political Economy 19 (2): 183–189. doi:10.1215/00182702-19-2-183.  A.W. Ward, W.P. Trent; et al., eds. (1907–1921). "Francis Amasa Walker". The Cambridge history of English and American literature. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.  Whitaker, John K. (1997). "Enemies or Allies? Henry George and Francis Amasa Walker One Century Later". Journal of Economic Literature 35 (4): 1891–1915.  Wright, Carroll D. (1897). "Francis Amasa Walker". Publications of the American Statistical Association (American Statistical Association) 5 (38): 245–275. doi:10.2307/2276668. JSTOR 2276668.    == External links == Biographical note – MIT Archives Biographical note – New School Works by Francis Amasa Walker at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Francis Amasa Walker at Internet Archive  "Walker, Amasa". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.   "Walker, Amasa". Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography. 1889.   "Walker, Francis Amasa". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.

Sir Francis Galton, FRS (/ˈfrɑːnsɪs ˈɡɔːltən/; 16 February 1822 – 17 January 1911) was an English Victorian statistician, progressive, polymath, sociologist, psychologist, anthropologist, eugenicist, tropical explorer, geographer, inventor, meteorologist, proto-geneticist and psychometrician. He was knighted in 1909. Galton produced over 340 papers and books. He also created the statistical concept of correlation and widely promoted regression toward the mean. He was the first to apply statistical methods to the study of human differences and inheritance of intelligence, and introduced the use of questionnaires and surveys for collecting data on human communities, which he needed for genealogical and biographical works and for his anthropometric studies. He was a pioneer in eugenics, coining the term itself and the phrase "nature versus nurture". His book Hereditary Genius (1869) was the first social scientific attempt to study genius and greatness. As an investigator of the human mind, he founded psychometrics (the science of measuring mental faculties) and differential psychology and the lexical hypothesis of personality. He devised a method for classifying fingerprints that proved useful in forensic science. He also conducted research on the power of prayer, concluding it had none by its null effects on the longevity of those prayed for. His quest for the scientific principles of diverse phenomena extended even to the optimal method for making tea. As the initiator of scientific meteorology, he devised the first weather map, proposed a theory of anticyclones, and was the first to establish a complete record of short-term climatic phenomena on a European scale. He also invented the Galton Whistle for testing differential hearing ability. He was Charles Darwin's half-cousin.   == Early life == Galton was born at "The Larches", a large house in the Sparkbrook area of Birmingham, England, built on the site of "Fair Hill", the former home of Joseph Priestley, which the botanist William Withering had renamed. He was Charles Darwin's half-cousin, sharing the common grandparent Erasmus Darwin. His father was Samuel Tertius Galton, son of Samuel "John" Galton. The Galtons were famous and highly successful Quaker gun-manufacturers and bankers, while the Darwins were distinguished in medicine and science. He was cousin of Douglas Strutt Galton and half-cousin of Charles Darwin and both families boasted Fellows of the Royal Society and members who loved to invent in their spare time. Both Erasmus Darwin and Samuel Galton were founding members of the famous Lunar Society of Birmingham, whose members included Boulton, Watt, Wedgwood, Priestley, Edgeworth, and other distinguished scientists and industrialists. Likewise, both families were known for their literary talent: Erasmus Darwin composed lengthy technical treatises in verse; Galton's aunt Mary Anne Galton wrote on aesthetics and religion, and her notable autobiography detailed the unique environment of her childhood populated by Lunar Society members.  Galton was by many accounts a child prodigy – he was reading by the age of two; at age five he knew some Greek, Latin and long division, and by the age of six he had moved on to adult books, including Shakespeare for pleasure, and poetry, which he quoted at length (Bulmer 2003, p. 4). Later in life, Galton would propose a connection between genius and insanity based on his own experience. He stated, "Men who leave their mark on the world are very often those who, being gifted and full of nervous power, are at the same time haunted and driven by a dominant idea, and are therefore within a measurable distance of insanity" Galton attended King Edward's School, Birmingham, but chafed at the narrow classical curriculum and left at 16. His parents pressed him to enter the medical profession, and he studied for two years at Birmingham General Hospital and King's College London Medical School. He followed this up with mathematical studies at Trinity College, University of Cambridge, from 1840 to early 1844. According to the records of the United Grand Lodge of England, it was in February 1844 that Galton became a freemason at the so-called Scientific lodge, held at the Red Lion Inn in Cambridge, progressing through the three masonic degrees as follows: Apprentice, 5 February 1844; Fellow Craft, 11 March 1844; Master Mason, 13 May 1844. A curious note in the record states: "Francis Galton Trinity College student, gained his certificate 13 March 1845". One of Galton's masonic certificates from Scientific lodge can be found among his papers at University College, London. A severe nervous breakdown altered Galton's original intention to try for honours. He elected instead to take a "poll" (pass) B.A. degree, like his half-cousin Charles Darwin (Bulmer 2003, p. 5). (Following the Cambridge custom, he was awarded an M.A. without further study, in 1847.) He then briefly resumed his medical studies. The death of his father in 1844 had left him financially independent but emotionally destitute, and he terminated his medical studies entirely, turning to foreign travel, sport and technical invention. In his early years Galton was an enthusiastic traveller, and made a notable solo trip through Eastern Europe to Constantinople, before going up to Cambridge. In 1845 and 1846 he went to Egypt and travelled down the Nile to Khartoum in the Sudan, and from there to Beirut, Damascus and down the Jordan. In 1850 he joined the Royal Geographical Society, and over the next two years mounted a long and difficult expedition into then little-known South West Africa (now Namibia). He wrote a successful book on his experience, "Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa". He was awarded the Royal Geographical Society's Founder's Gold Medal in 1853 and the Silver Medal of the French Geographical Society for his pioneering cartographic survey of the region (Bulmer 2003, p. 16). This established his reputation as a geographer and explorer. He proceeded to write the best-selling The Art of Travel, a handbook of practical advice for the Victorian on the move, which went through many editions and is still in print. In January 1853 Galton met Louisa Jane Butler (1822–1897) at his neighbour's home and they were married on 1 August 1853. The union of 43 years proved childless.   == Middle years == Galton was a polymath who made important contributions in many fields of science, including meteorology (the anti-cyclone and the first popular weather maps), statistics (regression and correlation), psychology (synaesthesia), biology (the nature and mechanism of heredity), and criminology (fingerprints). Much of this was influenced by his penchant for counting or measuring. Galton prepared the first weather map published in The Times (1 April 1875, showing the weather from the previous day, 31 March), now a standard feature in newspapers worldwide. He became very active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science, presenting many papers on a wide variety of topics at its meetings from 1858 to 1899 (Bulmer 2003, p. 29). He was the general secretary from 1863 to 1867, president of the Geographical section in 1867 and 1872, and president of the Anthropological Section in 1877 and 1885. He was active on the council of the Royal Geographical Society for over forty years, in various committees of the Royal Society, and on the Meteorological Council. James McKeen Cattell, a student of Wilhelm Wundt who had been reading Galton's articles, decided he wanted to study under him. He eventually built a professional relationship with Galton, measuring subjects and working together on research. In 1888, Galton established a lab in the science galleries of the South Kensington Museum. In Galton's lab, participants could be measured to gain knowledge of their strengths and weaknesses. Galton also used these data for his own research. He would typically charge people a small fee for his services. During this time, Galton wrote a controversial letter to the Times titled 'Africa for the Chinese', where he argued that the Chinese, as a race capable of high civilisation and (in his opinion) only temporarily stunted by the recent failures of Chinese dynasties, should be encouraged to immigrate to Africa and displace the supposedly inferior aboriginal blacks.   == Heredity and eugenics ==  The publication by his cousin Charles Darwin of The Origin of Species in 1859 was an event that changed Galton's life (Forrest 1974, p. 84). He came to be gripped by the work, especially the first chapter on "Variation under Domestication," concerning animal breeding. Galton devoted much of the rest of his life to exploring variation in human populations and its implications, at which Darwin had only hinted. In so doing, he established a research program which embraced multiple aspects of human variation, from mental characteristics to height; from facial images to fingerprint patterns. This required inventing novel measures of traits, devising large-scale collection of data using those measures, and in the end, the discovery of new statistical techniques for describing and understanding the data. Galton was interested at first in the question of whether human ability was hereditary, and proposed to count the number of the relatives of various degrees of eminent men. If the qualities were hereditary, he reasoned, there should be more eminent men among the relatives than among the general population. To test this, he invented the methods of historiometry. Galton obtained extensive data from a broad range of biographical sources which he tabulated and compared in various ways. This pioneering work was described in detail in his book Hereditary Genius in 1869. Here he showed, among other things, that the numbers of eminent relatives dropped off when going from the first degree to the second degree relatives, and from the second degree to the third. He took this as evidence of the inheritance of abilities. Galton recognised the limitations of his methods in these two works, and believed the question could be better studied by comparisons of twins. His method envisaged testing to see if twins who were similar at birth diverged in dissimilar environments, and whether twins dissimilar at birth converged when reared in similar environments. He again used the method of questionnaires to gather various sorts of data, which were tabulated and described in a paper The history of twins in 1875. In so doing he anticipated the modern field of behaviour genetics, which relies heavily on twin studies. He concluded that the evidence favoured nature rather than nurture. He also proposed adoption studies, including trans-racial adoption studies, to separate the effects of heredity and environment. Galton recognised that cultural circumstances influenced the capability of a civilisation's citizens, and their reproductive success. In Hereditary Genius, he envisaged a situation conducive to resilient and enduring civilisation as follows:  The best form of civilization in respect to the improvement of the race, would be one in which society was not costly; where incomes were chiefly derived from professional sources, and not much through inheritance; where every lad had a chance of showing his abilities, and, if highly gifted, was enabled to achieve a first-class education and entrance into professional life, by the liberal help of the exhibitions and scholarships which he had gained in his early youth; where marriage was held in as high honour as in ancient Jewish times; where the pride of race was encouraged (of course I do not refer to the nonsensical sentiment of the present day, that goes under that name); where the weak could find a welcome and a refuge in celibate monasteries or sisterhoods, and lastly, where the better sort of emigrants and refugees from other lands were invited and welcomed, and their descendants naturalised. (p. 362)  Galton invented the term eugenics in 1883 and set down many of his observations and conclusions in a book, Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development. He believed that a scheme of 'marks' for family merit should be defined, and early marriage between families of high rank be encouraged by provision of monetary incentives. He pointed out some of the tendencies in British society, such as the late marriages of eminent people, and the paucity of their children, which he thought were dysgenic. He advocated encouraging eugenic marriages by supplying able couples with incentives to have children. On 29 October 1901, Galton chose to address eugenic issues when he delivered the second Huxley lecture at the Royal Anthropological Institute The Eugenics Review, the journal of the Eugenics Education Society, commenced publication in 1909. Galton, the Honorary President of the society, wrote the foreword for the first volume. The First International Congress of Eugenics was held in July 1912. Winston Churchill and Carls Elliot were among the attendees.   == Empirical test of pangenesis and Lamarckism == Galton conducted wide-ranging inquiries into heredity which led him to challenge Charles Darwin's hypothetical theory of pangenesis. Darwin had proposed as part of this hypothesis that certain particles, which he called "gemmules" moved throughout the body and were also responsible for the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Galton, in consultation with Darwin, set out to see if they were transported in the blood. In a long series of experiments in 1869 to 1871, he transfused the blood between dissimilar breeds of rabbits, and examined the features of their offspring. He found no evidence of characters transmitted in the transfused blood (Bulmer 2003, pp. 116–118). Darwin challenged the validity of Galton's experiment, giving his reasons in an article published in Nature where he wrote:  Now, in the chapter on Pangenesis in my Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication I have not said one word about the blood, or about any fluid proper to any circulating system. It is, indeed, obvious that the presence of gemmules in the blood can form no necessary part of my hypothesis; for I refer in illustration of it to the lowest animals, such as the Protozoa, which do not possess blood or any vessels; and I refer to plants in which the fluid, when present in the vessels, cannot be considered as true blood." He goes on to admit: "Nevertheless, when I first heard of Mr. Galton's experiments, I did not sufficiently reflect on the subject, and saw not the difficulty of believing in the presence of gemmules in the blood.  Galton explicitly rejected the idea of the inheritance of acquired characteristics (Lamarckism), and was an early proponent of "hard heredity" through selection alone. He came close to rediscovering Mendel's particulate theory of inheritance, but was prevented from making the final breakthrough in this regard because of his focus on continuous, rather than discrete, traits (now known as polygenic traits). He went on to found the biometric approach to the study of heredity, distinguished by its use of statistical techniques to study continuous traits and population-scale aspects of heredity. This approach was later taken up enthusiastically by Karl Pearson and W.F.R. Weldon; together, they founded the highly influential journal Biometrika in 1901. (R.A. Fisher would later show how the biometrical approach could be reconciled with the Mendelian approach. ) The statistical techniques that Galton invented (correlation, regression—see below) and phenomena he established (regression to the mean) formed the basis of the biometric approach and are now essential tools in all the social sciences.   == Innovations in statistics and psychological theory ==   === Historiometry === The method used in Hereditary Genius has been described as the first example of historiometry. To bolster these results, and to attempt to make a distinction between 'nature' and 'nurture' (he was the first to apply this phrase to the topic), he devised a questionnaire that he sent out to 190 Fellows of the Royal Society. He tabulated characteristics of their families, such as birth order and the occupation and race of their parents. He attempted to discover whether their interest in science was 'innate' or due to the encouragements of others. The studies were published as a book, English men of science: their nature and nurture, in 1874. In the end, it promoted the nature versus nurture question, though it did not settle it, and provided some fascinating data on the sociology of scientists of the time.   === The Lexical Hypothesis === Sir Francis was the first scientist to recognise what is now known as the Lexical hypothesis. This is the idea that the most salient and socially relevant personality differences in people's lives will eventually become encoded into language. The hypothesis further suggests that by sampling language, it is possible to derive a comprehensive taxonomy of human personality traits.   === The questionnaire === Galton's inquiries into the mind involved detailed recording of people's subjective accounts of whether and how their minds dealt with phenomena such as mental imagery. To better elicit this information, he pioneered the use of the questionnaire. In one study, he asked his fellow members of the Royal Society of London to describe mental images that they experienced. In another, he collected in-depth surveys from eminent scientists for a work examining the effects of nature and nurture on the propensity toward scientific thinking.   === Variance and standard deviation === Core to any statistical analysis is the concept that measurements vary: they have both a central tendency, or mean, and a spread around this central value, or variance. In the late 1860s, Galton conceived of a measure to quantify normal variation: the standard deviation. Galton was a keen observer. In 1906, visiting a livestock fair, he stumbled upon an intriguing contest. An ox was on display, and the villagers were invited to guess the animal's weight after it was slaughtered and dressed. Nearly 800 participated, but not one person hit the exact mark: 1,198 pounds. Galton stated that "the middlemost estimate expresses the vox populi, every other estimate being condemned as too low or too high by a majority of the voters", and calculated this value (in modern terminology, the median) as 1,207 pounds. To his surprise, this was within 0.8% of the weight measured by the judges. Soon afterwards, he acknowledged that the mean of the guesses, at 1,197 pounds, was even more accurate. The same year, Galton suggested in a letter to the journal Nature a better method of cutting a round cake by avoiding making radial incisions.   === Experimental derivation of the normal distribution === Studying variation, Galton invented the quincunx, a pachinko-like device, also known as the bean machine, as a tool for demonstrating the law of error and the normal distribution (Bulmer 2003, p. 4).   === Bivariate normal distribution === He also discovered the properties of the bivariate normal distribution and its relationship to regression analysis.   === Correlation and regression ===  In 1846, the French physicist Auguste Bravais (1811–1863) first developed what would become the correlation coefficient. After examining forearm and height measurements, Galton independently rediscovered the concept of correlation in 1888 (Bulmer 2003, pp. 191–196) and demonstrated its application in the study of heredity, anthropology, and psychology. Galton's later statistical study of the probability of extinction of surnames led to the concept of Galton–Watson stochastic processes (Bulmer 2003, pp. 182–184). This is now a core of modern statistics and regression. Galton invented the use of the regression line (Bulmer 2003, p. 184) and for the choice of r (for reversion or regression) to represent the correlation coefficient. In the 1870s and 1880s he was a pioneer in the use of normal theory to fit histograms to actual tabulated data, much of which he collected himself: for instance large samples of sibling and parental height. Consideration of the results from these empirical studies lead to his further insights into evolution, natural selection, and regression to the mean.   === Regression to mediocrity === Galton was the first to describe and explain the common phenomenon of regression toward the mean, which he first observed in his experiments on the size of the seeds of successive generations of sweet peas. The conditions under which regression toward the mean occurs depend on the way the term is mathematically defined. Galton first observed the phenomenon in the context of simple linear regression of data points. Galton developed the following model: pellets fall through a quincunx or "bean machine" forming a normal distribution centered directly under their entrance point. These pellets could then be released down into a second gallery (corresponding to a second measurement occasion. Galton then asked the reverse question "from where did these pellets come?"  The answer was not "on average directly above". Rather it was "on average, more towards the middle", for the simple reason that there were more pellets above it towards the middle that could wander left than there were in the left extreme that could wander to the right, inwards (p. 477)    === Theories of perception === Galton went beyond measurement and summary to attempt to explain the phenomena he observed. Among such developments, he proposed an early theory of ranges of sound and hearing, and collected large quantities of anthropometric data from the public through his popular and long-running Anthropometric Laboratory, which he established in 1884, and where he studied over 9,000 people. It was not until 1985 that these data were analysed in their entirety.   === Differential psychology === Galton's study of human abilities ultimately led to the foundation of differential psychology and the formulation of the first mental tests. He was interested in measuring humans in every way possible. This included measuring their ability to make sensory discrimination which he assumed was linked to intellectual prowess. Galton suggested that individual differences in general ability are reﬂected in performance on relatively simple sensory capacities and in speed of reaction to a stimulus, variables that could be objectively measured by tests of sensory discrimination and reaction time. He also measured how quickly people reacted which he later linked to internal wiring which ultimately limited intelligence ability. Throughout his research Galton assumed that people who reacted faster were more intelligent than others.   === Composite photography === Galton also devised a technique called "composite portraiture" (produced by superimposing multiple photographic portraits of individuals' faces registered on their eyes) to create an average face (see averageness). In the 1990s, a hundred years after his discovery, much psychological research has examined the attractiveness of these faces, an aspect that Galton had remarked on in his original lecture. Others, including Sigmund Freud in his work on dreams, picked up Galton's suggestion that these composites might represent a useful metaphor for an Ideal type or a concept of a "natural kind" (see Eleanor Rosch)—such as Jewish men, criminals, patients with tuberculosis, etc.—onto the same photographic plate, thereby yielding a blended whole, or "composite", that he hoped could generalise the facial appearance of his subject into an "average" or "central type". (See also entry Modern physiognomy under Physiognomy). This work began in the 1880s while the Jewish scholar Joseph Jacobs studied anthropology and statistics with Francis Galton. Jacobs asked Galton to create a composite photograph of a Jewish type. One of Jacobs' first publications that used Galton's composite imagery was "The Jewish Type, and Galton's Composite Photographs," Photographic News, 29, (24 April 1885): 268–269. Galton hoped his technique would aid medical diagnosis, and even criminology through the identification of typical criminal faces. However, his technique did not prove useful and fell into disuse, although after much work on it including by photographers Lewis Hine and John L. Lovell and Arthur Batut.   == Fingerprints == In a Royal Institution paper in 1888 and three books (Finger Prints, 1892; Decipherment of Blurred Finger Prints, 1893; and Fingerprint Directories, 1895), Galton estimated the probability of two persons having the same fingerprint and studied the heritability and racial differences in fingerprints. He wrote about the technique (inadvertently sparking a controversy between Herschel and Faulds that was to last until 1917), identifying common pattern in fingerprints and devising a classification system that survives to this day. The method of identifying criminals by their fingerprints had been introduced in the 1860s by Sir William James Herschel in India, and their potential use in forensic work was first proposed by Dr Henry Faulds in 1880, but Galton was the first to place the study on a scientific footing, which assisted its acceptance by the courts (Bulmer 2003, p. 35). Galton pointed out that there were specific types of fingerprint patterns. He described and classified them into eight broad categories: 1: plain arch, 2: tented arch, 3: simple loop, 4: central pocket loop, 5: double loop, 6: lateral pocket loop, 7: plain whorl, and 8: accidental.   == Final years ==  In an effort to reach a wider audience, Galton worked on a novel entitled Kantsaywhere from May until December 1910. The novel described a utopia organised by a eugenic religion, designed to breed fitter and smarter humans. His unpublished notebooks show that this was an expansion of material he had been composing since at least 1901. He offered it to Methuen for publication, but they showed little enthusiasm. Galton wrote to his niece that it should be either "smothered or superseded". His niece appears to have burnt most of the novel, offended by the love scenes, but large fragments survived.   == Honours and impact == Over the course of his career Galton received many major awards, including the Copley Medal of the Royal Society (1910). He received in 1853 the Founder's Medal, the highest award of the Royal Geographical Society, for his explorations and map-making of southwest Africa. He was elected a member of the prestigious Athenaeum Club in 1855 and made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1860. His autobiography also lists the following: Silver Medal, French Geographical Society (1854) Gold Medal of the Royal Society (1886) Officier de l'Instruction Publique, France (1891) D.C.L. Oxford (1894) Sc.D. (Honorary), Cambridge (1895) Huxley Medal, Anthropological Institute (1901) Elected Hon. Fellow Trinity College, Cambridge (1902) Darwin Medal, Royal Society (1902) Linnean Society of London's Darwin–Wallace Medal (1908) Galton was knighted in 1909. His statistical heir Karl Pearson, first holder of the Galton Chair of Eugenics at University College London (now Galton Chair of Genetics), wrote a three-volume biography of Galton, in four parts, after his death (Pearson 1914, 1924, 1930). In the early days of IQ testing, Lewis Terman estimated that Galton's childhood IQ was about 200, based on the fact that he consistently performed mentally at roughly twice his chronological age (Forrest 1974). (This follows the original definition of IQ as mental age divided by chronological age, rather than the modern definition based on the standard distribution and standard deviation.) The flowering plant genus Galtonia was named in his honour.   == Major works == Galton, Francis (1853). Narrative of an explorer in South Africa. London.  Galton, F. (1869). Hereditary Genius. London: Macmillan. Galton, F (1883). Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development. London: J.M. Dent & Company Galton, F (1889). Natural Inheritance. London: Macmillan.   == See also ==  A Large Attendance in the Antechamber, a play about Galton Darwin–Wedgwood family Efficacy of prayer Eugenics in the United States Historiometry Racial hygiene Galton's problem   == References ==   == Further reading == Brookes, Martin (2004). Extreme Measures: The Dark Visions and Bright Ideas of Francis Galton. Bloomsbury.  Bulmer, Michael (2003). Francis Galton: Pioneer of Heredity and Biometry. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-7403-3.  Cowan, Ruth Schwartz. Sir Francis Galton and the Study of Heredity in the Nineteenth Century. Garland (1985). Originally Cowan's PhD dissertation, Johns Hopkins University, (1969).  Ewen, Stuart and Elizabeth Ewen (2006; 2008) "Nordic Nightmares," pp. 257–325 in Typecasting: On the Arts and Sciences of Human Inequality, Seven Stories Press. ISBN 978-1-58322-735-0 Forrest, D.W. (1974). Francis Galton: The Life and Work of a Victorian Genius. Taplinger. ISBN 0-8008-2682-5.  Galton, Francis (1909). Memories of My Life:. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company.  Gillham, Nicholas Wright (2001). A Life of Sir Francis Galton: From African Exploration to the Birth of Eugenics, Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514365-5 Pearson, Karl. "The life, letters and labours of Francis Galton (3 vols. 1914, 1924, 1930)".  Daniëlle Posthuma, Eco J. C. De Geus, Wim F. C. Baaré, Hilleke E. Hulshoff Pol, René S. Kahn & Dorret I. Boomsma (2002). "The association between brain volume and intelligence is of genetic origin". Nature Neuroscience 5 (2): 83–84. doi:10.1038/nn0202-83. PMID 11818967.  Quinche, Nicolas, Crime, Science et Identité. Anthologie des textes fondateurs de la criminalistique européenne (1860–1930). Genève: Slatkine, 2006, 368p., passim. Stigler, S. M. (2010). "Darwin, Galton and the Statistical Enlightenment". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 173 (3): 469–482. doi:10.1111/j.1467-985X.2010.00643.x.    == External links == Francis Galton at Find a Grave Galton's Complete Works at Galton.org (including all his published books, all his published scientific papers, and popular periodical and newspaper writing, as well as other previously unpublished work and biographical material). Works by Francis Galton at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Francis Galton at Internet Archive Works by Francis Galton at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  The Galton Machine or Board demonstrating the normal distribution on YouTube Portraits of Galton from the National Portrait Gallery (United Kingdom) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Francis Galton", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science History and Mathematics Human Memory – University of Amsterdam website with test based on the work of Galton An 8-foot-tall (2.4 m) Probability Machine (named Sir Francis Galton) comparing stock market returns to the randomness of the beans dropping through the quincunx pattern. on YouTube from Index Funds Advisors IFA.com Catalogue of the Galton papers held at UCL Archives "Composite Portraits", by Francis Galton, 1878 (as published in the Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, volume 8). "Enquiries into Human Faculty and its Development", book by Francis Galton, 1883. The Scientific Way to Cut a Cake on YouTube, demonstrated by Alex Bellos

Francis Ysidro Edgeworth FBA (8 February 1845 – 13 February 1926) was an Anglo-Irish philosopher and political economist who made significant contributions to the methods of statistics during the 1880s. From 1891 onward he was appointed the founding editor of The Economic Journal.   == Life == Edgeworth was born in Edgeworthstown, County Longford, Ireland. He did not attend school, but was educated by private tutors at the Edgeworthstown estate until he reached the age to enter university. His father, Francis Beaufort Edgeworth was descended from French Huguenots, and "was a restless philosophy student at Cambridge on his way to Germany when he decided to elope with a teenage Catalonian refugee [Rosa Florentina Eroles] he met on the steps of the British Museum. One of the outcomes of their marriage was Ysidro Francis Edgeworth (the name order was reversed later) ..." Richard Lovell Edgeworth was his grandfather, and the writer Maria Edgeworth his aunt. As a student at Trinity College, Dublin, and Balliol College, Oxford, Edgeworth studied ancient and modern languages. A voracious autodidact, he studied mathematics and economics only after he had completed university. He qualified as a barrister in London in 1877 but did not practise. On the basis of his publications in economics and mathematical statistics in the 1880s, Edgeworth was appointed to a chair in economics at King's College London in 1888, and in 1891 was appointed Drummond Professor of Political Economy at Oxford University. Also in 1891 he was appointed the founding editor of The Economic Journal. He continued as editor or joint-editor until his death 35 years later. Edgeworth was a highly influential figure in the development of neo-classical economics. He was the first to apply certain formal mathematical techniques to individual decision making in economics. He developed utility theory, introducing the indifference curve and the famous Edgeworth box, which is now familiar to undergraduate students of microeconomics. He is also known for the Edgeworth conjecture, which states that the core of an economy shrinks to the set of competitive equilibria as the number of agents in the economy gets large. In statistics, Edgeworth is most prominently remembered by having his name on the Edgeworth series. His most original and creative book on economics was Mathematical Psychics: An Essay on the Application of Mathematics to the Moral Sciences, published in 1881 at the beginning of his long career in the subject. The book was notoriously difficult to read. He frequently referenced literary sources and interspersed the writing with passages in a number of languages, including Latin, French and Ancient Greek. The mathematics was similarly difficult, and a number of his creative applications of mathematics to economic or moral issues would be judged as incomprehensible. However, one of the most influential economists of the time, Alfred Marshall, commented in his review of Mathematical Psychics: This book shows clear signs of genius, and is a promise of great things to come... His readers may sometimes wish that he had kept his work by him a little longer till he had worked it out a little more fully, and obtained that simplicity which comes only through long labour. But taking it as what it claims to be, 'a tentative study', we can only admire its brilliancy, force, and originality. Edgeworth's close friend William Stanley Jevons said of Mathematical Psychics: Whatever else readers of this book may think about it, they would probably all agree that it is a very remarkable one... There can be no doubt that in the style of his composition Mr. Edgeworth does not do justice to his matter. His style, if not obscure, is implicit, so that the reader is left to puzzle out every important sentence like an enigma. The Royal Statistical Society awarded him the Guy Medal in 1907. Edgeworth served as the president of the Royal Statistical Society, 1912–14. In 1928 A.L. Bowley published a book entitled and devoted to F. Y. Edgeworth's Contributions to Mathematical Statistics.   == Contributions to economics ==  In Mathematical Psychics (1881), his most famous and original book, he criticised Jevons's theory of barter exchange, showing that under a system of "recontracting" there will be, in fact, many solutions, an "indeterminacy of contract". Edgeworth's "range of final settlements" was later resurrected by Martin Shubik (1959) as the game-theoretic concept of "the core". Edgeworth's conjecture As the number of agents in an economy increases, the degree of indeterminacy is reduced. In the limit case of an infinite number of agents (perfect competition), contract becomes fully determinate and identical to the 'equilibrium' of economists. The only way of resolving this indeterminacy of contract would be to appeal to the utilitarian principle of maximising the sum of the utilities of traders over the range of final settlements. Incidentally, it was in this 1881 book that Edgeworth introduced into economics the generalised utility function, U (x, y, z, ...), and drew the first 'indifference curve'. International trade He was the first one to use offer curves and community indifference curves to illustrate its main propositions, including the "optimal tariff". Taxation paradox Taxation of a good may actually result in a decrease in price. He set the utilitarian foundations for highly progressive taxation, arguing that the optimal distribution of taxes should be such that 'the marginal disutility incurred by each taxpayer should be the same' (Edgeworth, 1897). Monopoly pricing In 1897, in an article on monopoly pricing, Edgeworth criticised Cournot's exact solution to the duopoly problem with quantity adjustments as well as Bertrand's "instantly competitive" result in a duopoly model with price adjustment. At the same time, Edgeworth showed how price competition between two firms with capacity constraints and/or rising marginal cost curves resulted in indeterminacy. This gave rise to the Bertrand-Edgeworth model of oligopoly. Marginal productivity theory Edgeworth criticised the marginal productivity theory in several articles (1904, 1911), and tried to refine the neo-classical theory of distribution on a more solid basis. Although his work in questions of war finance during World War I was original, they were a bit too theoretical and did not achieve the practical influence he had hoped. Edgeworth's limit theorem Edgeworth's limit theorem relates to equilibrium of supply and demand in a free market. See Edgeworth's limit theorem. Though Edgeworth's economic ideas were original and in depth, his contemporaries frequently complained of his manner of expression for lack of clarity. He was prone to verbosity and coining obscure words without providing definition for the reader.   == Publications of Edgeworth ==   === Collections/Selections === F. Y. Edgeworth (1925) Papers relating to political economy 3 vols. Available online at Gallica Philip Mirowski (ed.) (1994). Edgeworth's Writings on Chance, Economic Hazard, and Statistics, Rowman & Littlefield. Charles R. McCann Jr. (ed.) (1966) F.Y. Edgeworth: Writings in Probability, Statistics and Economics, 3 vols. Cheltenham, Glos.: Elgar. Peter Newman (ed.) (2003) F.Y. Edgeworth : Mathematical psychics, and further papers on political economy Oxford University Press.   === Individual works === "Mr. Mathew Arnold on Bishop Butler's Doctrine of Self-Love", 1876, Mind New and Old Methods of Ethics, 1877. "The Hedonical Calculus", 1879, Mind Mathematical Psychics: An essay on the application of mathematics to the moral sciences, 1881. "Mr. Leslie Stephen on Utilitarianism", 1882, Mind "The Law of Error", 1883, Phil Mag "The Method of Least Squares", 1883, Phil Mag "The Physical Basis of Probability", 1883, Phil Mag "On the Method of Ascertaining a Change in the Value of Gold", 1883, JRSS "Review of Jevons's Investigations", 1884, Academy "The Rationale of Exchange", 1884, JRSS "The Philosophy of Chance", 1884, Mind "On the Reduction of Observations", 1884, Phil Mag "A Priori Probabilities", 1884, Phil Mag "Chance and Law", 1884, Hermathena "Methods of Statistics", 1885, Jubilee Volume of RSS. "The Calculus of Probabilities Applied to Psychic Research, I & II", 1885, 1886, Proceedings of Society for Psychic Research "On Methods of Ascertaining Variations in the Rate of Births, Deaths and Marriages", 1885, JRSS "Progressive Means", 1886, JRSS "The Law of Error and the Elimination of Chance", 1886 Phil Mag "On the Determination of the Modulus of Errors", 1886, Phil Mag "Problems in Probabilities", 1886, Phil Mag "Review of Sidgwick's Scope and Method", 1886, Academy "Review of Jevons's Journals", 1886, Academy "Four Reports by the committee investigating best method of ascertaining and measuring variations in the monetary standard", 1887, Reports of the BAAS (Parts I & 3; Part 2) "Observations and Statistics: An essay on the theory of errors of observation and the first principles of statistics", 1887, Transactions of Cambridge Society. Metretike, or the method of measuring probability and utility, 1887. "On Observations Relating to Several Quantities", 1887, Hermathena "The Law of Error", 1887, Nature "The Choice of Means", 1887, Phil Mag "On Discordant Observations", 1887, Phil Mag "The Empirical Proof of the Law of Error", 1887, Phil Mag "On a New Method of Reducing Observations Relating to Several Quantities", 1888, Phil Mag "New Methods of Measuring Variation in General Prices, 1888, JRSS "The Statistics of Examinations", 1888, JRSS "The Value of Authority Tested by Experiment", 1888, Mind "Mathematical Theory of Banking", 1888, JRSS "On the Application of Mathematics to Political Economy: Address of the President of Section F of the British Association for the Advancement of Science", 1889, JRSS "The Mathematical Theory of Political Economy: Review of Walras's Elements", 1889, Nature "Review of Wicksteed's Alphabet", 1889, Academy "Review of Bohm-Bawerk's Kapital und Kapitalismus", 1889, Academy "Review of Bertrand's Calcul des Probabilites", 1889, J of Education "Points at which Mathematical Reasoning is Applicable to Political Economy", 1889, Nature "Appreciation of Gold", 1889, QJE "The Element of Chance in Competitive Examinations", 1890, JRSS "Economic Science and Statistics", 1889, Nature "Review of Marshall's Principles", 1890, Nature "Review of Jevons's Pure Logic", 1890, Academy "Review of Walras's Elements", 1890, Academy "Review of Bohm-Bawerk's Capital and Interest", 1890, Academy "La Théorie mathématique de l'offre et de la demande et le côut de production", 1891, Revue d'Economie Politique "Osservazioni sulla teoria matematica dell' economica politica", 1891, GdE (trans. "On the Determinateness of Economic Equilibrium") "Ancora a proposito della teoria del baratto", 1891, GdE "Review of Ricardo's Principles", 1891, J of Education "The British Economic Association", 1891, In: The Economic Journal (EJ), Vol. 1, p. 1 - 14 (in  Wikisource) "Review of Keynes's Scope and Method", 1891, EJ "An Introductory Lecture on Political Economy", 1891, EJ "Review of Sidgwick's Elements of Politics", 1891, EJ "Review of Second Edition of Marshall's Principles", 1891, EJ "Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Prices," Connecticut Academy, 1892. "Correlated Averages", 1892, Philos Magazine "The Law of Error and Correlated Averages", 1892, Philos Magazine. "Recent Attempts to Evaluate the Amount of Coin Circulating in a Country", 1892, EJ "Review of Marshall's Economics of Industry", 1892, Nature "Review of Cantillon's Essai", 1892, EJ "Review of Palgrave's Dictionary", 1892, EJ "Review of Bohm-Bawerk's Positive Theory of Capital", 1892, EJ "Review of Smart's Introduction to the Theory of Value", 1892, EJ "Review of Dusing's Das Geschlechtverhaltniss", 1892, EJ "Review of Benson's Capital, Labor and Trade", 1892, EJ "Review of Smart's Women's Wages", 1893 "Review of Bonar's Philosophy", 1893, Mind "Review of Walsh's Bimetallism", 1893, EJ "Review of Fisher's Mathematical Investigations", 1893, EJ "Professor Böhm-Bawerk on the Ultimate Standard of Value", 1894, EJ "One More Word on the Ultimate Standard of Value", 1894, EJ "Review of Wiser's Natural Value", 1894, EJ "Theory of International Values: Parts I, II and III", 1894, EJ "Recent Writings on Index Numbers", 1894, EJ "The Measurement of Utility by Money", 1894, EJ "Asymmetric Correlation between Social Phenomenon", 1894, JRSS Entries: "Average", "Census", "Cournot", "Curves", "Demand Curves", Difficulty of Attainment", "Distance in Time", "Error", 1894, in Palgrave, editor, Dictionary of Political Economy, Vol. 1. "Review of the Webbs' History of Trade Unionism", 1894, EJ "Review of Third Edition of Marshall's Principles", 1895, EJ "Mr. Pierson on the Scarcity of Gold", 1895, EJ "Thoughts on Monetary Reform", 1895, EJ "The Stationary State in Japan", 1895, EJ "A Defense of Index-Numbers", 1896, EJ "Statistics on Unprogressive Communities", 1896, JRSS "The Asymmetrical Probability Curve (Abstract)", 1894, Proceedings of Royal Society "The Asymmetrical Probability Curve", 1896, Phil Mag "The Compound law of Error", 1896, Phil Mag Entries: "Gossen", "Index Numbers", "Intrinsic Value", "Jenkin", "Jennings", "Least Squares" and "Mathematical Method", 1896, in Palgrave, editor, Dictionary of Political Economy, Vol. 2. "Review of Price's Money", 1896, EJ "Review of Nicholson's Strikes and Social Problems", 1896, EJ "Review of Pierson's Leerboek, Vol. 1", 1896, EJ "Review of Pierson's Leerkook, Vol. 2", 1897, EJ "Review of Bastable, Theory of International Trade", 1897, EJ "Review of Grazani's Istituzioni", 1897, EJ "La teoria pura del monopolio", 1897, GdE, (trans."The Pure Theory of Monopoly") "The Pure Theory of Taxation: Parts I, II and III", 1897, EJ "Miscellaneous Applications of the Calculus of Probabilities", Parts 1, 2, 3, 1897, 1898, JRSS "Review of Cournot's Recherches", 1898, EJ "Professor Graziani on the Mathematical Theory of Monopoly", 1898, EJ "Review of Darwin's Bimetallism", 1898, EJ "On the Representation of Statistics by Mathematical Formulae", Part 1 (1898), Parts 2, 3, 4 (1899) "On a Point in the Theory of International Trade", 1899, EJ "Review of Davidson, Bargain Theory of Wages", 1899, EJ "Professor Seligman on the Mathematical Method in Political Economy", 1899, EJ Entries: "Pareto", "Pareto's Law", "Probability", Supply Curve" and "Utility", 1899, in Palgrave, editor, Dictionary of Political Economy, Vol. 3 "Answers to Questions by Local Taxation Commission", 1899, Reprint of Royal Commission for Local Taxation "The Incidence of Urban Rates, Parts I, II and III" 1900, EJ "Defence of Mr. Harrison's Calculation of the Rupee Circulation", 1900, EJ "Review of J.B. Clark's Theory of Distribution", 1900, EJ "Review of Smart's Taxation of Land-Values", 1900, EJ "Review of Bastable, Theory of International Trade (3rd edition)", 1897, EJ "Review of Bonar and Hollander, Letters of Ricardo", 1900, EJ "Mr. Walsh on the Measurement of General Exchange Value", 1901, EJ "Disputed Points in the Theory of International Trade", 1901, EJ "Review of Gide's Cooperation", 1902, EJ "Review of Wells's Anticipations", 1902, EJ "Methods of Representing Statistics of Wages and Other Groups Not *"Fulfilling the Normal Law of Error", with A.L. Bowley, 1902, JRSS "The Law of Error", 1902, Encycl Britannica "Review of Cannan's History of Theories of Production", 1903, EJ "Review of Bortkiewicz's Anwendungen and Pareto's Anwendungen", 1903, EJ "Review of Bastable's Public Finance", 1903, EJ "Review of Bastable's Cartels et Trusts", 1903, EJ "Review of Pigou's Riddle of the Tariff", 1904, EJ "Review of Nicholson's Elements", 1904, EJ "Review of Bowley's National Progress", 1904, EJ "Review of Plunkett's Ireland", 1904, EJ "Review of Northon's Loan Credit", 1904, EJ "Review of Graziani's Istituzione", 1904, EJ "Review of Dietzel's Vergeltungzolle", 1904, EJ "Preface", 1904, in J.R. MacDonald, editor, Women in the Printing Trades. "The Theory of Distribution", 1904, QJE "The Law of Error", 1905, Transactions of Cambridge Society "Review of Nicholson's History of English Corn Laws", 1905, EJ "Review of Cunynghame's Geometrical Political Economy", 1905, EJ "Review of Carver's Theory of Distribution", 1905, EJ "Review of Taussig's Present Position", 1905, EJ "Review of Henry Sidgwick: A memoir", 1906, EJ "The Generalised Law of Error, or Law of Great Numbers", 1906, JRSS "Recent Schemes for Rating Urban Land Values", 1906, EJ "On the Representation of Statistical Frequency by a Series", 1907, JRSS "Statistical Observations on Wasps and Bees", 1907, Biometrika "Review of de Foville's Monnaie and Guyot's Science economique", 1907, EJ "Appreciations of Mathematical Theories", Parts I & II (1907), Parts III & IV (1908), EJ "On the Probable Errors of Frequency Constants", I, II & III (1908), Add. (1909), JRSS "Review of Andreades's Lecture on the Census", 1908, EJ "Review of Rea's Free Trade", 1908, EJ "Review of Withers's Meaning of Money", 1909, EJ "Review of Mitchell's Gold Prices", 1909, EJ "Review of Jevons's Investigations", 1909, EJ "Application du calcul des probabilités à la Statistique", 1909, Bulletin de l'Institut international de statistique "On the Use of the Differential Calculus in Economics to Determine Conditions of Maximum Advantage", 1909, Scientia "Applications of Probabilities to Economics, Parts I & II", 1910, EJ. "The Subjective Element in the First Principles of Taxation", 1910, QJE "Review of John Stuart Mill's Principles", 1910, EJ "Review of Colson's Cours", 1910, EJ "Review of J. Maurice Clark's Local Freight Discriminations", 1910, EJ "Review of Hammond's Railway Rate Theories", 1911, EJ "Probability and Expectation", 1911, Encycl Britannica "Monopoly and Differential Prices", 1911, EJ "Contributions to the Theory of Railway Rates", Part I & II (1911), Part III (1912), Part IV (1913), EJ "Review of Moore's Laws of Wages", 1912, EJ "Review of Pigou's Wealth and Welfare", 1913, EJ "On the Use of the Theory of Probabilities in Statistics Relating to Society", 1913, J of RSS "A Variant Proof of the Distribution of Velocities in a Molecular Chaos", 1913, PhilMag "On the Use of Analytical Geometry to Represent Certain Kinds of Statistics", Parts I-V, 1914, J of RSS "Recent Contributions to Mathematical Economics, I & II", 1915, EJ On the Relations of Political Economy to War, 1915. The Cost of War and ways of reducing it suggested by economic theory, 1915. "Economists on War: Review of Sombart, etc.", 1915, EJ "Review of Pigou's Economy and Finance of War", 1916, EJ "Review of Preziosi's La Germania alla Conquista dell' Italia", 1916, EJ "British Incomes and Property", 1916, EJ "On the Mathematical Representation of Statistical Data", Part I (1916), Parts II-IV (1917), J of RSS "Review of Gill's National Power and Prosperity", 1917, EJ "Review of Lehfeldt's Economics in Light of War", 1917, EJ "Some German Economic Writings about the War", 1917, EJ "After-War Problems: Review of Dawson at al.", 1917, EJ "Review of Westergaard's Scope and Methods of Statistics", 1917, JRSS "Review of Anderson's Value of Money", 1918, EJ "Review of Moulton and Phillips on Money and Banking", 1918, EJ "Review of Loria's Economic Causes of War", 1918, EJ "Review of Arias's Principii", 1918, EJ "Review of Smith-Gordon, Rural Reconstruction of Ireland and Russell's National Being", 1918, EJ "On the Value of a Mean as Calculated from a Sample", 1918, EJ "An Astronomer on the Law of Error", 1918, PhilMag Currency and Finance in Time of War, 1918. "The Doctrine of Index-Numbers According to Prof. Wesley Mitchell", 1918, EJ "Psychical Research and Statistical Method", 1919, JRSS "Methods of Graduating Taxes on Income and Capital", 1919, EJ "Review of Cannan's Money", 1919, EJ "Review of Andreades's Historia", 1919, EJ "Review of Lehfeldt's Gold Prices", 1919, EJ A Levy on Capital for the Discharge of the Debt, 1919. "Mathematical Formulae and the National Commission on Income Tax", 1920, EJ "On the Application of Probabilities to the Movement of Gas Molecules", Part I (1920), Part II (1922), Phil Mag "Entomological Statistics", 1920, Metron "Review of Gustav Cassel's Theory of Social Economy", 1920, EJ "Review of Bowley's Change in Distribution of National Income", 1920, JRSS "Review of the Webbs' History of Trade Unionism", 1920, EJ "Molecular Statistics", Part I (1921), Part II (1922), JRSS "On the Genesis of the Law of Eror", 1921, PhilMag "The Philosophy of Chance", 1922, Mind "The Mathematical Economics of Professor Amoroso", 1922, EJ "Equal Pay to Men and Women for Equal Work", 1922, EJ "Review of Keynes's Treatise on Probability", 1922, JRSS "Review of Pigou's Political Economy of War", 1922, EJ "Statistics of Examinations", 1923, JRSS "On the Use of Medians for Reducing Observations Relating to Several Quantities", 1923, Phil Mag "Mr. Correa Walsh on the Calculation of Index Numbers", 1923, JRSS "Index Numbers According to Mr. Walsh", 1923, EJ Women's Wages in Relation to Economic Welfare, 1923, EJ "Review of Marshall's Money, Credit and Commerce", 1923, EJ "Review of The Labour Party's Aim", 1923, EJ "Review of Bowley's Mathematical Groundwork", 1924, EJ "Review of Fisher's Economic Position of the Married Woman", 1924, EJ "Untried Methods of Representing Frequency", 1924, JRSS Papers Relating to Political Economy, 3 volumes, 1925. "The Plurality of Index-Numbers", 1925, EJ "The Element of Probability in Index-Numbers", 1925, JRSS "The Revised Doctrine of Marginal Social Product", 1925, EJ "Review of J.M. Clark's Overhead Costs", 1925, EJ. "mathematical method in political economy," 1926, Palgrave's Dictionary of Political Economy, reprinted in 1987, The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 3. "Mr Rhode's Curve and the Method of Adjustment", 1926, JRSS   == References ==   == External links ==  Works written by or about Francis Ysidro Edgeworth at Wikisource Archival material relating to Francis Ysidro Edgeworth listed at the UK National Archives   == Additional reading == P J FitzPatrick, "Leading British statisticians of the nineteenth century, Journal of the American Statistical Association 55 (1960), 38–70. M G Kendall, "Francis Ysidro Edgeworth, 1845–1926," Biometrika 55 (1968), 269–275. Newman, Peter (1987). "Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 84–98. _____. (2001). "Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro (1845–1926)," International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pp. 4170–4175. Abstract. Spiegel, Henry William. The Growth of Economic Thought. Ed. Durham & London. Duke University Press, 1991. Stigler, Stephen M. * (1987). "Edgeworth as statistician," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 98–98.

Frank I. Luntz (born February 23, 1962) is an American political consultant, pollster, and "public opinion guru" best known for developing talking points and other messaging for various Republican causes. His work has included assistance with messaging for Newt Gingrich's Contract with America, promotion of the terms death tax instead of estate tax and climate change instead of global warming, and public relations support for pro-Israel policies in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Luntz's most recent work has been with the Fox News Channel as a frequent commentator and analyst, as well as running focus groups during and after presidential debates. Luntz describes his specialty as “testing language and finding words that will help his clients sell their product or turn public opinion on an issue or a candidate.” He is also an author of business books dealing with communication strategies and public opinion. Luntz's current company, Luntz Global, LLC, specializes in message creation and image management for commercial and political clients.   == Background == Luntz was born and grew up in West Hartford, Connecticut, the son of Phyllys (née Kelmenson) and Lester Luntz, who together wrote the first American forensic dentistry textbook. He graduated from Hall High School, graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in history and political science from the University of Pennsylvania, and received a doctorate in politics from Oxford University. Luntz is unmarried. Luntz has appeared as a consultant or panel member on a number of television news shows, including The Colbert Report, Capital Gang, Good Morning America, Hannity, Hardball with Chris Matthews, Meet the Press, PBS NewsHour, Nightline, The O'Reilly Factor, Real Time with Bill Maher, and The Today Show. He has written op-eds for publications such as The Financial Times, The Los Angeles Times, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and The Washington Post. He was an adjunct professor at the University of Pennsylvania from 1989 until 1996 and also taught at George Washington University and American University.   == Use of language == Luntz frequently tests word and phrase choices using focus groups and interviews. His stated purpose in this is the goal of causing audiences to react based on emotion. "80 percent of our life is emotion, and only 20 percent is intellect. I am much more interested in how you feel than how you think." "If I respond to you quietly, the viewer at home is going to have a different reaction than if I respond to you with emotion and with passion and I wave my arms around. Somebody like this is an intellectual; somebody like this is a freak." In an article in The New Yorker Luntz is quoted as saying,  The way my words are created is by taking the words of others.... I've moderated an average of a hundred plus focus groups a year over five years... I show them language that I've created. Then I leave a line for them to create language for me.  In a January 9, 2007, interview on Fresh Air with Terry Gross, Luntz redefined the term "Orwellian" in a "positive" sense, saying that if one reads Orwell's "Essay On Language" (presumably referring to "Politics and the English Language"), "To be 'Orwellian' is to speak with absolute clarity, to be succinct, to explain what the event is, to talk about what triggers something happening… and to do so without any pejorative whatsoever." Luntz's description of "Orwellian" is considered to contradict both its popularly-defined meaning as well as that defined by George Orwell. Luntz believes that Orwell would not have approved of many of the uses to which his pseudonym is applied by quoting Orwell's essay "Politics and the English Language", where Luntz focuses on how Orwell derides the use of cliché and dying metaphors. Luntz's description of his job revolves around exploiting the emotional content of language. "It's all emotion. But there's nothing wrong with emotion. When we are in love, we are not rational; we are emotional." "...my job is to look for the words that trigger the emotion." "We know that words and emotion together are the most powerful force known to mankind.." Additionally in his January 9, 2007, interview on Fresh Air, Luntz discussed his use of the term, "energy exploration" (oil drilling). His research on the matter involved showing people a picture of current oil drilling and asking if in the picture it "looks like exploration or drilling." He said that 90 percent of the people he spoke to said it looked like exploring. "Therefore I'd argue that it is a more appropriate way to communicate." He went on to say "if the public says after looking at the pictures, that doesn't look like my definition of drilling—it looks like my definition of exploring—then don't you think we should be calling it what people see it to be, rather than adding a political aspect to it all?" Terry Gross responded: "Should we be calling it what it actually is, as opposed to what somebody thinks it might be? The difference between exploration and actually getting out the oil—they're two different things, aren't they?" James L. Martin, chairman of the conservative 60 Plus Association, described Luntz's role as being that of pollster and popularizer of the phrase "death tax".  Martin gained an important ally in GOP pollster Frank Luntz, whose polling revealed that 'death tax' sparked voter resentment in a way that 'inheritance tax' and 'estate tax' couldn't match. After all, who wouldn't be opposed to a 'tax on death'? Luntz shared his findings with Republicans and included the phrase in the GOP's Contract with America. Luntz went so far as to recommend in a memo to GOP lawmakers that they stage press conferences 'at your local mortuary' to dramatize the issue. 'I believe this backdrop will clearly resonate with your constituents,' he wrote. 'Death is something the American people understand.' Apparently, he's right. Spurred by Luntz, Republicans have employed the term 'death tax' so aggressively that it has entered the popular lexicon. Nonpartisan venues like newspapers and magazines have begun to use it in a neutral context—a coup for abolitionists like Martin.   == Publications == Luntz is the author of the 2007 New York Times Best Seller, "Words That Work: It's Not What You Say, It's What People Hear." His second book, "What Americans Really Want ... Really: The Truth About Our Hopes, Dreams and Fears," climbed to #6 on the New York Times Business Best Sellers list. In March 2011, Luntz released his book,"Win: The Key Principles to Take Your Business From Ordinary to Extraordinary".   == Notable work and views ==   === U.S. politics, 1990s === Luntz was Pat Buchanan's pollster during the 1992 U.S. Republican presidential primary, and later that year served as Ross Perot's pollster in the general election. Luntz also served as Newt Gingrich's pollster in mid-1990s for the Contract with America. During that time, he helped Gingrich produce a GOPAC memo that encouraged Republicans to "speak like Newt" by describing Democrats and Democratic policies using words such as “corrupt,” "devour," "greed," "hypocrisy," "liberal," "sick," and "traitors."   === Israel and the Palestinians === In December 2008 to January 2009, Luntz wrote a report titled "The Israel project's 2009 Global Language Dictionary" that has been used by the Israeli government to defend Israeli policy in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The report, commissioned by The Israel Project, advised media spokespeople to use specific language that Luntz believed would create a more favorable impression of Israel in the United States and the rest of the international community. For example, when discussing the contours of a two-state solution, the report advised describing Palestinian negotiating points as "demands" because Americans dislike people who make "demands." The report was marked "not for distribution or publication", but it was leaked to Newsweek shortly after it was written. According to the Guardian, Luntz also wrote that "Israeli spokesmen or political leaders must never, ever justify 'the deliberate slaughter of innocent women and children' and they must aggressively challenge those who accuse Israel of such a crime." Luntz cited as an example of an "effective Israeli sound bite" one which read, "I particularly want to reach out to Palestinian mothers who have lost their children. No parent should have to bury their child." Patrick Cockburn criticized the report as essentially admitting "the Israeli government does not really want a two-state solution, but this should be masked because 78 per cent of Americans do.″   === Global warming ===  Although Luntz later tried to distance himself from the Bush administration policy, it was his idea that administration communications reframe "global warming" as "climate change" since "climate change" was thought to sound less severe. Luntz has since said that he is not responsible for what the Bush administration did after that time. Though he now believes humans have contributed to global warming, he maintains that the science was in fact incomplete, and his recommendation sound, at the time he made it. In a 2002 memo to President George W. Bush titled "The Environment: A Cleaner, Safer, Healthier America", obtained by the Environmental Working Group, Luntz wrote: "The scientific debate is closing ... but not yet closed. There is still a window of opportunity to challenge the science.... Voters believe that there is no consensus about global warming within the scientific community. Should the public come to believe that the scientific issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly. Therefore, you need to continue to make the lack of scientific certainty a primary issue in the debate, and defer to scientists and other experts in the field." In 2010, Luntz announced new research that shows the American people are eager for Congress to act on climate legislation that would promote energy independence and a healthier environment. "Americans want their leaders to act on climate change—but not necessarily for the reasons you think," Luntz said. "A clear majority of Americans believe climate change is happening. This is true of McCain voters and Obama voters alike. And even those that don't still believe it is essential for America to pursue policies that promote energy independence and a cleaner, healthier environment." In reference to recent political events, Luntz added: "People are much more interested in seeing solutions than watching yet another partisan political argument."    === 2005 UK Conservative leadership election === In 2005 Luntz conducted a focus group broadcast on the Conservative leadership race on the BBC current affairs show Newsnight. The focus group's overwhelmingly positive reaction to David Cameron was seen by many as crucial in making him the favorite in a crowded field. Cameron was the eventual victor. In March 2007, Newsnight invited him back to gauge comparative opinions on Cameron, Gordon Brown and Sir Menzies Campbell in the city of Birmingham.   === 2007 Irish general elections === Luntz led a focus group telecast with the Irish state broadcaster RTE to gather the opinions of the Irish people before the May 24, 2007 general elections. RTÉ hoped to show viewers some of the campaign techniques the political parties were using without their knowledge.   === 2007 Australian federal election === Another focus group of swing voters was analysed by Luntz in the lead-up to the November 2007 poll between the ruling Coalition and the opposition Labor party. Luntz noted that, like the Irish scenario, the Coalition was well established, presiding over the country for 11 years and overseeing continued economic growth for much of that period; and that unlike the lead-up to the Irish elections, Australia had a stronger and more popular opposition leader in Kevin Rudd: "This is much closer to the Irish election where the leader just barely scraped in, Bertie Ahern, because the economy was so good. But the big difference there was the opposition leader was not as good as Kevin Rudd." Luntz was brought in to conduct his research in a collaborative effort by Sky News Australia and The Australian newspaper.   === 2010 UK General Election === During the 2010 UK General Election, Luntz led focus groups during the Prime Ministerial debates between Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Nick Clegg, and wrote about his findings for The Sun, and also appeared on the BBC's Daily Politics. Luntz has predicted that 2015 will likely result in a hung parliament.   === Gun control === In 2012 Luntz conducted a poll that found that sizable majorities of gun owners supported gun control measures such as mandatory criminal background checks, minimum age restrictions, and eligibility requirements for concealed weapon permits.   === U.S. politics, 2010s ===   ==== Occupy Wall Street movement, 2011 ==== In November 2011, during the height of the Occupy Wall Street movement, Luntz had a meeting with the Republican Governors Association to discuss how to address the growing populist Occupy movement sweeping the country.  I'm so scared of this anti-Wall Street effort. I'm frightened to death. They're having an impact on what the American people think of capitalism.   ==== Depression and sale of LuntzGlobal, 2012–2014 ==== Frustrated with the contention and argumentation of voters after the 2012 presidential election, The Atlantic reported on Luntz, "Something in his psyche has broken, and he does not know if he can recover." As a result, in 2014, he sold the majority of shares of his polling business, LuntzGlobal, but he continues to be a contributor to news outlets.   == Criticism ==   === Refusal to release poll data === In 1997, the American Association for Public Opinion Research, of which Luntz was not a member, criticized Luntz for refusing to release poll data to support his claimed results "because of client confidentiality". Diane Colasanto, who was president of the AAPOR at the time, said  It is simply wanting to know, How many people did you question? What were the questions? We understand the need for confidentiality, but once a pollster makes results public, the information needs to be public. People need to be able to evaluate whether it was sound research.  In 2000 he was censured by the National Council on Public Polls "for allegedly mischaracterizing on MSNBC the results of focus groups he conducted during the [2000] Republican Convention." In September 2004, MSNBC dropped Luntz from its planned coverage of that year's presidential debate, saying "[W]e made a decision not to use focus groups as part of our debate coverage. This decision had nothing to do with Frank's past work or politics." Luntz disagreed, believing that MSNBC "buckled to political pressure" from activist David Brock.   === 2010 "Lie of the Year" award === Luntz was awarded the 2010 PolitiFact Lie of the Year award for his promotion of the phrase 'government takeover' to refer to healthcare reform, starting in the spring of 2009. "'Takeovers are like coups,' Luntz wrote in a 28-page memo. 'They both lead to dictators and a loss of freedom.'" In an editorial response, the Wall Street Journal wrote that "PolitiFact's decree is part of a larger journalistic trend that seeks to recast all political debates as matters of lies, misinformation and 'facts,' rather than differences of world view or principles." The editors of PolitiFact announced "We have concluded it is inaccurate to call the plan a government takeover."   === Leaked tape from the University of Pennsylvania === On April 25, 2013, The American Spectator, a conservative news outlet, published a scathing article about Luntz entitled "The Problematic Frank Luntz’s Stockholm Syndrome".  In fact, what Luntz has done is simply reveal the kind of thinking that goes on in the minds of too many on the right who, whether they realize it or not, have been intellectually and culturally bullied that there is some sort of 'right way'—'right' as in 'correct'—to think. Resulting in some conservatives who suffer from what might be called a political version of Stockholm Syndrome—where the captives identify with their captors.  The article was a response to an April 22, 2013 leaked recording of Luntz at the University of Pennsylvania, where he said conservative radio personalities (specifically Rush Limbaugh and Mark Levin) were being "problematic" and "destroying" Republicans' ability to connect with more voters, or even maintain a majority in the House of Representatives in the 2014 mid-term elections. As part of his critique Luntz said:  And they get great ratings, and they drive the message, and it's really problematic. And this is not on the Democratic side. It's only on the Republican side... [Democrats have] got every other source of news on their side. And so that is a lot of what's driving it. If you take—Marco Rubio's getting his ass kicked. Who's my Rubio fan here? We talked about it. He's getting destroyed! By Mark Levin, by Rush Limbaugh, and a few others. He's trying to find a legitimate, long-term effective solution to immigration that isn't the traditional Republican approach, and talk radio is killing him. That's what's causing this thing underneath. And too many politicians in Washington are playing coy.  After the leak, Luntz announced that he would no longer fund a scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania. The scholarship, which was in his father's name, supported student trips to Washington D.C.   == Bibliography == Candidates, Consultants, and Campaigns: The Style and Substance of American Electioneering. New York: Blackwell, 1988. Words That Work: It's Not What You Say, It's What People Hear New York: Hyperion, 2007. What Americans Really Want...Really New York: Hyperion, 2009. Win: The Key Principles to Take Your Business from Ordinary to Extraordinary New York: Hyperion, 2011.   == References ==   == External links == Luntz Global, Luntz's communications company Works by or about Frank Luntz in libraries (WorldCat catalog) Appearances on C-SPAN

Friedrich Robert Helmert (July 31, 1843 – June 15, 1917) was a German geodesist and an important writer on the theory of errors.   == Career == Helmert was born in Freiberg, Kingdom of Saxony. After schooling in Freiberg and Dresden, he entered the Polytechnische Schule, now Technische Universität, in Dresden to study engineering science in 1859. Finding him especially enthusiastic about geodesy, one of his teachers, August Nagel, hired him while still a student to work on the triangulation of the Erzgebirge and the drafting of the trigonometric network for Saxony. In 1863 Helmert became Nagel's assistant on the Central European Arc Measurement. After a year's study of mathematics and astronomy Helmert obtained his doctor's degree from the University of Leipzig in 1867 for a thesis based on his work for Nagel. In 1870 Helmert became instructor and in 1872 professor at RWTH Aachen, the new Technical University in Aachen. At Aachen he wrote Die mathematischen und physikalischen Theorieen der höheren Geodäsie (Part I was published in 1880 and Part II in 1884). This work laid the foundations of modern geodesy. See history of geodesy. Part I is devoted to the mathematical aspects of geodesy and contains a comprehensive summary of techniques for solving for geodesics on an ellipsoid. The method of least squares had been introduced into geodesy by Gauss and Helmert wrote a fine book on least squares (1872, with a second edition in 1907) in this tradition, which became a standard text. In 1876 he discovered the chi-squared distribution as the distribution of the sample variance for a normal distribution. This discovery and other of his work was described in German textbooks, including his own, but was unknown in English, and hence later rediscovered by English statisticians – the chi-squared distribution by Karl Pearson (1900), and the application to the sample variance by 'Student' and Fisher. From 1887 Helmert was professor of advanced geodesy at the University of Berlin and director of the Geodetic Institute. In 1916 he had a stroke and died of its effects the following year in Potsdam.   == Honours == Helmert received many honours. He was president of the global geodetic association of "Internationale Erdmessung", member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1905, and recipient of some 25 German and foreign decorations. The lunar crater Helmert was named in his honor, approved by the IAU in 1973.   == See also == Helmert transformation (in geodesy) Helmert's equation coordinate system Helmert–Wolf blocking national survey terrestrial gravity field Geodesics on an ellipsoid   == References ==   == External links == Royal Society citation 1908 (very succinct) There is an obituary at MNRAS 78 (1918) 256 There is a photograph of Helmert at Helmert on the Portraits of Statisticians page and three more at Helmert See also memorial stone The first edition of Helmert's textbook on least squares is available at the GDZ site Die Ausgleichsrechnung nach der Methode der kleinsten Quadrate A partial scan of Die mathematischen und physikalischen Theorieen der höheren Geodäsie (Part I) is available on the site Friedrich Robert Helmert (1841–1917) English translations (by the Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis) of Parts I and II of Die mathematischen und physikalischen Theorieen der höheren Geodäsie are available at doi:10.5281/zenodo.32050 doi:10.5281/zenodo.32051 There is an account of Helmert's work on the theory of errors in section 10.6 of Oscar Sheynin Theory of Probability: A Historical Essay For eponymous terms in statistics see Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics: A for the Abbe–Helmert criterion and Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics: H for the Helmert transformation.

Gareth Owen Roberts FRS (born 1964) is a statistician and applied probabilist. He is Professor of Statistics in the Department of Statistics and Director of the Centre for Research in Statistical Methodology (CRiSM) at the University of Warwick. He is an established authority on the stability of Markov chains, especially applied to Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) theory methodology for a wide range of latent statistical models with applications in spatial statistics, infectious disease epidemiology and finance.   == Education == Roberts was educated at Jesus College, Oxford, graduating in 1985 in Mathematics  and subsequently went on to complete in 1988 a PhD thesis on Some boundary hitting problems for diffusion processes under the supervision of Saul Jacka at the University of Warwick.   == Career == Following his PhD, Roberts held various academic positions at the University of Nottingham, the University of Cambridge and Lancaster University before returning to the University of Warwick.   == Awards and honours == 2013 - Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society 2010 - Editor of Journal of the Royal Statistical Society (Series B) 2009 - Institute of Mathematical Statistics Medallion 2008 - Royal Statistical Society's Guy medal in Silver 2004 - ISI highly cited researcher  (Mathematics: Ranked 16th ) 1999 - Rollo Davidson Prize of the University of Cambridge 1997 - Royal Statistical Society's Guy medal in Bronze 1995 - Raybould Fellowship His nomination to become a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2013 reads:  "Gareth Roberts is distinguished for his work spanning Applied Probability, Bayesian Statistics and Computational Statistics. He has made fundamental contributions to the theory, methodology and application of Markov Chain Monte Carlo and related methods in Statistics. He has developed crucial convergence and stability theory, constructed a theory of optimal scaling for Metropolis–Hastings algorithms, and has introduced and explored the theory of adaptive MCMC algorithms. He has made pioneering contributions to infinite dimensional simulation problems and inference in stochastic processes. His work has already found practical application in the study of epidemics such as Avian Influenza and Foot and Mouth disease."   == References ==

Genichi Taguchi (田口 玄一, Taguchi Gen'ichi) (January 1, 1924 - June 2, 2012) was an engineer and statistician. From the 1950s onwards, Taguchi developed a methodology for applying statistics to improve the quality of manufactured goods. Taguchi methods have been controversial among some conventional Western statisticians, but others have accepted many of the concepts introduced by him as valid extensions to the body of knowledge.   == Biography == Taguchi was born and raised in the textile town of Tokamachi, in Niigata prefecture. He initially studied textile engineering at Kiryu Technical College with the intention of entering the family kimono business. However, with the escalation of World War II in 1942, he was drafted into the Astronomical Department of the Navigation Institute of the Imperial Japanese Navy. After the war, in 1948 he joined the Ministry of Public Health and Welfare, where he came under the influence of eminent statistician Matosaburo Masuyama, who kindled his interest in the design of experiments. He also worked at the Institute of Statistical Mathematics during this time, and supported experimental work on the production of penicillin at Morinaga Pharmaceuticals, a Morinaga Seika company. In 1950, he joined the Electrical Communications Laboratory (ECL) of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation just as statistical quality control was beginning to become popular in Japan, under the influence of W. Edwards Deming and the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers. ECL was engaged in a rivalry with Bell Labs to develop cross bar and telephone switching systems, and Taguchi spent his twelve years there in developing methods for enhancing quality and reliability. Even at this point, he was beginning to consult widely in Japanese industry, with Toyota being an early adopter of his ideas. During the 1950s, he collaborated widely and in 1954-1955 was visiting professor at the Indian Statistical Institute, where he worked with C. R. Rao, Ronald Fisher and Walter A. Shewhart. While working at the SQC Unit of ISI, he was introduced to the orthogonal arrays invented by C. R. Rao - a topic which was to be instrumental in enabling him to develop the foundation blocks of what is now known as Taguchi methods. On completing his doctorate at Kyushu University in 1962, he left ECL, though he maintained a consulting relationship. In the same year he visited Princeton University under the sponsorship of John Tukey, who arranged a spell at Bell Labs, his old ECL rivals. In 1964 he became professor of engineering at Aoyama Gakuin University, Tokyo. In 1966 he began a collaboration with Yuin Wu, who later emigrated to the U.S. and, in 1980, invited Taguchi to lecture. During his visit there, Taguchi himself financed a return to Bell Labs, where his initial teaching had made little enduring impact. This second visit began a collaboration with Madhav Phadke and a growing enthusiasm for his methodology in Bell Labs and elsewhere, including Ford Motor Company, Boeing, Xerox and ITT. Since 1982, Genichi Taguchi has been an advisor to the Japanese Standards Institute and executive director of the American Supplier Institute, an international consulting organisation. His concepts pertaining to experimental design, the loss function, robust design, and the reduction of variation have influenced fields beyond product design and manufacturing, such as sales process engineering.   == Contributions ==  Taguchi has made a very influential contribution to industrial statistics. Key elements of his quality philosophy include the following: Taguchi loss function, used to measure financial loss to society resulting from poor quality; The philosophy of off-line quality control, designing products and processes so that they are insensitive ("robust") to parameters outside the design engineer's control; and Innovations in the statistical design of experiments, notably the use of an outer array for factors that are uncontrollable in real life, but are systematically varied in the experiment.   == Honours == 1986 - Willard F. Rockwell Medal of the International Technology Institute 1989 - Indigo Ribbon from the Emperor of Japan 1990 - Honoured as a Quality Guru by the British Department of Trade and Industry 1995 - Honorary member of the Japanese Society of Quality Control 1997 - Automotive Hall of Fame Inductee 1998 - Honorary member of the American Society for Quality 1998 - Honorary member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 1999 - Honorary president of the Robust Quality Engineering Society (Japan)   == Book == Genichi Taguchi (August 1992). Taguchi on Robust Technology Development: Bringing Quality Engineering Upstream. ASME Press. ISBN 978-0791800287.  Genichi Taguchi, Subir Chowdhury, Shin Taguchi (October 1999). Robust Engineering: Learn How to Boost Quality while Reducing Costs & Time to Market. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0071347822.  Genichi Taguchi, Subir Chowdhury, Yuin Wu (August 2000). The Mahalanobis-Taguchi System. McGraw Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0071362634.  Genichi Taguchi, Rajesh Jugulum (2002). The Mahalanobis-Taguchi Strategy : A Pattern Technology System. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0471023333.  Genichi Taguchi, Rajesh Jugulum, Shin Taguchi (2004). Computer-Based Robust Engineering: Essential For DFSS. Amer Society for Quality. ISBN 978-0873896221.  Genichi Taguchi, Subir Chowdhury, Yuin Wu (2005). Taguchi's Quality Engineering Handbook. John Wiley. ISBN 978-0471413349.    == References == ^ "ASI Mourns the Loss of Dr. Genichi Taguchi". Asiusa.com. 2012-03-28. Retrieved 2012-06-26.  ^ Wadsworth, Harrison M. (1997). Handbook of statistical methods for engineers and scientists (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.  ^ Smith, Gerald F. (1998). Quality problem solving. American Society for Quality. pp. 250?251.  ^ a b c d "Genichi Taguchi". American Society for Quality.  ^ a b Jayaswal, Bijay K.; Peter C. Patton (2006). Design for Trustworthy Software: Tools, Techniques, and Methodology of Developing Robust Software. Prentice Hall. p. 44.  ^ Taguchi, Genichi (June 1995). "Quality engineering (Taguchi methods) for the development of electronic circuit technology". IEEE Transactions on Reliability (IEEE Reliability Society) 44 (2): 225?229. doi:10.1109/24.387375. ISSN 0018-9529.  ^ Gen'ichi TAGUCHI (March 1962). Studies on mathematical statistics for quality control. Doctoral thesis. Kushu University.  ^ "About ASI". American Supplier Institute. Retrieved 2009-04-22.  ^ Selden, Paul H. (1997). Sales Process Engineering: A Personal Workshop. Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press. pp. 156?158, 169, 237.    == External links == Photograph of Dr. Genichi Taguchi

Georg Rasch (21 September 1901 - 19 October 1980) was a Danish mathematician, statistician, and psychometrician, most famous for the development of a class of measurement models known as Rasch models. He studied with R.A. Fisher and also briefly with Ragnar Frisch, and was elected a member of the International Statistical Institute in 1948. In 1919, Rasch began studying mathematics at the University of Copenhagen. He completed a masters degree in 1925 and received a doctorate in science with thesis director Niels Erik Nørlund in 1930. Rasch married in 1928. Unable to find work as a mathematician in the 1930s, he turned to work as a statistical consultant. In this capacity he worked on a range of problems, including problems of biological growth.   == Contributions to psychometrics == Georg Rasch is best known for his contributions to psychometrics. His work in this field began when he used the Poisson distribution to model the number of errors made by students when reading texts. He referred to the model as the multiplicative Poisson model. He later developed the Rasch model for dichotomous data, which he applied to response data derived from intelligence and attainment tests including data collected by the Danish military. At the same epoch, American scientists independently developed item response theory (IRT). Within IRT, the Rasch model is one of the most simple response models. In contrast to other simple models, the Rasch model has a distinctive mathematical property: the model parameters (item difficulties, examinee ability) are sufficient statistics. Rasch demonstrated that his approach met criteria for measurement deduced from an analysis of measurement in the physical sciences. He also proposed generalizations of his model (Rasch, 1960/1980, 1977). Today, the Rasch model is used extensively in assessment in education and educational psychology, particularly for attainment and cognitive assessments.   == Major publications == Rasch, G. (1960/1980). Probabilistic models for some intelligence and attainment tests.(Copenhagen, Danish Institute for Educational Research), expanded edition (1980) with foreword and afterword by B.D. Wright. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Rasch, G. (1961). On general laws and the meaning of measurement in psychology, pp. 321–334 in Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, IV. Berkeley: University of Chicago Press, 1980. Rasch, G. (1977). On Specific Objectivity: An attempt at formalizing the request for generality and validity of scientific statements. The Danish Yearbook of Philosophy, 14, 58-93.   == Obituary == Andersen, E. B. (1982) Georg Rasch (1901–1980), Psychometrika, 47,(4), 375-376.   == References ==   == External links == Lina Wøhlk Olsen, Essays on Georg Rasch and his contributions to statistics, PhD thesis Univ. of Copenhagen, in part online here, in part published elsewhere. Institute for Objective Measurement - some Georg Rasch papers online here

George Alfred Barnard (23 September 1915 – 9 August 2002) was a British statistician known particularly for his work on the foundations of statistics and on quality control.   == BiographyEdit == George Barnard was born in Walthamstow, London. His father was a cabinet maker and his mother had been a domestic servant. George's sister Dorothy Wedderburn became a sociologist and eventually Principal of Royal Holloway, University of London. George attended the local grammar school, the Monoux School, and from there he won a scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge to read mathematics. In 1937 he went on to Princeton University to do graduate work on mathematical logic with Alonzo Church. Barnard was on holiday in Britain when the Second World War started and he never went back to Princeton to finish his PhD. The war made Barnard into a statistician as it did for many mathematicians of his generation. In 1940 he joined an engineering firm, Plessey, as a mathematical consultant. In 1942 he moved to the Ministry of Supply to apply quality control and sampling methods to the products for which they were responsible. It was there that Barnard began doing statistics. The group he was put in charge of included Peter Armitage, Dennis Lindley and Robin Plackett. Lindley recalls that they were like students working for a doctorate with Barnard as supervisor. Abraham Wald was in a similar group in the United States. Both groups developed sequential methods of sampling. At the end of the war, Barnard went to Imperial College London, as a lecturer, becoming a reader in 1948 and professor of mathematical statistics in 1954. In 1966 he moved to the newly created University of Essex, from which he retired in 1975. Barnard, however, kept on doing statistics until he died aged 86. Until 1981 he spent much of each year at the University of Waterloo, Canada, and after that he continued writing papers and corresponding with colleagues all over the world. Barnard's best known contribution is probably his 1962 paper on likelihood inference but the paper he thought his best was the 1949 paper in which he first espoused the likelihood principle. He had originally described the principle in the context of optional stopping. A statement by Savage brings out how surprising the principle first seemed (Foundations of Statistical Inference, 1961, p. 75)  I learned the stopping rule principle from Professor Barnard in ... 1952. Frankly, I then thought it a scandal that anyone in the profession could advance an idea so patently wrong, even as today I can scarcely believe that some people resist an idea so patently right.  In an interview Barnard recalled, "my main interest above everything was politics from about 1933 until 1956. Well, that’s not true—until the end of the war it would be fair to say." At school he proposed the motion to the school debating society that "Socialism is preferable to Capitalism." He joined the Communist Party in 1933 and he took part in anti-fascist marches in the east end of London. A fellow activist recalls him as a "lean-and-and-hungry-looking mathematician from a working class family" who served as the "student Party's chief local commissar." At Plessey he was chairman of the shop stewards. Barnard served terms as president of three societies, the Royal Statistical Society in 1971-2, the Operational Research Society in 1962-4 and the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications in 1970-1. He was awarded the Guy Medal in Gold by the Royal Statistical Society in 1975. In May 1986 Barnard was awarded an honorary degree by the Open University as Doctor of the University and in 1994 he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by the University of Essex. Lindley wrote in The Statistician, "We have lost a great statistician and a delightful human being."   == Personal lifeEdit == He married first, Helen J. B. Davis in 1942 and they had three sons. He married second, Mary M. L. Jones in 1949 and they had one son. He was the brother of the social scientist Dorothy Wedderburn.   == PublicationsEdit == G A Barnard (1945) "A New Test for 2X2 Tables", Nature, 156, 177 & 783. G A Barnard (1946) "Sequential Tests in Industrial Statistics", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Supplement, 8, 1-26. Barnard, G A (1949). "Statistical Inference". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 11: 115–149.  Barnard, G A (195). "Control charts and stochastic processes". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B B (21): 239–71.  Barnard, G A; Jenkins, G.M.; Winsten, C.B. (1962). "Likelihood Inference and Time Series". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 125 (3): 321–372. doi:10.2307/2982406.  There is a bibliography (containing 109 articles) up to 1989: Seymour Geisser et al. (eds) Bayesian and Likelihood Methods in Statistics and Econometrics : Essays in Honor of George A. Barnard, North-Holland 1990. This contains a review of Barnard's work by Lindley. The volume was one of a series honouring Bayesian heroes. In 1990 he made a book out of manuscripts left by his friend Egon Pearson: E. S. Pearson (1990) ‘Student’, A Statistical Biography of William Sealy Gosset, Edited and Augmented by R. L. Plackett with the Assistance of G. A. Barnard, Oxford: University Press. After 1990 Barnard published little, although he kept up his letter writing. In 1996 however he produced a review of Barndorff-Nielsen and Cox After observing that, "A great virtue of the book is that it raises perhaps as many questions as it answers," Barnard went on to give his answer to one of those questions: Review of Inference and Asymptotics. by O. E. Barndorff-Nielsen; D. R. Cox Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 159, (1996), 178-179.   == See alsoEdit == Barnardisation   == ReferencesEdit ==  Lindley, D. V. (2003). "Professor George A. Barnard (1915-2002)". The Statistician 52: 231–234. doi:10.1111/1467-9884.00355_1.  M. H. DeGroot (1988). "A Conversation with George A. Barnard". Statistical Science 3 (2): 196–212. doi:10.1214/ss/1177012905. JSTOR 2245568.  (Obituary)   == External linksEdit == George Alfred Barnard at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Briefer obituary by Lindley in IMS Bulletin Obituary on p. 8 George Alfred Barnard portrait on the Portraits of Statisticians page. Statistical Inference and Analysis, Selected Correspondence of R.A. Fisher Edited by J.H. Bennett. Barnard’s correspondence with Fisher School Debate 1932. Barnard the school debater A Conversation with V.P. Godambe. Barnard the PhD supervisor London Review of Books, 29 July 1999. Barnard the letter writer

George Chalmers (1742 – 31 May 1825) was a Scottish antiquarian and political writer.   == Biography == Chalmers was born at Fochabers, Moray; his father, James Chalmers, was a grandson of George Chalmers of Pittensear in Lhanbryde. After completing a course at King's College, Aberdeen, he studied law at the University of Edinburgh for several years. Two uncles on the father's side had settled in British North America, and Chalmers visited Maryland in 1763, apparently to assist in recovering a tract of land about which a dispute had arisen. He began practising as a lawyer at Baltimore. As a Loyalist, however, at the outbreak of the American War of Independence, he abandoned his professional prospects and returned to Great Britain. Several years then passed before he found adequate employment. In August 1786, Chalmers was appointed chief clerk to the committee of Privy Council on matters relating to trade, following its re-establishment. He retained this position for the rest of his life. It left him time to write. Chalmers was a fellow of the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries of London, an honorary member of the Antiquarian Society of Scotland, and a member of other learned societies. His library was left to his nephew, at whose death in 1841 it was sold and dispersed.   == Controversialist == A dogmatic writer, Chalmers became involved in numerous liteary controversies. Among his avowed opponents were Edmond Malone and George Steevens, the Shakespeare editors; Thomas James Mathias, the author of the Pursuits of Literature; Dr John Jamieson, the Scottish lexicographer; John Pinkerton, the historian; David Irving, the biographer of the Scottish poets; and James Currie of Liverpool.   == Works ==   === Caledonia === Chalmers's major work was his Caledonia, which he left incomplete. The first volume appeared in 1807, and is introductory to the others. It is divided into four books, treating successively of the Roman, the Pictish, the Scottish and the Scoto-Saxon periods, from 80 to 1306 AD. The books present, in a condensed form, with an account of the people, the language and the civil and ecclesiastical history, as well as the agricultural and commercial state of Scotland during the first thirteen centuries of the Common Era. The chapters on the Roman period are marred by the author's having accepted as genuine Charles Bertram's forgery De Situ Britanniae. The second volume, published in 1810, gives an account of the seven southeastern counties of Scotland — Roxburgh, Berwick, East Lothian ("Haddington"), Edinburgh/Midlothian (all as "Edinburgh"), West Lothian ("Linlithgow"), Peebles and Selkirk — each covered by name, situation and extent, natural objects, antiquities, establishment as shires, civil history, agriculture, manufactures and trade, and ecclesiastical history. In 1824 the third volume appeared, giving, under the same headings, a description of the seven south-western counties — Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Wigtown, Ayr, Lanark, Renfrew and Dumbarton. In the preface to this volume the author stated that the materials for the history of the central and northern counties were collected.   === Early works (1776-1786) === Before his Privy Council appointment, Chalmers applied himself to investigating the history and establishment of the English colonies in North America, based on his access to the state papers and other documents of what were then termed the plantation records. His work, Political Annals of the present United Colonies from their Settlement to the Peace of 1763, (1780), was to have formed two volumes; but the second, for the period between 1688 and 1763, never appeared. The first volume traces the original settlement of the different American colonies, and the changes in their constitutions and forms of government, as affected by British politics. Chalmers next wrote An Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Britain during the Present and Four Preceding Reigns (1782), which passed through several editions.   === Mature works (1786-1824) === Chalmers wrote biographical sketches of Daniel Defoe, Sir John Davies, Allan Ramsay, Sir David Lyndsay, Thomas Churchyard and others, for editions of their works. The British government also paid Chalmers £500 to write a hostile biography of Thomas Paine; he published it under the assumed name of Francis Oldys, A.M., of the University of Pennsylvania. A life of Thomas Ruddiman, whom he admired, combined praise for the subject with an attack on the reputation of his contemporary James Anderson. In 1818 Chalmers published a life of Mary, Queen of Scots, based on a manuscript left by John Whitaker, but rewritten. Mary's history occupied much of his attention, and his last work, A Detection of the Love Letters lately attributed in Hugh Campbell's work to Mary Queen of Scots, is an exposure of an attempt to represent as genuine some fictitious letters said to have passed between Mary and Bothwell. He had also prepared for the press a detailed history of the life and reign of David I of Scotland. In his later researches he was assisted by his nephew James, son of Alexander Chalmers, writer in Elgin. Apology for the Believers in the Shakespeare Papers which were exhibited in Norfolk Street, appeared in 1797, followed by other tracts by Chalmers on the same subject, relating to the Ireland Shakespeare forgeries. He also took part in the controversy on the identity of Junius, and in The Author of Junius Ascertained, from a Concatenation of Circumstances amounting to Moral Demonstration (1817) asserted that the Junius letters were written by Hugh Boyd. In 1824 he published The Poetical Remains of some of the Scottish Kings, now first collected; and in the same year he edited, for the Bannatyne Club, Robene and Makyne and the Testament of Cresseid, by Robert Henryson. Political writings by Chalmers included: Collection of Treaties between Great Britain and other Powers (1790); Vindication of the Privileges of the People in respect to the Constitutional Right of Free Discussion, etc. (1796), published anonymously; A Chronological Account of Commerce and Coinage in Great Britain from the Restoration till 1850 (1810); Opinions of Eminent Lawyers on various points of English Jurisprudence, chiefly concerning the Colonies, Fisheries, and Commerce of Great Britain (1814); Comparative Views of the State of Great Britain before and since the War (1817).   == Chalmers' works online == Political annals of the present United Colonies: ... (1779) An Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Britain during the Present and Four Preceding Reigns (1782) The Life of Thomas Ruddiman (1794) An Apology for the Believers in the Shakespeare Papers which were exhibited in Norfolk Street (1797) The Life of Mary, Queen of Scots, Derived from State Papers Volume1 Volume 2 (1818)   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: James Macdonald (1911). "Chalmers, George". In Chisholm, Hugh. Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == Notes ==   == External links == Works by George Chalmers at Project Gutenberg Works by or about George Chalmers at Internet Archive "Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen" Portraits of George Chalmers at the National Portrait Gallery, London Archival material relating to George Chalmers listed at the UK National Archives

George Bernard Dantzig (November 8, 1914 – May 13, 2005) was an American mathematical scientist who made important contributions to operations research, computer science, economics, and statistics. Dantzig is known for his development of the simplex algorithm, an algorithm for solving linear programming problems, and his work with linear programming. In statistics, Dantzig solved two open problems in statistical theory, which he had mistaken for homework after arriving late to a lecture of Jerzy Neyman. Dantzig was the Professor Emeritus of Transportation Sciences and Professor of Operations Research and of Computer Science at Stanford.   == BiographyEdit == Born in Portland, Oregon, George Bernard Dantzig was named after George Bernard Shaw, the Irish writer. His father, Tobias Dantzig, was a Baltic German mathematician and linguist, and his mother, Anja Dantzig (née Ourisson), was a French linguist. Dantzig's parents met during their study at the Sorbonne University in Paris, where Tobias studied mathematics under Henri Poincaré, after whom Dantzig's brother was named. The Dantzigs immigrated to the United States, where they settled in Portland, Oregon. Early in the 1920s the Dantzig family moved from Baltimore to Washington. His mother became a linguist at the Library of Congress, and his father became a math tutor at the University of Maryland, College Park, George attended Powell Junior High School and Central High School; one of his friends there was Abraham Seidenberg, who also became a professional mathematician. By the time he reached high school he was already fascinated by geometry, and this interest was further nurtured by his father, challenging him with complicated problems, particularly in projective geometry. George Dantzig earned bachelor's degrees in mathematics and physics from the University of Maryland in 1936, and his master's degree in mathematics from the University of Michigan in 1938. After a two-year period at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, he enrolled in the doctoral program in mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, where he studied statistics under Jerzy Neyman. With the outbreak of World War II, George took a leave of absence from the doctoral program at Berkeley to join the U.S. Air Force Office of Statistical Control. In 1946, he returned to Berkeley to complete the requirements of his program and received his Ph.D. that year. Although he had a faculty offer from Berkeley, he returned to the Air Force as mathematical advisor to the comptroller. In 1952 Dantzig joined the mathematics division of the RAND Corporation. By 1960 he became a professor in the Department of Industrial Engineering at UC Berkeley, where he founded and directed the Operations Research Center. In 1966 he joined the Stanford faculty as Professor of Operations Research and of Computer Science. A year later, the Program in Operations Research became a full-fledged department. In 1973 he founded the Systems Optimization Laboratory (SOL) there. On a sabbatical leave that year, he headed the Methodology Group at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria. Later he became the C. A. Criley Professor of Transportation Sciences at Stanford, and kept going, well beyond his mandatory retirement in 1985. He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. George was the recipient of many honors, including the first John von Neumann Theory Prize in 1974, the National Medal of Science in 1975, an honorary doctorate from the University of Maryland, College Park in 1976. The Mathematical Programming Society honored Dantzig by creating the George B. Dantzig Prize, bestowed every three years since 1982 on one or two people who have made a significant impact in the field of mathematical programming. Dantzig died on May 13, 2005, in his home in Stanford, California, of complications from diabetes and cardiovascular disease. He was 90 years old.   == WorkEdit == Freund wrote further that "through his research in mathematical theory, computation, economic analysis, and applications to industrial problems, [Dantzig] has contributed more than any other researcher to the remarkable development of linear programming". Dantzig's seminal work allows the airline industry, for example, to schedule crews and make fleet assignments. Based on his work tools are developed "that shipping companies use to determine how many planes they need and where their delivery trucks should be deployed. The oil industry long has used linear programming in refinery planning, as it determines how much of its raw product should become different grades of gasoline and how much should be used for petroleum-based byproducts. It is used in manufacturing, revenue management, telecommunications, advertising, architecture, circuit design and countless other areas".   === Mathematical statisticsEdit === An event in Dantzig's life became the origin of a famous story in 1939 while he was a graduate student at UC Berkeley. Near the beginning of a class for which Dantzig was late, professor Jerzy Neyman wrote two examples of famously unsolved statistics problems on the blackboard. When Dantzig arrived, he assumed that the two problems were a homework assignment and wrote them down. According to Dantzig, the problems "seemed to be a little harder than usual", but a few days later he handed in completed solutions for the two problems, still believing that they were an assignment that was overdue. Six weeks later, Dantzig received a visit from an excited professor Neyman, who was eager to tell him that the homework problems he had solved were two of the most famous unsolved problems in statistics. He had prepared one of Dantzig's solutions for publication in a mathematical journal. As Dantzig told it in a 1986 interview in the College Mathematics Journal:  A year later, when I began to worry about a thesis topic, Neyman just shrugged and told me to wrap the two problems in a binder and he would accept them as my thesis.  Years later another researcher, Abraham Wald, was preparing to publish a paper which arrived at a conclusion for the second problem, and included Dantzig as its co-author when he learned of the earlier solution. This story began to spread, and was used as a motivational lesson demonstrating the power of positive thinking. Over time Dantzig's name was removed and facts were altered, but the basic story persisted in the form of an urban legend, and as an introductory scene in the movie Good Will Hunting.   === Linear programmingEdit === Linear programming is a mathematical method for determining a way to achieve the best outcome (such as maximum profit or lowest cost) in a given mathematical model for some list of requirements represented as linear relationships. Linear programming arose as a mathematical model developed during World War II to plan expenditures and returns in order to reduce costs to the army and increase losses to the enemy. It was kept secret until 1947. Postwar, many industries found its use in their daily planning. The founders of this subject are Leonid Kantorovich, a Russian mathematician who developed linear programming problems in 1939, Dantzig, who published the simplex method in 1947, and John von Neumann, who developed the theory of the duality in the same year. Dantzig's original example of finding the best assignment of 70 people to 70 jobs exemplifies the usefulness of linear programming. The computing power required to test all the permutations to select the best assignment is vast; the number of possible configurations exceeds the number of particles in the universe. However, it takes only a moment to find the optimum solution by posing the problem as a linear program and applying the Simplex algorithm. The theory behind linear programming drastically reduces the number of possible optimal solutions that must be checked. In 1963, Dantzig’s Linear Programming and Extensions was published by Princeton University Press. Rich in insight and coverage of significant topics, the book quickly became “the bible” of linear programming.   == PublicationsEdit == Books by George Dantzig: 1953. Notes on linear programming. RAND Corporation. 1956. Linear inequalities and related systems. With others. Edited by H.W. Kuhn and A.W. Tucker. Princeton University Press. 1963. Linear programming and extensions. Princeton University Press and the RAND Corporation. pdf from RAND 1966. On the continuity of the minimum set of a continuous function. With Jon H. Folkman and Norman Shapiro. 1968. Mathematics of the decision sciences. With Arthur F. Veinott, Jr. Summer Seminar on Applied Mathematics 5th : 1967 : Stanford University. American Mathematical Society. 1969. Lectures in differential equations. A. K. Aziz, general editor. Contributors: George B. Dantzig and others. 1970. Natural gas transmission system optimization. With others. 1973. Compact city; a plan for a liveable urban environment. With Thomas L. Saaty. 1974. Studies in optimization. Edited with B.C. Eaves. Mathematical Association of America. 1985. Mathematical programming : essays in honor of George B. Dantzig. Edited by R.W. Cottle. Mathematical Programming Society. 1997. Linear programming 1: Introduction. G.B.D. and Mukund N. Thapa. Springer-Verlag. 2003. Linear programming 2: Theory and Extensions. G.B.D. and Mukund N. Thapa. Springer-Verlag. 2003. The Basic George B. Dantzig. Edited by Richard W. Cottle. Stanford Business Books, Stanford University Press, Stanford, California. Book chapters: Dantzig, George B. (1960), "General convex objective forms", in Arrow, Kenneth J.; Karlin, Samuel; Suppes, Patrick, Mathematical models in the social sciences, 1959: Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium, Stanford mathematical studies in the social sciences, IV, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, pp. 151–158, ISBN 9780804700214.  Articles, a selection: Dantzig, George B. (June 1940). "On the Non-Existence of Tests of 'Student's' Hypothesis Having Power Functions Independent of σ". The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 11 (2): 186–92. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177731912. JSTOR 2235875.  Wood, Marshall K.; Dantzig, George B. (1949). "Programming of Interdependent Activities: I General Discussion". Econometrica 17 (3/4): 193–9. doi:10.2307/1905522. JSTOR 1905522.  Dantzig, George B. (1949). "Programming of Interdependent Activities: II Mathematical Model". Econometrica 17 (3): 200–211. doi:10.2307/1905523.  Dantzig, George B. (1955). "Optimal Solution of a Dynamic Leontief Model with Substitution". Econometrica 23 (3): 295–302. doi:10.2307/1910385.    == See alsoEdit ==  Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition Knapsack problem Maximum flow problem Optimization (mathematics) Travelling salesman problem   == NotesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Cottle, Richard; Johnson, Ellis; Wets, Roger (March 2007). "George B. Dantzig (1914–2005)" (PDF). Notices of the American Mathematical Society 54 (3): 344–62.  "Professor George Dantzig: Linear Programming Founder Turns 80", SIAM News, November 1994 O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "George Dantzig", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Dantzig, George B. (1990). "The Diet Problem". Interfaces 20 (4): 43–7. doi:10.1287/inte.20.4.43. JSTOR 25061369.  Cottle, Richard W. (2005). "George B. Dantzig: a legendary life in mathematical programming". Mathematical Programming 105 (1): 1–8. doi:10.1007/s10107-005-0674-4. ISSN 0025-5610.    == External linksEdit == Works by or about George Dantzig in libraries (WorldCat catalog) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "George Dantzig", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Obituaries of George Dantzig Interview with George B. Dantzig: The Father of Linear Programming - The College Mathematical Journal, 1986 INFORMS George Dantzig Memorial Website George Dantzig at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

George Horace Gallup (November 18, 1901 – July 26, 1984) was an American pioneer of survey sampling techniques and inventor of the Gallup poll, a successful statistical method of survey sampling for measuring public opinion.   == Biography ==  Gallup was born in Jefferson, Iowa. He was the son of George Henry Gallup, a dairy farmer. As a teen, George Jr., known then as "Ted", would deliver milk and used his salary to start a newspaper at the high school, where he also played football. His higher education took place at the University of Iowa, where he was a football player, a member of the Iowa Beta chapter of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, and editor of The Daily Iowan, an independent newspaper which serves the university campus. He earned his B.A. in 1923, his M.A. in 1925 and his Ph.D. in 1928. He then moved to Des Moines, Iowa, where he served as head of the Department of Journalism at Drake University until 1931. That year, he moved to Evanston, Illinois, as a professor of journalism and advertising at Northwestern University. The next year, he moved to New York City to join the advertising agency of Young and Rubicam as director of research (later as vice president from 1937 to 1947). He was also professor of journalism at Columbia University, but he had to give up this position shortly after he formed his own polling company, the American Institute of Public Opinion (Gallup Poll), in 1935. Gallup is often credited as the developer of public polling. In 1932, Gallup did some polling for his mother-in-law, Ola Babcock Miller, a candidate who was a long-shot from winning a position as Iowa Secretary of State. With the Democratic landslide of that year, she won a stunning victory, furthering Gallup's interest in politics. In 1936, his new organization achieved national recognition by correctly predicting, from the replies of only 50,000 respondents, that Franklin Roosevelt would defeat Alf Landon in the U.S. Presidential election. This was in direct contradiction to the widely respected Literary Digest magazine whose poll based on over two million returned questionnaires predicted that Landon would be the winner. Not only did Gallup get the election right, he correctly predicted the results of the Literary Digest poll as well using a random sample smaller than theirs but chosen to match it. Twelve years later, his organization had its moment of greatest ignominy, when it predicted that Thomas Dewey would defeat Harry S. Truman in the 1948 election, by five to fifteen percentage points. Gallup believed the error was mostly due to ending his polling three weeks before Election Day. In 1947, he launched the Gallup International Association, an international association of polling organizations. In 1948, with Claude E. Robinson, he founded Gallup and Robinson, Inc., an advertising research company. In 1958, Gallup grouped all of his polling operations under what became The Gallup Organization. Gallup died in 1984 of a heart attack at his summer home in Tschingel, a village in the Bernese Oberland of Switzerland. He was buried in Princeton Cemetery. His wife died in 1988, and their son, writer and pollster George Gallup, Jr., died in 2011.   == See also == Approval rating The Gallup Organization Gallup & Robinson George H. Gallup House Gallup International Association   == References ==   == Bibliography == Cantril, Hadley. Gauging Public Opinion (1944) Cantril, Hadley and Mildred Strunk, eds. Public Opinion, 1935–1946 (1951), massive compilation of many public opinion polls from US, UK, Canada, Australia, and elsewhere. Converse, Jean M. Survey Research in the United States: Roots and Emergence 1890–1960 (1987), the standard history Doktorov, Boris Z. "George Gallup: Biography and Destiny." Moscow: (2011) Foley, Ryan J., Gallup Papers Give Glimpse into US Polling History, Associated Press (2012) Gallup, George. Public Opinion in a Democracy (1939) Gallup, Alec M. ed. The Gallup Poll Cumulative Index: Public Opinion, 1935–1997 (1999) lists 10,000+ questions, but no results Gallup, George Horace, ed. The Gallup Poll; Public Opinion, 1935–1971 3 vol (1972) summarizes results of each poll. Hawbaker, Becky Wilson. "Taking 'the Pulse of Democracy': George Gallup, Iowa, and the Origin of the Gallup Poll." The Palimpsest 74(3) 98–118. Description of Gallup's Iowa years and their impact on his development. Lavrakas, Paul J. et al. eds. Presidential Polls and the News Media (1995) Moore, David W. The Superpollsters: How They Measure and Manipulate Public Opinion in America (1995) Ohmer, Susan (2006). George Gallup in Hollywood. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12133-0.  Rogers, Lindsay. The Pollsters: Public Opinion, Politics, and Democratic Leadership (1949) Traugott, Michael W. The Voter's Guide to Election Polls 3rd ed. (2004) Young, Michael L. Dictionary of Polling: The Language of Contemporary Opinion Research (1992)   == External links == The Gallup Legacy, from Gallup & Robinson website TIME profile from 1948

Sir George Handley "The Knibb" Knibbs CMG (13 June 1858 – 30 March 1929) was an Australian scientist, the first Commonwealth Statistician and the first director of the Commonwealth Institute of Science and Industry, predecessor to the CSIRO. Knibbs was born in Sydney son of John Handley Knibbs, foreman, and his wife Ellen, née Curthoys. Knibbs joined the New South Wales Land Survey Department in 1877 and in January 1878 was appointed a licensed surveyor. In 1889 Knibbs resigned to take up private practice as a surveyor, and in 1890 became lecturer in surveying at the University of Sydney. Knibbs was elected a member of the Royal Society of New South Wales in 1881, became a member of the council in 1894, from 1896 to 1906 was almost continuously honorary secretary, and in 1898-9 was president. Knibbs was also taking an active interest in other societies, and was president of the Institution of Surveyors at Sydney for four years in the period between 1892 and 1901, and president of the New South Wales branch and a fellow of the British Astronomical Society in 1897-8. Knibbs had begun contributing papers to the Royal Society of New South Wales at an early age, at first on matters arising out of surveying, and then on problems of physics. In his presidential address delivered on 3 May 1899 Knibbs showed that he had spent time studying mathematics. In 1902 and 1903, as a royal commissioner on education, Knibbs travelled through Europe and furnished a valuable report, which led to his being appointed Director of Technical Education for New South Wales in 1905. He was also in this year acting professor of physics at the University of Sydney. In 1906 the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics was created and Knibbs became its first director. During World War I Knibbs was on the Royal Commission dealing with problems of trade and industry, and was a consulting member of the committee on munitions of war. In 1920 Knibbs played a leading role at the British Empire Statistical Conference in London. In March 1921 he was made director of the newly founded Institute of Science and Industry, a forerunner to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). At the 1921 meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science Knibbs was president of the Social and Statistical Science Section, and took as the subject of his address "Statistics in regard to World and Empire development". Two years later he was president of the association and spoke on "Science and its service to man". Knibbs resigned his directorship of the Institute of Science and Industry in 1926, and lived in retirement until his death of coronary vascular disease at Camberwell, Victoria, a suburb of Melbourne, on 30 March 1929. Knibbs was created a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG) in 1911 and was knighted in 1923. He contributed 29 papers to the Royal Society of New South Wales, and several of his monographs, largely on statistical subjects, were published as pamphlets. In 1913 he published a volume of verse, Voices of the North and Echoes of Hellas, largely translations, carefully written but not important as poetry, and in 1928 appeared a work on population, The Shadow of the World's Future.   == References ==  Serle, Percival (1949). "Knibbs, George Handley". Dictionary of Australian Biography. Sydney: Angus and Robertson. Retrieved 2009-08-24.

George Pólya /ˈpoʊl.jə/ (Hungarian: Pólya György, pronounced [ˈpoːjɒ ˈɟørɟ]; December 13, 1887 – September 7, 1985) was a Hungarian mathematician. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Zürich and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He made fundamental contributions to combinatorics, number theory, numerical analysis and probability theory. He is also noted for his work in heuristics and mathematics education.   == Life and works == He was born as Pólya György in Budapest, Austria-Hungary to Anna Deutsch and Jakab Pólya, Roman Catholics who converted from Judaism in 1886. Although his parents were religious and he was baptized into the Roman Catholic Church, George Pólya grew up to be an agnostic. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Zürich in Switzerland and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He remained Stanford Professor Emeritus for the rest of his life and career. He worked on a range of mathematical topics, including series, number theory, mathematical analysis, geometry, algebra, combinatorics, and probability. He died in Palo Alto, California, USA.   == Heuristics == Early in his career, Pólya wrote with Gábor Szegő two influential problem books Problems and Theorems in Analysis (I: Series, Integral Calculus, Theory of Functions and II: Theory of Functions. Zeros. Polynomials. Determinants. Number Theory. Geometry). Later in his career, he spent considerable effort to identify systematic methods of problem-solving to further discovery and invention in mathematics for students, teachers, and researchers. He wrote five books on the subject: How to Solve It, Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning (Volume I: Induction and Analogy in Mathematics, and Volume II: Patterns of Plausible Inference), and Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning, and Teaching Problem Solving (volumes 1 and 2). In How to Solve It, Pólya provides general heuristics for solving a gamut of problems, including both mathematical and non-mathematical problems. The book includes advice for teaching students of mathematics and a mini-encyclopedia of heuristic terms. It was translated into several languages and has sold over a million copies. Russian physicist Zhores I. Alfyorov, (Nobel laureate in 2000) praised it, noting that he was a fan. The book is still used in mathematical education. Douglas Lenat's Automated Mathematician and Eurisko artificial intelligence programs were inspired by Pólya's work. In addition to his works directly addressing problem solving, Pólya wrote another short book called Mathematical Methods in Science, based on a 1963 work supported by the National Science Foundation, edited by Leon Bowden, and published by the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) in 1977. As Pólya notes in the preface, Professor Bowden carefully followed a tape recording of a course Pólya gave several times at Stanford in order to put the book together. Pólya notes in the preface "that the following pages will be useful, yet they should not be regarded as a finished expression."   == Legacy == There are three prizes (whose names are confused with one another) named after Pólya. In 1969 the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) established the George Pólya Prize, given alternately in two categories for "a notable application of combinatorial theory" and for "a notable contribution in another area of interest to George Pólya." In 1976 the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) established the George Pólya Award "for articles of expository excellence" published in the College Mathematics Journal. In 1987 the London Mathematical Society (LMS) established the Pólya Prize for "outstanding creativity in, imaginative exposition of, or distinguished contribution to, mathematics within the United Kingdom." A mathematics center has been named in Pólya's honor at the University of Idaho in Moscow, Idaho. The mathematics center focuses mainly on tutoring students in the subjects of algebra and calculus.   == Selected publications ==   === Books === Aufgaben und Lehrsätze aus der Analysis, 1st edn. 1925. ("Problems and theorems in analysis“). Springer, Berlin 1975 (with Gábor Szegő). Reihen. 1975, 4th edn., ISBN 3-540-04874-X. Funktionentheorie, Nullstellen, Polynome, Determinanten, Zahlentheorie. 1975, 4th edn., ISBN 3-540-05456-1. Mathematik und plausibles Schliessen. Birkhäuser, Basel 1988, Induktion und Analogie in der Mathematik, 3rd edn., ISBN 3-7643-1986-0 (Wissenschaft und Kultur; 14). Typen und Strukturen plausibler Folgerung, 2nd edn., ISBN 3-7643-0715-3 (Wissenschaft und Kultur; 15). - English translation: Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning, Princeton University Press 1954, 2 volumes (Vol. 1: Induction and Analogy in Mathematics, Vol. 2: Patterns of Plausible Inference) Schule des Denkens. Vom Lösen mathematischer Probleme ("How to solve it“). 4th edn. Francke Verlag, Tübingen 1995, ISBN 3-7720-0608-6 (Sammlung Dalp). - English translation: How to solve it, Princeton University Press 2004 (with foreword by John Horton Conway and added exercises) Vom Lösen mathematischer Aufgaben. 2nd edn. Birkhäuser, Basel 1983, ISBN 3-7643-0298-4 (Wissenschaft und Kultur; 21). - English translation: Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning and Teaching Problem Solving, 2 volumes, Wiley 1962 (published in one vol. 1981) Collected Papers, 4 volumes, MIT Press 1974 (ed. Ralph P. Boas). Vol. 1: Singularities of Analytic Functions, Vol. 2: Location of Zeros, Vol. 3: Analysis, Vol. 4: Probability, Combinatorics with R. C. Read: Combinatorial enumeration of groups, graphs, and chemical compounds, Springer Verlag 1987 (English translation of Kombinatorische Anzahlbestimmungen für Gruppen, Graphen und chemische Verbindungen, Acta Mathematica, vol. 68, 1937, pp. 145-254) with Godfrey Harold Hardy: John Edensor Littlewood Inequalities, Cambridge University Press 1934 Mathematical methods in Science, MAA, Washington D. C. 1977 (ed. Leon Bowden) with Gordon Latta: Complex Variables, Wiley 1974 with Robert E. Tarjan, Donald R. Woods: Notes on introductory combinatorics, Birkhäuser 1983 with Jeremy Kilpatrick: The Stanford mathematics problem book: with hints and solutions, New York: Teachers College Press 1974 with several co-authors: Applied combinatorical mathematics, Wiley 1964 (ed. Edwin F. Beckenbach) with Gábor Szegő: Isoperimetric inequalities in mathematical physics, Princeton, Annals of Mathematical Studies 27, 1951   === Articles === "On the mean-value theorem corresponding to a given linear homogeneous differential equation". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc 24 (4): 312–324. 1922. MR 1501228.  "On Functions Whose Derivatives Do Not Vanish in a Given Interval". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 27 (4): 216–218. 1941. PMC 1078308.  "Sur l'existence de fonctions entières satisfaint à certaines conditions linéaires". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 50 (1): 129–139. 1941. MR 0004304.  with Ralph P. Boas, Jr.: "Generalizations of Completely Convex Functions". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 27 (6): 323–325. 1941. PMC 1078330.  "On converse gap theorems". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 52 (1): 65–71. 1942. MR 0006577.  with Norbert Wiener: "On the oscillation of the derivatives of a periodic function". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 52 (2): 249–256. 1942. MR 0007169.  "On the zeros of a derivative of a function and its analytic character". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 49, Part 1 (3): 178–191. 1943. MR 0007781.  "A Minimum Problem About the Motion of a Solid Through a Fluid". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 33 (7): 218–221. 1947. PMC 1079030.  "Remark on Weyl's Note "Inequalities Between the Two Kinds of Eigenvalues of a Linear Transformation". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 36 (1): 49–51. 1950. PMC 1063130.    == See also == Landau–Kolmogorov inequality Multivariate Pólya distribution Pólya conjecture Polya distribution Pólya enumeration theorem Pólya–Vinogradov inequality Pólya inequality Polya urn model Pólya's proof that there is no "horse of a different color"   == References ==   == External links == The George Pólya Award O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "George Pólya", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . George Pólya at the Mathematics Genealogy Project George Pólya, Gábor Szegö, Problems and theorems in analysis (1998) PolyaPower—an introduction to Polya's Heuristics at the Wayback Machine (archived July 28, 2009) George Pólya on UIUC's WikEd Memorial Resolution George Pólya — Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences "Polya Guessing" on Vimeo

George John Shaw-Lefevre, 1st Baron Eversley PC, DL (12 June 1831 – 19 April 1928) was a British Liberal Party politician. In a ministerial career that spanned thirty years, he was twice First Commissioner of Works and also served as Postmaster General and President of the Local Government Board.   == Background and education == Eversley was the only son of Sir John Shaw-Lefevre and Rachel Emily, daughter of Ichabod Wright. He was born in Battersea, and was the nephew of Charles Shaw-Lefevre, 1st Viscount Eversley, Speaker of the House of Commons. He was educated at Eton and at Trinity College, Cambridge, and was called to the Bar, Inner Temple, in 1855.   == Political career == Eversley stood unsuccessfully as the Liberal candidate for Winchester in 1859 but was successfully returned for Reading in 1863, a seat he held until 1885. He carried a vote in House of Commons for arbitration of the Alabama Claims in 1868. He entered the government under Lord Russell as Civil Lord of the Admiralty in 1866, a post he held until the government fell the same year, and later served under William Ewart Gladstone as Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Trade from 1868 to 1871, as Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department from January to March 1871, as Parliamentary Secretary of the Admiralty from 1871 to 1874 and again in 1880, and as First Commissioner of Works from 1881 to 1885. He entered Gladstone's cabinet in November 1884 when he was appointed Postmaster-General. He relinquished the post of First Commissioner of Works in February 1885 but continued as Postmaster General until the Liberals lost power in June 1885. Eversley lost his seat in parliament at the 1885 general election and consequently did not serve in Gladstone's brief 1886 administration. He was able to return to the House of Commons in April 1886 when he was elected for Bradford Central in a by-election, which constituency he represented until 1895. He once again became First Commissioner of Works and a member of Gladstone's cabinet in 1892. When Lord Rosebery became Prime Minister in 1894 he was appointed President of the Local Government Board, which he remained until the following year. In 1897 he was elected a member of the London County Council as Progressive for the Haggerston Division. He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1880 and in 1906 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Eversley, of Old Ford in the County of London, a revival of the Eversley title held by his uncle. He made his last speech in the House of Lords in 1913.   == Other public positions == Eversley was also a Commissioner to negotiate a Convention on Fisheries with French Government in 1858, a member of Sea Fisheries Commission in 1862, President of the Statistical Society of London between 1878 and 1879 and Chairman of the Royal Commissions on the Loss of Life at Sea in 1885 and on the Agricultural Depression between 1893 and 1896. In 1865 he co-founded the Commons Preservation Society, becoming its first chairman and, in 1905, its president. He was appointed a Bencher of the Inner Temple in 1882. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1899.   == Family == Lord Eversley married Lady Constance Moreton, daughter of Henry Reynolds-Moreton, 3rd Earl of Ducie, in 1874. They had no children. He died in April 1928, aged 96, when the barony became extinct. He is buried in the graveyard at St Mary's Church, King's Worthy. Lady Eversley survived him by a year and died in February 1929. It is interesting that one of his sisters, Maria Louisa Shaw Lefevre, can be identified as the anonymous author of "The Notebooks Of A Spinster Lady, 1878-1903", published by Cassell in 1919. In her notebooks she tells amusing stories of life in the upper classes of society in England at the time, makes candid observations of contemporary people and recounts jokes she heard told. She records that she attended the funeral of her good friend Augustus Hare in 1903. The book's editor, also unnamed, says she died in 1908. Reference to "The Times" lists her in its report on the funeral and the death records confirm she died in 1908. Another sister, Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre, was the first Principal of Somerville Hall; and another Rachel married Arthur Hamilton-Gordon, son of the Prime Minister the 4th Earl of Aberdeen.   == Notes ==   == References == "The Notebooks Of A Spinster Lady", page 290, regarding her attendance at the funeral, and page 295 where the editor records that she died five years after 1903. The Times, 28 January page 10. "Among those present at the funeral...Miss Shaw Lefevre". First quarter 1908 her death record, East Preston folio 26 page 255.   == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by George Shaw-Lefevre Lundy, Darryl. "Photograph of Lord Eversley at thepeerage.com". The Peerage.

George Waddel Snedecor (October 20, 1881 – February 15, 1974) was an American mathematician and statistician. He contributed to the foundations of analysis of variance, data analysis, experimental design, and statistical methodology. Snedecor's F distribution and the George W. Snedecor Award of the American Statistical Association are named after him. Snedecor founded the first academic department of statistics in the United States, at Iowa State University. He also created the first statistics laboratory in the U.S. at Iowa State, and was a pioneer of modern applied statistics in the U.S. His 1938 textbook Statistical Methods  became an essential resource: "In the 1970s, a review of citations in published scientific articles from all areas of science showed that Snedecor's Statistical Methods was the most frequently cited book." Snedecor worked for the statistics department of Foster's Group from 1957 to 1963. He was involved in the elaboration of all production data. The "F" of Snedecor's F distribution is named in honor of Sir Ronald Fisher. Snedecor was awarded honorary doctorates in science by North Carolina State University in 1956 and by Iowa State University in 1958. Snedecor Hall, at Iowa State University, is the home of the Statistics Department. It was constructed in 1939. At Iowa State, he was an early user of John Vincent Atanasoff's Atanasoff-Berry Computer (maybe the first user of an electronic digital computer for real world production mathematics problem solutions). Born in Memphis, Tennessee, into a socially prominent and politically powerful, southern Democratic, Presbyterian family line, Snedecor grew up in Florida and Alabama where his lawyer father moved wife and children in order to fulfill a personal and radical religious calling to minister to, evangelize and educate the poor. George was the grandson of Memphis lawyer Bedford Mitchell Estes, he was the son of Emily Alston Estes and James G. Snedecor, and nephew of Ione Estes Dodd and William J. Dodd, the great midwest architect.   == References == ^ Snedecor, George W.; Cochran, William G. (1989). Statistical Methods (8th ed.). Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing Professional. ISBN 978-0-8138-1561-9. Retrieved 2011-08-05.  ^ David Salsburg, The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century, New York, W. H. Freeman, 2001; p. 196. ^ Unpublished memoir of Emily Alston Estes Snedecor completed in 1931   == Books == Calculation and interpretation of analysis of variance and covariance (1934) Statistical methods applied to experiments in agriculture and biology (1938)   == External links == George W. Snedecor biography Article from Amstat News (PDF) Mathematics Genealogy Project

Gheorghe Mihoc (July 7, 1906 – December 25, 1981) was a Romanian statistician. He was born in Brăila, the son of a worker. In 1908, his father moved the family to Bucharest. Here he attended elementary school and the Gheorghe Şincai high school. He enrolled at the University of Bucharest, Faculty of Sciences, and was awarded his degree in mathematics in June 1928. He then went to Italy and studied statistics and actuarial studies at the University of Rome; he earned a Doctor of Statistical and Actuarial Sciences in July 1930. In 1930 he was appointed professor in the School of Statistics, Actuarial Studies, and Calculation, which had been established that year (it later became an Institute). The school was headed by Octav Onicescu. There Mihoc taught courses in actuarial mathematics from 1930 to 1948. On April 28, 1934, he earned his Doctorate in Mathematics from the University of Bucharest, in front of a commission consisting of Dimitrie Pompeiu, as chairman, Anton Davidoglu, and Octav Onicescu. The subject of his thesis was On the general properties of interdependent statistical variables. From 1937, Mihoc went to the University of Bucharest as assistant to Octav Onicescu, first at mechanics, then at algebra and probabilities calculation (1937-1942). That same year (1937) he also taught general mathematics with the students from the preparation year of the Polytechnic University of Bucharest. Between 1942 and 1946 he was conference lecturer of general mathematics at the Faculty of physics-chemistry of Bucharest University. Then, in 1946 he was appointed professor at the Commercial academy from Bucharest, for financial mathematics (1946-1949). In 1948, after the reform of education in all degrees, he was appointed head of the department of probability calculation and mathematical statistics at the Faculty of mathematics and physics of Bucharest University, then as professor head of department of applied mathematics. From the autumn of 1962 he was again professor, head of the department of probability calculation and mathematical statistics (successor to professor Onicescu). As statistician and actuar, Gheorghe Mihoc was employed on April 15, 1929 at the Central house of social insurance. He worked here as director at the directorate of insurance (1939-1940), as director of the directorate of pensions (1940-1942), as director of the Office of studies and actuariat (1942-1945). He was administrator at the House of pensions of the writers (1940-1945) and administrator at the House of pensions of the composers, painters and sculptors (1940-1943). In 1945 he was appointed chief actuary of the Central house of social insurance. Gheorghe Mihoc was dean of the Faculty of mathematics and physics of the Bucharest University from 1951 until 1960, and from 1960 to 1963 he was prorector of the Bucharest University. In July 1963 he was appointed rector. He was a corresponding member of the Academy from 1955 until 1963, and on March 20 he became titular member at the section of mathematical sciences. In April 1964 he was appointed director of the Statistical Centre of the Academy. He was member in the old "Mathematical gazette" and member in the board of C.R.C.C.S. In November 1964 Mihoc was awarded the title of Honorary Professor. Being reputed as specialist in probability calculation, he was invited to different countries to give lectures in this field.   == References ==

Sir Gilbert Thomas Walker, CSI, FRS (14 June 1868 – 4 November 1958) was a British physicist and statistician of the 20th century. Walker studied mathematics and applied it to a variety of fields including aerodynamics, electromagnetism and the analysis of time-series data before taking up a teaching position at Cambridge University. Although he had no experience in meteorology, he was recruited for a post in the Indian Meteorological Department where he worked on statistical approaches to predict the monsoons. He developed the methods in the analysis of time-series data that are now called the Yule-Walker equations. He is known for his groundbreaking description of the Southern Oscillation, a major phenomenon of global climate, and for discovering what is named after him as the Walker circulation, and for greatly advancing the study of climate in general. He was also instrumental in aiding the early career of the Indian mathematical prodigy, Srinivasa Ramanujan.   == Early life and education == He was born in Rochdale, Lancashire on 14 June 1868, the fourth child and eldest son of Thomas Walker and Elizabeth Charlotte Haslehurst. Thomas was Borough Engineer of Croydon and had pioneered the use of concrete for town reservoirs. He attended Whitgift School where he showed an interest in mathematics and got a scholarship to study at St Paul's School. He obtained a degree in Metallurgy from Imperial College London and attended Trinity College, Cambridge where he was Senior Wrangler in 1889. His hard studies led to ill-health and he spent several winters recuperating in Switzerland where he learnt skating and became quite expert. He became a lecturer at Trinity College from 1895.   == Career == Walker was an established applied mathematician at the University of Cambridge when he took up a position as assistant to the meteorological reporter in 1903. He was elevated to the position of director general of observatories in India in 1904. Walker had never worked on meteorology but the previous director of the Indian Meteorological Department, John Eliot. Another predecessor in the Indian Meteorological Department, Henry Francis Blanford, had noticed the pattern that the summer monsoon in India and Burma was correlated with the spring snow cover in the Himalayas. In India, the failure of the Indian Ocean monsoon had brought severe famine to the country in 1899 and meteorology had great economic value. Walker developed Blanford's idea with quantitative rigour and came up with correlation measures (with a lag) and regression equations (or in time-series terminology, autoregression). The methods he introduced for time-series regression are now partly named after him (the other contributor was Udny Yule who studied sun-spot cycles) as the Yule-Walker equations. Analyzing vast amounts of weather data from India and lands beyond, over the next fifteen years he published the first descriptions of the great seesaw oscillation of atmospheric pressure between the Indian and Pacific Ocean, and its correlation to temperature and rainfall patterns across much of the Earth's tropical regions, including India. This is now called the El Niño Southern Oscillation. He was made a Companion of the Order of the Star of India in 1911. Walker also took an interest in several other fields. He made mathematical studies on bird flight and boomerangs. His interest in boomerangs came early in undergraduate years and he had earned the nickname of "Boomerang Walker". In Simla, he used to throw a boomerang on the grounds of Annadale attracting the attention even of the Viceroy of India. He published a summary of his ten years of research in Nature in 1901. Walker continued his studies of yearly weather and climate change even after his retirement from India (in 1924 when he was knighted) and acceptance of a professorship in meteorology at Imperial College London. He had only mixed success in his original goal, the prediction of monsoonal failures; however, his theories and broad body of supporting research represented an invaluable step forward, allowing his successors in climate study to move beyond local observation and forecasting toward comprehensive models of climate worldwide. He served as president of the Royal Meteorological Society from 1926 to 1927. Walker was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1904, long before his work on meteorology on the strength of his work in applied mathematics and applications to electromagnetism. Walker, with his talent for mathematics, was among the first to recognize the abilities of the Indian mathematical prodigy Srinivasa Ramanujan and wrote a letter to the University of Madras to support a scholarship. In a review of a book, Walker noted the growing insularity of specialists:  There is, to-day, always a risk that specialists in two subjects, using languages full of words that are unintelligible without study, will grow up not only, without knowledge of each other’s work, but also will ignore the problems which require mutual assistance.  Walker married Mary Constance Carter in 1908 and they had a son and a daughter. He died at Coulsdon, Surrey on 4 November 1958. He was 90 years old. The Walker Institute in the United Kingdom, established to study climate, is named in his honour.   == References ==   == External links == Biography of Walker from The Walker Institute

Gottfried Emanuel Noether (Karlsruhe, Grand Duchy of Baden, 1915 – August 22, 1991, Willimantic, Connecticut) was an American statistician and educator. He was the son of Fritz Noether, the nephew of Emmy Noether, and the grandson of Max Noether.   == Education and career == Noether emigrated to the United States in 1939, where he earned a bachelor's degree (1940) and a master's degree (1941). The following four years, during World War II, he served with US Army intelligence in England, France, and Germany. After the war, he earned a doctorate from Columbia University (1949). He worked in academia for the rest of his career, beginning at New York University. He moved to Boston University in 1952 where he worked until he joined the faculty of the University of Connecticut in 1968. There, he eventually became chairman of the department of statistics. He retired in 1985.   == Statistician == Noether served on a statistical advisory committee for the United States Office of Management and Budget and as an associate editor of The American Statistician. He was a fellow of the American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. As an expert on non-parametric statistics, he wrote over 50 articles and six books. He also wrote a brief biography of his father Fritz, who was executed in the Soviet Union in 1941.   == Honours == In 1999 the Gottfried E. Noether Awards were established to "recognize distinguished researchers and teachers and to support research in the field of nonparametric statistics." The initial recipients of the Gottfried E. Noether Senior Scholar Awards were Erich Leo Lehmann (2000) and Robert V. Hogg (2001), and Pranab K. Sen (2002).   == References == Hartford Courant (August 26, 1991). "Gottfried E. Noether". Hartford Courant. p. B6.  (obituary) New York Times (August 27, 1991). "Gottfried Noether, 76, Educator in Statistics". New York Times. p. 22.  (obituary) Noether, Gottfried E.; Marilynn Dueker (1990). Introduction to Statistics: The Nonparametric Way. Springer. ISBN 0-387-97284-6.  Noether, Gottfried E. (September 1985). "Fritz Noether (1884–194?)". Integral Equations and Operator Theory 8 (5): 573–576. doi:10.1007/BF01201702.  Parastaev, Andrei (March 1990). "Letter to the editor". Integral Equations and Operator Theory 13 (2): 303–305. doi:10.1007/BF01193762.    == External links == About the Gottfried E. Noether Awards, with photograph.

Gunnar Kulldorff (6 December 1927 – 25 June 2015) was a Swedish statistician, specializing in estimation theory, survey sampling and order statistics. From 1989 to 1991, he was the president of the International Statistical Institute.   == Biography ==   === Early life === Gunnar Kulldorff was born in Malmö, Sweden on 6 December 1927, as the son of Erik and Ebba Kulldorff. In 1946, he entered Lund University, where he studied mathematics, statistics and mechanics, obtaining his bachelors degree in 1949.   === Scientific career === In 1954 Kulldorff earned a licentiate degree from the Department of Statistics at Lund University. Taking a teaching positions in the same department, he did his doctoral studies under the supervision of Carl-Erik Quensel and Harald Cramér. Kulldorff's research led to a PhD in 1961 for his thesis "Contributions to the Theory of Estimation from Grouped and Partially Grouped Samples". His thesis was republished by John Wiley & Sons as well as by the Soviet Union in a Russian translation. In a review for the Journal of the American Statistical Association, W. Edwards Deming wrote that "here is a book that faces reality, carrying the reader, in a modest 144 pages, on a wondrous excursion into the problems of grouped data, in which the reader cannot fail to catch the contagious enthusiasm of the author" . In 1965, Kulldorff was appointed as the first professor of statistics at the newly established Umeå University, where he also became the first dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. In 1966, he was appointed professor of mathematical statistics, a position he held until retirement. During this time, he wrote papers on survey sampling and the optimum combinations of selected order statistics from various well known parametric distributions, in order to draw inference on population parameters. Kulldorff was president of the Swedish Statistical Society 1968-69 and 1985–87, and a member of the Statistics Sweden Scientific Advisory Board from 1988 to 2002. He was president of the Swedish professors union 1978-1980.   === International Statistical Work === A large portion of Kulldorff's work was devoted to the promotion of statistics at the international level. He was a guest researcher at Texas A&M University (1970), Purdue University (1971), Stanford University (1971), the University of Kentucky (1977), the University of Arizona (1983) and the University of Manitoba (1985). Elected to the International Statistical Institute in 1968, Kulldorff served as vice president of the organization 1981-1985, president elect 1987-1989 and president 1989-1991. Around this time, he made many trips to support statistics in Africa, Asia and Latin America. In 1991, just after their independence, Kulldorff visited the Baltic countries. Seeing a need for knowledge and education about survey statistics, which had been underdeveloped during the Soviet era, he initiated a scientific exchange program between the Baltic and Nordic countries. A few years later, this led to the creation of the Baltic-Nordic-Ukrainian Network on Survey Statistics, with annual conferences, workshops and/or summer schools. In 2006, he received an honorary doctorate from Vilnius University in Lithuania.   === YMCA Activities === From an early age, Kulldorff was an active scout and scout leader in Malmö YMCA, leading to a long commitment to the organization. He was a board member (1954–66) and vice president (1962–66) of YMCA Sweden, where he played a key role in joining YMCA and YWCA into one organization, YWCA-YMCA of Sweden. From 1957-1966, he was a member of the YMCA International Board, and in the 1970s he was president of the local YMCA chapter in Umeå.   == Notes ==   == References == Blom, Gunnar (2015). "Gunnar Kulldorff". Nationalencyklopedin.  Jagers, Peter; Bimal Sinha (2015). "Obituary: Gunnar Kulldorff" (PDF). Institute of Mathematical Statistics Bulletin 44 (6): 11.  Kulldorff, Gunnar (1961), Contributions to the Theory of Estimation from Grouped and Partially Grouped Samples, Almqvist & Wiksell / John Wiley & Sons  Kulldorff, Martin (2015-07-08), "Gunnar Kulldorff, Umeå", Västerbottens-Kuriren  Svensk Biografisk Handbok (1993), Kulldorff, Gunnar, Norstedts Förlag, p. 607    == External links == Gunnar Kulldorff at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Gunnar Kulldorff's publications indexed by Google Scholar, a service provided by Google

Gustav Theodor Fechner (/ˈfɛxnər/; German: [ˈfɛçnɐ]; April 19, 1801 – November 18, 1887), was a German philosopher, physicist and experimental psychologist. An early pioneer in experimental psychology and founder of psychophysics, he inspired many 20th century scientists and philosophers. He is also credited with demonstrating the non-linear relationship between psychological sensation and the physical intensity of a stimulus via the formula: , which became known as the Weber–Fechner law.   == Early life and scientific careerEdit == Fechner was born at Groß Särchen, near Muskau, in Lower Lusatia, where his father was a pastor. Despite being raised by his religious father, Fechner became an atheist in later life. He was educated first at Sorau (now Żary in Western Poland). In 1817 he studied of medicine at the Medizinisch-Chirurgische Akademie in Dresden and from 1818 at the University of Leipzig, the city in which he spent the rest of his life. In 1834 he was appointed professor of physics. But in 1839, he contracted an eye disorder while studying the phenomena of color and vision, and, after much suffering, resigned. Subsequently recovering, he turned to the study of the mind and its relations with the body, giving public lectures on the subjects dealt with in his books.   == ContributionsEdit == Gustav Fechner published chemical and physical papers, and translated chemical works by J. B. Biot and Louis Jacques Thénard from the French language. A different but essential side of his character is seen in his poems and humorous pieces, such as the Vergleichende Anatomie der Engel (1825), written under the pseudonym of "Dr. Mises." Fechner's epoch-making work was his Elemente der Psychophysik (1860). He starts from the monistic thought that bodily facts and conscious facts, though not reducible one to the other, are different sides of one reality. His originality lies in trying to discover an exact mathematical relation between them. The most famous outcome of his inquiries is the law known as the Weber–Fechner law which may be expressed as follows: "In order that the intensity of a sensation may increase in arithmetical progression, the stimulus must increase in geometrical progression." Though holding good within certain limits only, the law has been found to be immensely useful. Fechner's law implies that sensation is a logarithmic function of physical intensity, which is impossible due to the logarithm's singularity at zero; therefore, S. S. Stevens proposed the more mathematically plausible power-law relation of sensation to intensity in his famous 1961 paper entitled "To Honor Fechner and Repeal His Law." Fechner's general formula for getting at the number of units in any sensation is S = c log R, where S stands for the sensation, R for the stimulus numerically estimated, and c for a constant that must be separately determined by experiment in each particular order of sensibility. Fechner's reasoning has been criticized on the grounds that although stimuli are composite, sensations are not. "Every sensation," says William James, "presents itself as an indivisible unit; and it is quite impossible to read any clear meaning into the notion that they are masses of units combined."   === The Fechner color effectEdit ===  In 1838, he also studied the still-mysterious perceptual illusion of what is still called the Fechner color effect, whereby colors are seen in a moving pattern of black and white. The English journalist and amateur scientist Charles Benham, in 1894, enabled English-speakers to learn of the effect through the invention of the spinning top that bears his name. Whether Fechner and Benham ever actually met face to face for any reason is not known.   === The medianEdit === In 1878 Fechner published a paper in which he developed the notion of the median. He later delved into experimental aesthetics and thought to determine the shapes and dimensions of aesthetically pleasing objects. He mainly used the sizes of paintings as his data base. In his 1876 Vorschule der Aesthetik he used the method of extreme ranks for subjective judgements. Fechner is generally credited with introducing the median into the formal analysis of data.   === SynesthesiaEdit === In 1871 Fechner reported the first empirical survey of coloured letter photisms among 73 synesthetes. His work was followed in the 1880s by that of Francis Galton.   === Corpus callosum splitEdit === One of Fechner's speculations about consciousness dealt with brain. During his time, it was known that the brain is bilaterally symmetrical and that there is a deep division between the two halves that are linked by a connecting band of fibers called the corpus callosum. Fechner speculated that if the corpus callosum were split, two separate streams of consciousness would result - the mind would become two. Yet, Fechner believed that his theory would never be tested; he was incorrect. During the mid-twentieth century, Roger Sperry and Michael Gazzaniga worked on epileptic patients with sectioned corpus callosum and observed that Fechner's idea was correct.   === Golden Section hypothesisEdit === Fechner constructed ten rectangles with different ratios of width to length and asked numerous observers to choose the "best" and "worst" rectangle shape. He was concerned with the visual appeal of rectangles with different proportions. The rectangles chosen as "best" by the largest number of participants had a ratio of 0.62 (between 3:5 and 5:8). This became known as the "golden section" (or Golden ratio) and referred to the ratio of a rectangle's width to length that is most appealing to the eye. Carl Stumpf partook in this study as a participant. However, there has been some ongoing dispute on the experiment itself, as the fact that Fechner deliberately discarded results of the study ill-fitting to his needs became known, with many mathematicians including Mario Livio refuting the result of the experiment.   === The two-piece normal distributionEdit === In his posthumously published Kollektivmasslehre (1897), Fechner introduced the Zweiseitige Gauss'sche Gesetz or two-piece normal distribution, to accommodate the asymmetries he had observed in empirical frequency distributions in many fields. The distribution has been independently rediscovered by several authors working in different fields.   == InfluenceEdit == Fechner, along with Wilhelm Wundt and Hermann von Helmholtz, is recognized as one of the founders of modern experimental psychology. His clearest contribution was the demonstration that because the mind was susceptible to measurement and mathematical treatment, psychology had the potential to become a quantified science. Theorists such as Immanuel Kant had long stated that this was impossible, and that therefore, a science of psychology was also impossible. Though he had a vast influence on psychophysics, the actual disciples of his general philosophy were few. Ernst Mach was inspired by his work on psychophysics. William James also admired his work: in 1904, he wrote an admiring introduction to the English translation of Fechner's Büchlein vom Leben nach dem Tode (Little Book of Life After Death). Fechner's world concept was highly animistic. He felt the thrill of life everywhere, in plants, earth, stars, the total universe. Man stands midway between the souls of plants and the souls of stars, who are angels. God, the soul of the universe, must be conceived as having an existence analogous to men. Natural laws are just the modes of the unfolding of God's perfection. In his last work Fechner, aged but full of hope, contrasts this joyous "daylight view" of the world with the dead, dreary "night view" of materialism. Fechner's work in aesthetics is also important. He conducted experiments to show that certain abstract forms and proportions are naturally pleasing to our senses, and gave some new illustrations of the working of aesthetic association. Charles Hartshorne saw him as a predecessor on his and Alfred North Whitehead's philosophy and regretted that Fechner's philosophical work had been neglected for so long. Fechner's position in reference to predecessors and contemporaries is not very sharply defined. He was remotely a disciple of Schelling, learnt much from Baruch Spinoza, G.W. Leibniz, Johann Friedrich Herbart, Arthur Schopenhauer, and Christian Hermann Weisse, and decidedly rejected G.W.F. Hegel and the monadism of Rudolf Hermann Lotze.   === Fechner DayEdit === It is claimed that, on the morning of 22 October 1850, Fechner awoke with a sudden new insight into how to study the mind. Moving away from Wundtarian introspection and basing his work on that of Weber, he developed his psychophysical Fechner scale. Each year, psychophysicists celebrate 22 October as the anniversary of Fechner's new insight as Fechner Day. Celebrations to mark Fechner Day were organized by the International Society for Psychophysics and held in Fechner's home city of Leipzig in 2001.   == Family and later lifeEdit == Little is known of Fechner's later years, nor of the circumstances, cause, and manner of his death. Fechner was the brother of painter Eduard Clemens Fechner and of Clementine Wieck Fechner, who was the stepmother of Clara Wieck when Clementine became her father Friedrich Wieck's second wife.   == WorksEdit == Praemissae ad theoriam organismi generalem ("Advances in the general theory of organisms") (1823). (Dr. Mises) Stapelia mixta (1824). Internet Archive (Harvard) Resultate der bis jetzt unternommenen Pflanzenanalysen ("Results of plant analyses undertaken to date") (1829). Internet Archive (Stanford) Maassbestimmungen über die galvanische Kette (1831). (Dr. Mises) Schutzmittel für die Cholera ("Protective equipment for cholera") (1832). Google (Harvard) — Google (UWisc) Repertorium der Experimentalphysik (1832). 3 volumes. Volume 1. Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (Oxford) Volume 2. Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (Oxford) Volume 3. Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (Oxford)  (ed.) Das Hauslexicon. Vollständiges Handbuch praktischer Lebenskenntnisse für alle Stände (1834–38). 8 volumes. Das Büchlein vom Leben nach dem Tode (1836). 6th ed., 1906. Internet Archive (Harvard) — Internet Archive (NYPL) (English) On Life After Death (1882). Google (Oxford) — IA (UToronto) 2nd ed., 1906. Internet Archive (UMich) 3rd ed., 1914. IA (UIllinois) (English) The Little Book of Life After Death (1904). IA (UToronto) 1905, Internet Archive (UCal) — IA (Ucal) — IA (UToronto)  (Dr. Mises) Gedichte (1841). Internet Archive (Oxford) Ueber das höchste Gut ("Concerning the Highest Good") (1846). Internet Archive (Stanford) (Dr. Mises) Nanna oder über das Seelenleben der Pflanzen (1848). 2nd ed., 1899. 3rd ed., 1903. Internet Archive (UMich) 4th ed., 1908. Internet Archive (Harvard) Zend-Avesta oder über die Dinge des Himmels und des Jenseits (1851). 3 volumes. 3rd ed., 1906. Google (Harvard) Ueber die physikalische und philosophische Atomenlehre (1855). 2nd ed., 1864. Internet Archive (Stanford) Professor Schleiden und der Mond (1856). Google (UMich) Elemente der Psychophysik (1860). 2 volumes. Volume 1. Google (ULausanne) Volume 2. Internet Archive (NYPL) Ueber die Seelenfrage ("Concerning the Soul") (1861). Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (UCal) — Internet Archive (UMich) 2nd ed., 1907. Google (Harvard) Die drei Motive und Gründe des Glaubens ("The three motives and reasons of faith") (1863). Google (Harvard) — Internet Archive (NYPL) Einige Ideen zur Schöpfungs- und Entwickelungsgeschichte der Organismen (1873). Internet Archive (UMich) (Dr. Mises) Kleine Schriften (1875). Internet Archive (UMich) Erinnerungen an die letzen Tage der Odlehre und ihres Urhebers (1876). Google (Harvard) Vorschule der Aesthetik (1876). 2 Volumes. Internet Archive (Harvard) In Sachen der Psychophysik (1877). Internet Archive (Stanford) Die Tagesansicht gegenüber der Nachtansicht (1879). Google (Oxford) 2nd ed., 1904. Internet Archive (Stanford) Revision der Hauptpuncte der Psychophysik (1882). Internet Archive (Harvard) Kollektivmasslehre (1897). Internet Archive (NYPL)   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Heidelberger, M. (2001), "Gustav Theodor Fechner" in Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 142–147. New York: Springer Verlag, 2001. Heidelberger, M. (2004), Nature From Within: Gustav Theodor Fechner and his Psychophysical Worldview (trans. Cynthia Klohr), Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2004. ISBN 0-822-9421-00 Robinson, David K. (2010), "Gustav Fechner: 150 years of Elemente der Psychophysik", in History of Psychology, Vol 13(4), Nov 2010, pp.409-410. [4] Stigler, Stephen M. (1986), The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 242–254.   == External linksEdit == Works by Gustav Theodor Fechner at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Gustav Fechner at Internet Archive William James on Fechner Works of Gustav Theodor Fechner at Projekt Gutenberg-DE. (German) Excerpt from Elements of Psychophysics from the Classics in the History of Psychology website. Robert H. Wozniak’s Introduction to Elemente der Psychophysik. Biography, bibliography and digitized sources in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Granville Stanley 1912 'Founders of modern psychology p. 125ff archive.org Gustav Theodor Fechner 1904 The Little Book of Life after Death Forward by William James Gustav Theodor Fechner 1908 The Living Word Gustav Theodor Fechner at statprob.com

Gwilym Meirion Jenkins (12 August 1932 – 10 July 1982) was a Welsh statistician and systems engineer, born in Gowerton (Welsh: Tregŵyr), Swansea, Wales. He is most notable for his pioneering work with George Box on autoregressive moving average models, also called Box–Jenkins models, in time-series analysis. He earned a first class honours degree in Mathematics in 1953 followed by a Ph.D. at University College London in 1956. After graduating, he married Margaret Bellingham and together they raised three children. His first job after university was junior fellow at the Royal Aircraft Establishment. He followed this by a series of visiting lecturer and professor positions at Imperial College London, Stanford University, Princeton University, and the University of Wisconsin–Madison, before settling in as a professor of Systems Engineering at Lancaster University in 1965. His initial work concerned discrete time domain models for Chemical Engineering applications. While at Lancaster, he founded and became managing director of ISCOL (International Systems Corporation of Lancaster). He remained in academia until 1974, when he left to start his own consulting company. He served on the Research Section Committee and Council of the Royal Statistical Society in the 1960s, founded the Journal of Systems Engineering in 1969, and briefly carried out public duties with the Royal Treasury in the mid-1970s. He was elected to the Institute of Mathematical Statistics and the Institute of Statisticians. He was a jazz and blues enthusiast and an accomplished pianist. He succumbed to Hodgkin's lymphoma in 1982.   == Books by G. M. Jenkins == Spectral analysis and its applications (with D. G. Watts) 1968 Time Series Analysis: Forecasting and Control (with G. E. P. Box and Gregory C. Reinsel) 2008 Practical experience with modelling and forecasting time series 1979 Case studies in time series analysis (with G. McLeod) 1983   == Obituary == G. E. P. Box (1983) G. M. Jenkins, 1933-1982 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), Vol. 146, No. 2, pp. 205–206.   == References ==   == External links == George Box's Interview for the International Journal of Forecasting G. M. Jenkins at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Halbert L. Dunn, M.D. (1896–1975) was the leading figure in establishing a national vital statistics system in the United States and is known as the "father of the wellness movement".   == Early life == Born in New Paris, Ohio, he attended the University of Minnesota where he earned his M.D. in 1922 and his Ph.D. in 1923. He served as an assistant in medicine at Presbyterian Hospital of New York City 1923-1924 and as fellow in medicine at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota (1924–1925).   == Work in statistics == In 1929, he was the first biostatistician hired by the Mayo Clinic and established its computer coding system for deriving medical statistics. He was Chief of the National Office of Vital Statistics from 1935 through 1960, first as part of the Bureau of the Census and later under the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, where it eventually became the National Center for Health Statistics in 1960. In his final year with the U.S. Public Health Service he was Assistant Surgeon General for aging. He was one of the founders of the National Association for Public Health Statistics and Information Systems (NAPHSIS) and of the Inter-American Statistics Institute (IASI). He was Secretary General of the IASI from 1941 to 1952. The Halbert L. Dunn Award, named in his honor, has been presented since 1981 by NAPHSIS in recognition of outstanding and lasting contributions to the field of vital and health statistics.   == Wellness == Dr. Dunn introduced the concept of wellness (or high-level wellness) in a series of twenty-nine lectures he gave at the Unitarian Church in Arlington County, Virginia in the late 1950s. Those lectures provided the basis for his book, High Level Wellness, which was published in 1961. The book was reissued in a number of editions but did not have a great deal of immediate impact. It did, however, come into the hands of a number of the future leaders of wellness and holistic health movement that bloomed more than a decade later, such as Don B. Ardell, Robert Russell, John Travis, and Elizabeth Neilson. Four events in the mid-1970s broadened the impact of Dunn's ideas. First, John Travis opened the first US wellness center (Mill Valley, CA, 1975). This center and other organizations were then described in Don Ardell's 1976 book, using Dunn's title (giving Dunn due credit for his origination of the title and concept). Then Elizabeth Neilson founded the journal Health Values: Achieving High Level Wellness (renamed the American Journal of Health Promotion in 1996), which was dedicated to Dunn and reprinted one of his papers in its first edition. Lastly, the publisher of Health Values, Charles B. Slack, Inc., published a reprint edition of Dunn's High Level Wellness that achieved a wider distribution and impact.   == References == Ardell, D. B. (1976). High Level Wellness: An Alternative to Doctors, Drugs and Disease. Emmaus, PA: Rodale. Ardell, D. B. (Dec. 29, 2000). A (very) brief history of the wellness concept. Wellness in the Headlines (Don's Report to the World). [1] Dunn, H.L. (1961). High-Level Wellness. Arlington, VA: Beatty Press. Dunn, H.L. (1977). High Level Wellness. Thorofare, NJ: Charles, B. Slack. Dunn, H.L. (1977). What High Level Wellness Means. Health Values, 1(1), 9-16. Neilson, E. A. (1988). Health Values: Achieving high level wellness—Origin, philosophy, purpose. Health Values, 12(3):3-5. Rice, S. A. (1967). Conception, gestation and birth of the IASI. The American Statistician, 21(3), 15-19 Travis, J. W., and Ryan, R. S. (1981, 1988, 2004) Wellness Workbook, Ten Speed Press/Celestial Arts

Harald Ludvig Westergaard (April 19, 1853 in Copenhagen – December 13, 1936 in Copenhagen) was a Danish statistician and economist known for his work in demography and the history of statistics. Harald Westergaard was born in Copenhagen and apart from a period studying in England and Germany in 1877-78 he lived there all his life. His subject at the University of Copenhagen was mathematics but he became interested in economics and, while he was in England, he seems to have met William Stanley Jevons. In the preface to the second edition (1879) of the Theory of Political Economy Jevons refers to Westergaard's mathematical suggestions. However, after this spectacular debut Westergaard seems not to have contributed further to mathematical economics. In 1880-2, Westergaard worked for the Danish Insurance Office and he developed an interest in demography. His international reputation was made by the publication of Die Lehre von der Mortalität und Morbilität (1881). This work won him a gold medal from the University and led to his appointment as a Lecturer in 1883. In 1886, he became a Professor at the early age of 33. He retired in 1924. Westergaard's late work Contributions to the History of Statistics (1932) described the history of vital and economic statistics up to the end of the nineteenth century. Statistical theory, whether of the Laplace or Pearson variety, is discussed but given a subordinate place. In the Introduction, Westergaard remarks, "For a long while ... the calculus of probabilities had less influence on statistics than might have been expected, the authors confining themselves to abstract theories which had little or nothing to do with reality." Westergaard was well-known and respected internationally. The obituary in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society of London, begins, "By [his] death Europe has lost her senior statistician" and ends, "This is not the place to write at length about his personal charm, marked by simplicity, helpfulness and friendliness; but it was this as much as his intellectual eminence that gave him a unique place in the society of economists and statisticians."   == Books by Harald Westergaard == Die Lehre von der Mortalität und Morbilität: Anthropologisch-statistische Untersuchungen. 1881 Grundzüge der Theorie der Statistik. 1890 Economic Development in Denmark before and during the World War. 1922 Contributions to the History of Statistics, 1932, reprinted 1969 New York: Kelley   == References == “ Westergaard, Harald Ludvig”, pp. 319–320 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. Obituary: Harald Westergaard, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 100, No. 1. (1937), pp. 149–150.   == External links == There is a photograph at Harald Ludvig Westergaard on the Portraits of Statisticians page. For his connection with Jevons, search for Westergaard in Jevons: The Theory of Political Economy

Harold Hotelling (/ˈhoʊtəlɪŋ/; September 29, 1895 – December 26, 1973) was a mathematical statistician and an influential economic theorist, known for Hotelling's law, Hotelling's lemma, and Hotelling's rule in economics, as well as Hotelling's T-squared distribution in statistics. He was Associate Professor of Mathematics at Stanford University from 1927 until 1931, a member of the faculty of Columbia University from 1931 until 1946, and a Professor of Mathematical Statistics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from 1946 until his death. A street in Chapel Hill bears his name. In 1972 he received the North Carolina Award for contributions to science.   == Statistics == Hotelling is known to statisticians because of Hotelling's T-squared distribution which is a generalization of the Student's t-distribution in multivariate setting, and its use in statistical hypothesis testing and confidence regions. He also introduced canonical correlation analysis. At the beginning of his statistical career Hotelling came under the influence of R.A. Fisher, whose Statistical Methods for Research Workers had "revolutionary importance", according to Hotelling's review. Hotelling was able to maintain professional relations with Fisher, despite the latter's temper tantrums and polemics. Hotelling suggested that Fisher use the English word "cumulants" for the Thiele's Danish "semi-invariants". Fisher's emphasis on the sampling distribution of a statistic was extended by Jerzy Neyman and Egon Pearson with greater precision and wider applications, which Hotelling recognized. Hotelling sponsored refugees from European anti-semitism and Nazism, welcoming Henry Mann and Abraham Wald to his research group at Columbia. While at Hotelling's group, Wald developed sequential analysis and statistical decision theory, which Hotelling described as "pragmatism in action". In the United States, Harold Hotelling is known for his leadership of the statistics profession, in particular for his vision of a statistics department at a university, which convinced many universities to start statistics departments. Hotelling was known for his leadership of departments at Columbia University and the University of North Carolina.   == Economics == Hotelling has a crucial place in the growth of mathematical economics; several areas of active research were influenced by his economics papers. While at the University of Washington, he was encouraged to switch from pure mathematics toward mathematical economics by the famous mathematician Eric Temple Bell. Later, at Columbia University (where during 1933-34 he taught Milton Friedman statistics) in the '40s, Hotelling in turn encouraged young Kenneth Arrow to switch from mathematics and statistics applied to actuarial studies towards more general applications of mathematics in general economic theory. Hotelling is the eponym of Hotelling's law, Hotelling's lemma, and Hotelling's rule in economics.   === Spatial economics === One of Hotelling’s most important contributions to economics was his conception of “spatial economics” in his 1929 article. Space was not just a barrier to moving goods around, but rather a field upon which competitors jostled to be nearest to their customers. Hotteling considers a situation in which there are two sellers at point A and B in a line segment of size l. The buyers are distributed uniformly in this line segment and carry the merchandise to their home at cost c. Let p1 and p2 be the prices charged by A and B, and let the line segment be divided in 3 parts of size a, x+y and b, where x+y is the size of the segment between A and B, a the portion of segment to the left of A and b the portion of segment to the right of B. Therefore a+x+y+b=l. Since the product being sold is a commodity, the point of indifference to buying is given by p1+cx=p2+cy. Solving for x and y yields:  Let q1 and q2 indicate the quantities sold by A and B. The sellers profit are:  By imposing profit maximization:  Hotteling obtains the economic equilibrium. Hotteling argues this equilibrium is stable even though the sellers may try to establish a price cartel.   === Non-convexities === Hotelling made pioneering studies of non-convexity in economics. In economics, non-convexity refers to violations of the convexity assumptions of elementary economics. Basic economics textbooks concentrate on consumers with convex preferences and convex budget sets and on producers with convex production sets; for convex models, the predicted economic behavior is well understood. When convexity assumptions are violated, then many of the good properties of competitive markets need not hold: Thus, non-convexity is associated with market failures, where supply and demand differ or where market equilibria can be inefficient.   ==== Producers with increasing returns to scale: Marginal cost pricing ==== In "oligopolies" (markets dominated by a few producers), especially in "monopolies" (markets dominated by one producer), non-convexities remain important. Concerns with large producers exploiting market power initiated the literature on non-convex sets, when Piero Sraffa wrote about firms with increasing returns to scale in 1926, after which Hotelling wrote about marginal cost pricing in 1938. Both Sraffa and Hotelling illuminated the market power of producers without competitors, clearly stimulating a literature on the supply-side of the economy.   ==== Consumers with non-convex preferences ==== When the consumer's preference set is non-convex, then (for some prices) the consumer's demand is not connected; A disconnected demand implies some discontinuous behavior by the consumer, as discussed by Hotelling:  If indifference curves for purchases be thought of as possessing a wavy character, convex to the origin in some regions and concave in others, we are forced to the conclusion that it is only the portions convex to the origin that can be regarded as possessing any importance, since the others are essentially unobservable. They can be detected only by the discontinuities that may occur in demand with variation in price-ratios, leading to an abrupt jumping of a point of tangency across a chasm when the straight line is rotated. But, while such discontinuities may reveal the existence of chasms, they can never measure their depth. The concave portions of the indifference curves and their many-dimensional generalizations, if they exist, must forever remain in unmeasurable obscurity.  according to Diewert. Following Hotelling's pioneering research on non-convexities in economics, research in economics has recognized non-convexity in new areas of economics. In these areas, non-convexity is associated with market failures, where any equilibrium need not be efficient or where no equilibrium exists because supply and demand differ. Non-convex sets arise also with environmental goods (and other externalities), and with market failures, and public economics. Non-convexities occur also with information economics, and with stock markets (and other incomplete markets). Such applications continued to motivate economists to study non-convex sets.   == Works == Hotelling, Harold (September 1925). "A general mathematical theory of depreciation". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 20 (151): 340–353. doi:10.1080/01621459.1925.10503499.  Hotelling, Harold (September 1927). "Differential equations subject to error, and population estimates". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 22 (159): 283–314. doi:10.1080/01621459.1927.10502963.  Hotelling, Harold (September 1927). "Statistical methods for research workers by R. A. Fisher". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis via JSTOR) 22 (159): 411–412. doi:10.2307/2276824. JSTOR 2276824.  Harold Hotelling’s review of Fishers’ Statistical methods for research workers. Hotelling, Harold; Working, Holbrook (March 1929). "Applications of the theory of error to the interpretation of trends". Journal of the American Statistical Association, special issue: Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 24 (165A): 73–85. doi:10.1080/01621459.1929.10506274.  Hotelling, Harold (March 1929). "Stability in competition". The Economic Journal (Taylor and Francis) 39 (153): 41–57. doi:10.2307/2224214. JSTOR 2224214.  Hotelling, Harold (April 1931). "The economics of exhaustible resources". Journal of Political Economy (The University of Chicago Press via JSTOR) 39 (2): 137–175. doi:10.1086/254195. JSTOR 1822328.  Hotelling, Harold (1931). "The generalization of student's ratio". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 2 (3): 360–378. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177732979.  Hotelling, Harold (October 1932). "Edgeworth's taxation paradox and the nature of demand and supply functions". Journal of Political Economy (The University of Chicago Press via JSTOR) 40 (5): 577–616. doi:10.1086/254387. JSTOR 1822600.  Hotelling, Harold (September 1933). "Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components". Journal of Educational Psychology (American Psychological Association) 24 (6): 417–441. doi:10.1037/h0071325.  Hotelling, Harold (October 1933). "Note on Edgeworth's taxation phenomenon and Professor Garver's additional condition on demand functions". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 1 (4): 408–409. doi:10.2307/1907332. JSTOR 1907332.  Hotelling, Harold (January 1935). "Demand functions with limited budgets". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 3 (1): 66–78. doi:10.2307/1907346. JSTOR 1907346.  Hotelling, Harold (February 1935). "The most predictable criterion". Journal of Educational Psychology (American Psychological Association) 26 (2): 139–142. doi:10.1037/h0058165.  Hotelling, Harold (December 1936). "Relation between two sets of variates". Biometrika (Oxford Journals) 28 (3–4): 321–377. doi:10.1093/biomet/28.3-4.321.  Hotelling, Harold; Pabst, Margaret R. (March 1936). "Rank correlation and tests of significance involving no assumption of normality". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 7 (1): 29–43. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177732543. JSTOR 2957508.  Hotelling, Harold (July 1938). "The general welfare in relation to problems of taxation and of railway and utility rates". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 6 (3): 242–269. doi:10.2307/1907054. JSTOR 1907054.  Hotelling, Harold (December 1940). "The teaching of statistics". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 11 (4): 457–470. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177731833.  Hotelling, Harold (1951). "A generalized T-Test and measure of multivariate dispersion". Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability (University of California Press): 23–41.  Hotelling, Harold (March 1951). "The impact of R. A. Fisher on statistics". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 46 (253): 35–46. doi:10.1080/01621459.1951.10500765.  Hotelling, Harold (1988). "Golden oldies: classic articles from the world of statistics and probability: 'the teaching of statistics'". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 3 (1): 63–71. doi:10.1214/ss/1177013001.  Hotelling, Harold (1988). "Golden oldies: classic articles from the world of statistics and probability: 'the place of statistics in the university'". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 3 (1): 72–83. doi:10.1214/ss/1177013002.    == Papers == "Harold Hotelling papers, 1910-1975.". Columbia University Libraries Archival Collections. Retrieved 2013-12-05.    == References ==  Kenneth J. Arrow, 1987, “Hotelling ,Harold" The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 670–71. I. Olkina and A. R. Sampsonb (2001). "Hotelling, Harold (1895–1973)," International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pp. 6921–6925. Abstract.   == External links == Harold Hotelling at the Mathematics Genealogy Project New School: Harold Hotelling American Statistical Association: Harold Hotelling Harold Hottelling The following have photographs: Harold Hotelling on the Portraits of Statisticians page. National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

Harry Clyde Carver (December 4, 1890 – January 30, 1977) was an American mathematician and academic, primarily associated with the University of Michigan. He was a major influence in the development of mathematical statistics as an academic discipline. Born in Waterbury, Connecticut, Carver was educated at the University of Michigan, earning his B.S. degree in 1915, and the next year becoming an instructor in mathematics; he taught statistics in actuarial applications. At the time, the University of Michigan was only the second such institution in the United States to offer this type of course, after the pioneering Iowa State University. Carver was appointed assistant professor at Michigan in 1918, then associate professor (1921) and full professor (1936); during this period the University's program in mathematical statistics and probability underwent significant expansion. In 1930 Carver founded the journal Annals of Mathematical Statistics, which over time became an important periodical in the field. Financial support, however, was lacking in the midst of the Great Depression; in January 1934 Carver undertook financial responsibility for the Annals and maintained the existence of the journal at his own expense. In 1935 he helped to start the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, which in 1938 assumed control over the journal; Samuel S. Wilks succeeded Carver as editor in the same year. The Institute has named its Harry C. Carver Medal after him. With the coming of World War II, Carver devoted his energies to solving problems in aerial navigation, an interest he maintained for the remainder of his life. In one lecture titled "Let Us Own Data Science" given by Bin Yu in 2014 at Peking University, Carver was described as in the following formula: Turner + Carver = "Data Scientist".   == References ==   == Further reading == Craig, Cecil C. "Harry C. Carver, 1890-1977." Annals of Statistics, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Jan. 1978), pp. 1–4. Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century. New York, W. H. Freeman, 2001.   == External links == The Institute for Mathematical Statistics

Sir Harry Campion, KCB, CBE (20 May 1905 – 24 May 1996) was a British statistician and the first director of what was the Central Statistical Office of the United Kingdom. He was also first director of the United Nations Statistical Office. He played a leading role in the development of official statistics, nationally and internationally, after the Second World War.   == Background and early career == Harry Campion (later Sir Harry Campion) was born in Worsley, Lancashire, and was educated at Farnworth Grammar School and Manchester University. After leaving university, Campion joined the newly formed Cotton Trade Statistical Bureau, which collected data on output and sales of the cotton industry in the UK and also data on cotton industries of other countries and principal export markets and where he took part in the preparation of a regular digest of statistics. He spent 1932 in the United States, having been awarded a Rockefeller Foundation scholarship, then returned to Manchester University where he became Robert Ottley Reader in Statistics from 1933 to 1939 and set up an Economic Research Section carrying out applied research. While at Manchester he published research on the distribution of national capital using estate duty data and a book on public and private property. In 1939, Mr Campion joined the Central Economic Intelligence Service (CEIS), part of the War Cabinet Office, whose purpose was to provide economic and statistical material for a continuous survey of financial and economic plans and where Campion's role was to organise the statistics needed.   == Career at the Central Statistical Office == In January 1941, the Central Statistical Office was established to co-ordinate all statistics brought before the War Cabinet and soon after, Campion became its first director. The CSO became established as a permanent feature of government focusing on the development of national income accounts. After the war, Campion was seconded to the United Nations for a year to organise the creation of the United Nations Statistical Office. Following this secondment, Campion returned to the CSO until his retirement in March 1967. Some of the statistical products which first saw the light of day in the Harry Campion era are: Monthly Digest of Statistics, first published in 1946. Statistics of Trade Act 1947. Standard Industrial Classification, completed in 1947 and introduced in 1948. Annual Abstract, first post-war publication at beginning of 1948. Index of Industrial Production, first published in February 1948. Economic Trends, appeared in November 1953. Development of the National accounts including:  Employment Policy White Paper, first published in 1946. National Income and Expenditure Blue Book, first produced in September 1952. Sources and Methods, first edition published in 1956. quarterly estimates of national expenditure, first published in 1957. constant price estimates, appeared in 1959. seasonally adjusted estimates, appeared in 1960. quarterly balance of payments estimates and the Balance of Payments Pink Book, first published in 1960.  Financial Statistics, first appeared in 1962.   == United Nations == After the Second World War, the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) invited a number of prominent national statisticians, including Harry Campion, to form a 'Nuclear' Statistical Commission, which met from 1–14 May 1946 and made recommendations for the composition and terms of a permanent commission on statistics; the organisation of a statistical organisation; the disposition of existing statistical activities conducted by the League of Nations; the relationship between the statistical activities of the UN and specialised agencies; and the relationship between the statistical activities of the UN and other non-governmental organisations. Shortly afterward, Campion was seconded, at the request of the first Secretary General of the United Nations, Mr Trygve Lie, to the UN for a year to organise the creation of the United Nations Statistical Office.   == Death and bequests == Sir Harry Campion died in 1996 aged 91. On his death, Sir Harry Campion bequeathed half the residue of his estate to the Royal Statistical Society, who decided to commemorate him and the prominent part he played in the development of official statistics through a Fellowship. The Campion Fellowship ia awarded every two years with the maximum sum of money available on any occasion being £10,000, to Fellows of the Society to promote a specific piece of work or project that would make a significant contribution to the development, use or exposition of statistics on the economic or social well being of the population. The Manchester Statistical Society was also a beneficiary of the estate of Sir Harry Campion and similarly the bequest was placed into a trust fund to provide occasional modest grants to support research consistent with the Society's objective and history.   == Posts held == Director, Central Statistical Office, UK, 1941–1967. Member of the 'Nuclear' United Nations Statistics Commission, 1–15 May 1946. Director, United Nations Statistical Office, 1946–1947 Chairman, United Nations Statistics Commission, 1951 & 1953. President, Royal Statistical Society, 1957–1959. President, International Statistical Institute, 1963–1967. Vice-President, Manchester Statistical Society.   == Awards == CBE (1945). CB (1949). RSS Guy Medal in Silver (1950). KCB (1957). Honorary LLB, Manchester (1967).   == References ==   == Further reading == Ward, R & Doggett, T. (1991). Keeping Score: The First Fifty Years of the Central Statistical Office. London: HMSO. Obituary: Sir Harry Campion, 1905–96, W. Rudoe, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society), Vol. 160, No. 1 (1997), pp. 148–151   == External links == Report to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations on the first session of the Statistics Commission held from 27 January to 7 February 1947, paragraph 7, page 4. United Nations Statistics Division "Monthly Digest of Statistics", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2006. "Statistics of Trade Act 1947", (as amended), ONS library service. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Introduction to UK Standard Industrial Classification of Economic Activities UK SIC(92)", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Annual Abstract of Statistics", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Index of Production – UK", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Economic Trends", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "United Kingdom National Accounts – The Blue Book", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "United Kingdom Balance of Payments – The Pink Book", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Financial Statistics", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007.

Harry V. Roberts (1923–2004), American statistician, was a distinguished teacher and a pioneer in looking at the applications of Bayesian statistics to business decision making and in Total Quality Management. Roberts began teaching at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business in 1949 as an instructor of statistics. He was promoted to assistant professor in 1951. He earned his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1955, and was appointed associate professor. He was made full professor in 1959, and was named Sigmund E. Edelstone Professor of Statistics and Quality Management in 1991. In 1997, Roberts was awarded the Norman Maclean Faculty Award from the University of Chicago for his contributions to teaching and to the student experience on campus. In recognition of his career achievements, the Chicago chapter of the American Statistical Association created the Harry V. Roberts Statistical Advocate Award, first given in January 2002. His varied research interests also included interactive computing; time series analysis; the relation between statistical theory and practical decision making; survey methodology and practice; and productivity and quality improvement. Roberts was the co-author of many influential publications, including two groundbreaking books: Basic Methods of Marketing Research (with James Lorie) and the textbook, Statistics: A New Approach (with W. Allen Wallis). He also co-authored an early work on the random walk hypothesis of stock market prices, “Differencing of Random Walks and Near Random Walks,” with Nicholas Gonedes, published in the Journal of Econometrics in 1977. Roberts was an early computer enthusiast, and was especially interested in developing computer methods for statistical analysis. In the late 1960s, Roberts, in collaboration with his wife June and Robert Ling, developed a statistics package called Interactive Data Analysis (IDA), used for statistical instruction at a number of top business schools. Toward the end of his career, Roberts helped develop a curriculum in Total Quality Management at Chicago GSB and co-authored Quality is Personal: A Foundation for Total Quality Management (with B. E. Sergesketter). This was a novel application of TQM methods to self-improvement, reminiscent of self-experimentation.   == External links == Univ. of Chicago Obituary Chicago Chapter of Amer. Statistical Association

Henry Heylyn Hayter CMG (28 October 1821 – 23 March 1895) was an English-born Australian statistician   == Life == Hayter was the son of Henry Hayter and his wife Eliza Jane née Heylyn, and was born at Eden Vale, Wiltshire, England. He was educated at Charterhouse School and at Paris, and entered the Merchant Navy as a midshipman. He emigrated to Victoria, Australia in December 1852. After five years in Australia, Hayter joined the Victorian registrar-general's department in 1857 and gave particular attention to the statistics of the colony. In 1862 he was put at the head of the statistical branch of the department. He was appointed secretary to a Royal Commission to inquire into the working of the public service of Victoria in 1870, and in 1872 compiled an exhaustive report, which was the basis of the Public Service Act. Towards the end 1872, he spent a short holiday in New Zealand, where he investigated, at the request of the Government, the working of the Registrar-General's department, and made suggestions for its improvement. All his suggestions were adopted. In May 1874 he was appointed Victorian Government Statist in charge of a separate department and immediately started the “Victorian Year Book”. In 1875 a conference of Australian statisticians met at Hobart, to consider setting up uniform methods of handling official statistics. In most cases it was decided to adopt the methods used by Hayter. He edited and wrote most of a “Precis of Information on the Colony of Victoria, and its Capabilities for Defence” for the Intelligence Department of the War Office in 1877. In 1879 Hayter visited England as secretary to the Graham Berry and Charles Henry Pearson mission to London, and twice gave evidence to a committee of the British House of Commons which was considering how the system of collecting British statistics should be organised. In 1888 Hayter was president of the section dealing with economic and social science and statistics at the first meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, and in his presidential address pointed out the need for the methods in the different colonies to be completely uniform. He had conducted the census in Victoria in 1871 and 1881, and had found that a departure by any one colony from the established practice of the others made it quite impossible to deal with some statistics for the whole of Australia. He had intended retiring in 1890 but at the request of the government conducted the 1891 census. Hayter wrote several works including Notes of a Tour in New Zealand, Notes on the Colony of Victoria, a short history and a geography of Victoria for use in Victorian State schools, and of a Handbook to the Colony of Victoria, as well as a Nosological Index used throughout Australasia for classifying the causes of death. He wrote many papers which were read before scientific societies in various parts of the world and also produced some poetical works. He was created C.M.G. in 1882. Hayter died at Armadale near Melbourne in 1895. Hayter married Susan Dodd, daughter of William Dodd, in 1855 and they had a son. Henry's brother Harrison Hayter was a distinguished civil engineer in England.   == References ==   == Sources ==  Harris, Charles Alexander (1901). "Hayter, Henry Heylyn". In Sidney Lee. Dictionary of National Biography, 1901 supplement​. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Henry Ludwell Moore (November 21, 1869 – April 28, 1958) was an American economist known for his pioneering work in econometrics. Moore was born in Charles County, Maryland, the first of 15 children. He received a B.A. from Randolph-Macon College in 1892 and a Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University in 1896. His thesis was on von Thünen's theory of the natural wage. The visiting lecturers included Simon Newcomb and J. B. Clark and he may have learned some mathematical economics from them. While doing the Ph.D., he spent a year at the University of Vienna. At that time study in Europe was quite usual; Americans often went to Europe, usually to Germany, for their entire graduate education. Moore was an early U.S. Ph.D. His academic career proceeded through an instructorship and lectureship at Johns Hopkins, a professorship at Smith College from 1897 to 1902 and finally to positions at Columbia University. He retired from Columbia in 1929 due to ill health. Moore's earliest interest seems to have been in the history of economic thought but in 1901 he turned to the project of providing a "statistical complement to pure economics." Although he had studied with Carl Menger in Vienna, his "pure economics" belonged rather to the Marshallian and Walrasian branches of marginal economics. In 1903, 1909 and 1912, Moore visited Walras, Pareto and Bortkiewicz respectively. To improve his knowledge of statistical techniques, he attended the lectures of Karl Pearson in 1909 and 1913. Moore's first book, on testing the marginal productivity theory of wages, was well received as a pioneering venture, although Alfred Marshall refused to read it, telling Moore that "it proceeds on lines which I deliberately decided not to follow many years ago." Moore wrote two books on economic cycles, in which the economic cycle is presented as a reflection of a physical cycle. Economic Cycles argues that a rainfall cycle affects agricultural markets, which affect industrial markets. Generating Economic Cycles traces the rainfall cycle back to an astronomical cycle. There is a strong family resemblance between this cycle work and the earlier sunspot research of William Stanley Jevons. Moore's last book Synthetic Economics aimed to provide a statistical counterpart to Walras's general equilibrium theory. With his contemporaries, Wesley Mitchell and Irving Fisher, H. L. Moore pioneered new kinds of quantitative economics in the United States. Unlike them, Moore was not a great public figure. He was a private, sensitive person who suffered from long periods of illness. At the end of his essay on Moore, Stigler writes "In general one can say that Moore was as much a founder of this movement [statistical economics] as any one man is likely to be a founder of a great movement toward which a science has been steadily moving."   == Works == Laws of Wages: An Essay in Statistical Economics, 1911. Economic Cycles: Their Law and Cause, 1914. Forecasting the Yield and Price of Cotton, 1917. Generating Economic Cycles, 1923. Synthetic Economics, 1929 There is a full bibliography in Stigler's article below.   == Notes ==   == References == Stigler, George J. (1962). "Henry L. Moore and Statistical Economics". Econometrica 30 (1): 1–21. doi:10.2307/1911284. JSTOR 1911284.  Morgan, Mary S. (1990). A History of Econometric Ideas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-37398-0.    == External links == New School: Henry Ludwell Moore Two of Moore's books are available at the Archive for the History of Economic Thought Laws of Wages Economic Cycles  Columbia University Library: Henry Ludwell Moore Collection

Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne KG PC FRS (2 July 1780 – 31 January 1863), known as Lord Henry Petty from 1784 to 1809, was a British statesman. In a ministerial career spanning nearly half a century he notably served as Home Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer and was three times Lord President of the Council.   == Background and education == Lansdowne was the son of Prime Minister William Petty, 1st Marquess of Lansdowne (better known as the Earl of Shelburne) by his second marriage to Lady Louisa, daughter of John FitzPatrick, 1st Earl of Upper Ossory. He was educated at Westminster School, the University of Edinburgh, and Trinity College, Cambridge.   == Political career == He entered the House of Commons in 1802 as member for the family borough of Calne and quickly showed his mettle as a politician. In February 1806 he became Chancellor of the Exchequer in Lord Grenville's Ministry of All the Talents, being at this time member for the University of Cambridge, but he lost both his seat and his office in 1807. In 1809 he became Marquess of Lansdowne, and in the House of Lords and in society he continued to play an active part as one of the Whig leaders. His chief interest was perhaps in the question of Roman Catholic emancipation, a cause which he consistently championed, but he sympathised also with the advocates of the abolition of the slave-trade and with the cause of popular education. Lansdowne, who had succeeded his cousin, Francis Thomas Fitzmaurice, as 4th Earl of Kerry in 1818, took office with Canning in May 1827 and was Secretary of State for the Home Department from July of that year until January 1828. He was Lord President of the Council under Earl Grey and then under Lord Melbourne from November 1830 to August 1841, with the exception of the few months in 1835 when Sir Robert Peel was prime minister. He held the same office during the whole of Lord John Russell's ministry (1846–1852), and, having declined to become prime minister, sat in the cabinets of Lord Aberdeen and of Lord Palmerston, but without office. In 1857 he refused the offer of a dukedom, and he died on 31 January 1863. Lansdowne's social influence and political moderation made him one of the most powerful Whig statesmen of the time; he was frequently consulted by Queen Victoria on matters of moment, and his long official experience made his counsel invaluable to his party.   == Other public appointments == Lansdowne chaired the inaugural meeting of the London Statistical Society, and was its first president (1834–1836). He later served a second term (1842–1844). (See The Times 15 and 17 March 1834, and John Bibby (1987) HOTS: History of Teaching Statistics.)   == Family == Lord Lansdowne married Lady Louisa, daughter of the 2nd Earl of Ilchester, in 1808. She died in April 1851, aged 65. Lord Lansdowne died in January 1863, aged 82. His eldest son, the Earl of Kerry, had predeceased him and he was succeeded in the marquessate by his eldest surviving son Henry. The latter was the father of Henry Petty-FitzMaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne, who also became a distinguished statesman.   == References ==   == External links ==  Archival material relating to Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne listed at the UK National Archives  Obituary in Illustrated London News, 14 February 1863. Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Marquess of Lansdowne

Edward Hilton Young, 1st Baron Kennet GBE DSO DSC* PC (20 March 1879 – 11 July 1960) was a British politician and writer.   == Family and early life == Young was the youngest son of Sir George Young, 3rd Baronet (see Young baronets), a noted classicist and charity commissioner. Sir George's paternal grandmother was Emily Baring of the eponymous merchant banking dynasty. Hilton's mother, formerly Alice Eacy Kennedy, was of Dublin Irish Protestant background and had previously lived in India as Lady Lawrence, wife of Sir Alexander Lawrence, Bt, nephew to the Viceroy, Lord Lawrence. Widowed when Sir Alexander died in a bridge collapse, Alice returned to England, marrying Sir George in 1871. Hilton was the youngest of three sons and one daughter (who died aged 14) born to the couple. The oldest brother, also George, would become a diplomat and Ottoman scholar. The next brother, Geoffrey (see Geoffrey Winthrop Young), became a noted educator and mountaineer. Their childhood was spent at the family’s Thames-side ‘Formosa’ estate, at Cookham, Berkshire. On visits to their London house near Sloane Square, Hilton would often play in Kensington Gardens with the children of Sir George’s friend, Sir Leslie Stephen. In this way, he commenced a close friendship with his contemporary, Thoby Stephen, and became acquainted with Thoby’s siblings, Vanessa (see Vanessa Bell), Virginia (see Virginia Woolf) and Adrian. At his preparatory school, Northaw Place, in 1892 Young took pity on nine-year-old Clement Attlee on the latter's first day at school, offering the newcomer jam from his own pot. His secondary schooling commenced at Marlborough but incessant bullying saw him transferred to Eton where he joined the army stream which emphasised science rather than the classics. After two terms studying chemistry at University College London, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge in October 1897, emerging in 1900 with a 'first' in natural sciences and having achieved the office of president of the Union Society.   == Early career == Post-Cambridge he read for the Bar and was called by the Inner Temple in 1904. However, after receiving few briefs and suffering a nervous breakdown, he transferred to financial journalism. In 1908 he was appointed assistant editor of The Economist, resigning in 1910 to become city editor of The Morning Post. His 1912 work Foreign Companies and Other Corporations combined his legal and financial knowledge to examine the status of companies created in one national jurisdiction which operate in other jurisdictions. At Cambridge, through Thoby Stephen, he became acquainted with key members of what would become known as the ‘Bloomsbury group’. He attended the group’s early gatherings at Gordon Square and Fitzroy Square, and became attracted to Virginia Stephen, to whom he proposed on a punt on the Cam in May 1909, only to be rejected. Another Cambridge friendship, made through his brother Geoffrey, was with G. M. Trevelyan and in Spring 1906 he accompanied the historian during a retracement of the route of Garibaldi’s retreat which became the basis for Trevelyan’s Garibaldi trilogy. The second work in the trilogy — Garibaldi and the Thousand — was dedicated to the Young brothers and contained 15 photographs taken by Hilton.   == First World War == Enlisting in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve on 22 August 1914 and commissioned in September, he served in a wide variety of theatres and actions in the First World War, including the Grand Fleet at Scapa Flow, Harwich light cruisers, Admiral Troubridge’s mission to the Danube, naval siege guns at Flanders, the Zeebrugge Raid in which, commanding a rear gun on HMS Vindictive, he was severely wounded, necessitating the amputation of his right arm, and, finally, in the Russian campaign, commanding an armoured train on the line south of Archangel. These experiences were all recounted in his colourful 1920 war memoir, By Sea and Land. His war service also brought the awards of DSC and bar, DSO, Croix-de-Guerre and Serbian Silver Medal. Another literary consequence of his war service was A Muse at Sea, a compilation of his poems earlier published in the Ducal Weekly (the Iron Duke’s newspaper), the Morning Post, the Cornhill Magazine and the Nation. He also rendered other types of service to his friends Lytton Strachey and Clive Bell during the War. In 1908 he had bought a weekender cottage, the 'Lacket', at Lockeridge above Marlborough. During 1914–15 he rented the cottage to Strachey who drafted the first two chapters of his Eminent Victorians there. Facing a tribunal hearing to determine his claim for conscientious-objector status following the introduction of conscription, Bell appealed to Young in June 1916 for a testimonial which was duly provided. In May 1915, while serving on the HMS Iron Duke at Scapa Flow, the first edition of his System of National Finance appeared. Through further editions in 1924 and 1936, it remained the standard work on Westminster’s budgetary processes until well into the 1950s. Also while on active service, in February 1915 he was elected unopposed as a Liberal MP at a by-election for the seat of Norwich. Post-war he started his rise up the political ladder in February 1919 when he was appointed parliamentary private secretary to H.A.L. Fisher, president of the Board of Education. In April 1921 he was promoted to Financial Secretary to the Treasury. In this capacity he was the link between the government and the ‘Geddes axe’, the committee of business experts established by Lloyd George in the aftermath of World War I to undertake a fundamental review of government expenditure in the hope of identifying major savings.   == Post-war career == Out of office with the advent of Bonar Law’s Conservative administration in August 1922, he became Chief Whip for the Lloyd George Liberals and a Privy Counsellor. Losing his Norwich seat for 10 months during the political turmoil of 1923–4, he devoted the rest of the 1920s to furthering his personal and business interests, commencing with his 1922 marriage to sculptor Kathleen Scott, née Bruce, widow of Captain Robert Falcon Scott. With the marriage he became stepfather to Kathleen’s son, the future naturalist and yachtsman, Peter Scott. In August 1923 Kathleen, aged 45, gave birth to their son Wayland Young, who became a writer and Labour politician. Speaking at the Gresham's School prize-giving on 13 July 1923, Young "...recommended the boys to go in for great risks and dangerous deeds. Let them have adventure, and the madder the adventure, the better." Through Cambridge and Bloomsbury, Young had a longstanding friendship with E.M. Forster. Suffering writer’s block while working on A Passage to India, the novelist was Young’s guest at the Lacket in early May 1922. Shortly afterwards he wrote to Young declaring, “an unfinished novel’s before me now, and sometimes I work at it with distaste and despair…You certainly have done more than any individual I know to help me by direct remarks. Your knowledge of the business of creating seemed to me profounder than that possessed by so-called artists.” These comments suggest that Young gave Forster significant advice and encouragement at a crucial stage on work on the latter’s eventual masterpiece. In the City of London, Young became editor of the Financial News, 1926–29, when he introduced an Arts page which was continued by the Financial Times when they were merged in 1946. He also joined the boards of the Southern Railway, English Electric, and Hudson’s Bay companies. For Westminster he became a peripatetic financial- and political-troubleshooter, undertaking inter alia financial missions to Poland (1922–3) and Iraq (1925, 1930) intended to stabilise the financial positions of these countries, the former recreated and he latter newly created after World War I. The 1930 Iraq mission saw him recommend the establishment of an Iraq Currency Board to issue a national currency, the dinar, to replace Indian rupees issued as temporary currency when British forces displaced the Ottomans from the former Mesopotamia during World War I. The Iraqi government accepted Young’s recommendations in relation to the nation’s currency and he became the inaugural chairman of the Iraq Currency Board on 11 June 1931. He also chaired the 1925–6 Royal Commission on Indian Currency and Finance (at which his friend Maynard Keynes was a key witness) and the 1927–8 East African Commission on Closer Union. Young joined the Conservative Party in 1926 during his term as MP for Norwich. He served as a delegate to the Assembly of the League of Nations, 1926 and 1927. He became MP for Sevenoaks in 1929 and served as Minister for Export Credits from 1929 and Minister of Health between 1931 and 1935. The health portfolio also included responsibility for housing, including slum clearance and rehousing. Key items of legislation to which he contributed in this period were: the Town and Country Planning Act (1932) (which applied to all 'developable' land), the Housing Act (1935) (which laid down standards of accommodation) and the Restriction of Ribbon Development Act (1935) (which sought to consolidate urban development and restrict ribbon sprawl along major highways). He retired from politics in July 1935 and was created Baron Kennet of the Dene.   == After politics == Away from politics, he could now resume his life in business. By 1940, Lord Kennet was either chairman or a director of eight listed companies, which apart from the Southern Railway and timber merchants, Denny, Mott and Dickson Ltd, were engaged in the financial services and property sectors. In May 1940 he resumed his former role as chairman of the Iraq Currency Board when Leo Amery, who had replaced him as chairman in 1932, resigned on becoming a member of the wartime government. His political and financial experience made him a natural choice to chair the Capital Issues Committee during 1937–59. Responsible for advising the Chancellor of the Exchequer “on applications to issue capital for any purpose anywhere”, this committee was particularly important during World War II when it had to approve all issues of shares and securities with face values exceeding ₤10,000. He died at the Lacket on 11 July 1960 and was succeeded to the Kennet peerage by his son Wayland.   == References ==   == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Hilton Young Portraits of Edward Hilton Young, 1st Baron Kennet at the National Portrait Gallery, London

Holbrook Working (1895 – October 5, 1985) was an American professor of economics and statistics at Stanford University’s Food Research Institute known for his contributions on hedging, on the theory of futures prices, on an early theory of market maker behavior, and on the theory of storage (including the Working curve which plots the difference between short term and long term grain futures prices against current inventory).   == Biography == He was a native of Fort Collins, Colorado. Working earned his Ph.D. in Agricultural Economics from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1921. He taught at Cornell University and the University of Minnesota before he joined Stanford's Food Research Institute in 1925. His younger brother Elmer Working made a major contribution on the identification problem for demand curves in econometrics, with which Holbrook Working was also involved. Working disagreed with Keynes’s backwardation theory of futures prices, which argued that short hedgers (farmers) drive down futures prices because of their demand for price insurance. Working argued that there could be hedgers on both sides of the market and that hedging was essentially not a risk reduction technique, but "speculation in the basis" which allows informed traders and commodity dealers to profit from their knowledge of future changes in the difference between futures and spot prices. He was a founding member of the Econometric Society and was elected a Fellow of the American Agricultural Economics Association, the American Statistical Association, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1981 he was awarded the Wilks Memorial Award by the American Statistical Association.   == Notable papers == Working, Holbrook (August 1925). "The statistical determination of demand curves". The Quarterly Journal of Economics (Oxford Journals) 39 (4): 503–543. doi:10.2307/1883264.  Working, Holbrook (March 1928). "Business cycles: the problem and its setting, by Wesley C. Mitchell (book review)". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Sage) 23 (161): 89–109. doi:10.1080/01621459.1928.10503002.  Working, Holbrook; Hotelling, Harold (March 1929). "Applications of the theory of error to the interpretation of trends". Journal of the American Statistical Association, special issue: Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Sage) 24 (165A): 73–85. doi:10.1080/01621459.1929.10506274.  Working, Holbrook (March 1934). "A random-difference series for use in the analysis of time series". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Sage) 29 (185): 11–24. doi:10.1080/01621459.1934.10502683.  Working, Holbrook (October 1935). "Differential price behavior as a subject for commodity price analysis". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 3 (4): 416–427. doi:10.2307/1905633. JSTOR 1912225.  Working, Holbrook (June 1953). "Futures trading and hedging". The American Economic Review (American Economic Association via JSTOR) 43 (3): 314–343. JSTOR 1811346.  Working, Holbrook (November 1953). "Hedging reconsidered". American Journal of Agricultural Economics (Oxford Journals) 35 (4): 544–561. doi:10.2307/1233368.  Working, Holbrook (June 1962). "New concepts concerning futures markets and prices". The American Economic Review (American Economic Association via JSTOR) 52 (3): 413–459. JSTOR 1810553.  Working, Holbrook (1967). "Tests of a theory concerning floor trading on commodity exchanges". Stanford University’s Food Research Institute (AgEcon search) 7 (s): 5–48.    == References ==

Howell Tong (simplified Chinese: 汤家豪; traditional Chinese: 湯家豪; pinyin: TANG JIA HAO; born 1944 in Hong Kong) is a pioneer and an acknowledged authority in the field of nonlinear time series analysis, linking it with deterministic chaos. He is the father of the threshold time series models, which have extensive applications in ecology, economics, epidemiology and finance. Since October 1, 2009, he has been an Emeritus Professor at the London School of Economics and was twice (2009, 2010) holder of the Saw Swee Hock Professorship of Statistics at the National University of Singapore. He was a Distinguished Visiting Professor of Statistics at the University of Hong Kong from 2005 to 2013. Tong left Wah Yan College S.J. 香港華仁書院 (founded in 1919) in Hong Kong in 1961 and went, under his father's direction, to complete his matriculation at the Barnsbury School for Boys in North London (-one of the earliest comprehensive schools in England, now no longer in existence). He got his Bachelor of Science in 1966 (with first class honours), Master of Science in 1969 and Doctor of Philosophy in 1972, all from the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), where he studied under Maurice Priestley. Tong remained in UMIST first as a lecturer and then as a senior lecturer. While in Manchester, he started his married life with Mary. In 1982, he moved to the Chinese University of Hong Kong where he was the founding Chair of Statistics. Four years later, he returned to England to be Chair of Statistics at the University of Kent at Canterbury until 1999. From 1999 to September 2009, Tong was a Chair of Statistics at the London School of Economics and founded the Centre for the Analysis of Time Series. Between 1997 and 2004, Tong was also Chair Professor of Statistics, Founding Dean of the Graduate School and later Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Hong Kong. Tong was elected a member of the International Statistical Institute in 1983. In 1986, he was the session organiser and an invited speaker of the session on time series analysis, at the First World Congress of the Bernoulli Society held at Tashkent in the former Soviet Union. In 1994, he was the Special Plenary Lecturer at the 15th Nordic Meeting in Mathematical Statistics held at Lund, Sweden. He was elected a Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in 1993, an Honorary Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries, England in 1999, and a Foreign Member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters in 2000. In 2000, he became the first statistician to win the (class II) National Natural Science Prize in China. In 2002, the University of Hong Kong gave him their then highest award, the Distinguished Research Achievement Award, carrying a sum of HK$1,000,000 per annum for three years. The Royal Statistical Society, UK, awarded him their Guy Medal in Silver in 2007 in recognition of his "...many important contributions to time series analysis over a distinguished career and in particular for his fundamental and highly influential paper "Threshold autoregression, limit cycles and cyclical data", read to the Society in 1980, which paved the way for a major body of work in non-linear time series modelling."  In 2012, the International Chinese Statistical Association awarded him the Distinguished Achievement Award. Tong has one son, one daughter and one granddaughter.   == Bibliography == Tong, H. (1983). Threshold Models in Non-linear Time Series Analysis. Springer Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90918-4.  Tong, H. (1990). Non-linear Time Series: A Dynamical System Approach. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-852224-X.  Chan, K.S. and Tong, H. (2001). Chaos: a statistical perspective. Springer Verlag.  Tong, Howell (2001). "A Personal journey through time series in Biometrika". Biometrika 88 (Biometrika Centenary): 195–218. doi:10.1093/biomet/88.1.195.  Tong, Howell (2001). "A Personal journey through time series in Biometrika". In D. M. Titterington and D. R. Cox. Biometrika: One Hundred Years. Oxford University Press. pp. 193–216. ISBN 0-19-850993-6.    == Notes ==   == External links == Web page in the University of Hong Kong Howell Tong at the Mathematics Genealogy Project An interview with Howell Tong (in Chinese) A conversation with Howell Tong and other papers Bruce E. Hansen (2011). "Threshold autoregression in economics" (PDF). Statistics and Its Interface 4: 123–127.

Hugh Scurfield is an English actuary of considerable note. He was born on 9 December 1935 in the County of Durham, England; the third of four children to William Russell Scurfield and Elizabeth Morton Scurfield (née Hedley). He graduated from Hertford College, Oxford with an M.A. in 1956. Scurfield is the past president of Institute of Actuaries (1990 - 1992), and past president of the International Congress of Actuaries (1998). Scurfield was the General Manager, Actuary, and Director of Norwich Union Insurance Group, now known as Aviva. Other notable positions held by Scurfield include: Director, Ecclesiastical Insurance Group (1994 - 2004); Member, International Actuarial Association (1998); Non-executive Director, Royal Shrewsbury Hospital NHS Trust (2003); Deputy Chairman, Help the Hospice (2002 -2006); appointed Vice President, Help The Hospice (May 2006); Trustee and Chairman of the Lottery for Severn Hospice. In 2008, Scurfield was appointed Chairman of The Development Trust (The King's School Worcester). Hugh married Ann Beverley Pocock, daughter of H R S Pocock, 11 Jul 1959 in Reigate, Surrey. He married Jill Charles-Edwards, daughter of Mervyn Charles-Edwards, 08 Dec 1978 in Bishops Castle following his divorce from Ann in 1977. The four children of Hugh and Ann are: Bryan Hugh Scurfield, b. 10 May 1960, Norwich; Jane Elizabeth Scurfield, b. 31 Aug 1962, Norwich; Mary Sara Scurfield, b. 22 May 1964, Norwich; and Clare Louise Scurfield, b. 19 Aug 1967, Norwich.   == Published papers == Address by the President of the Institute of Actuaries: Developing a Proactive Role, 25 June 1990. J.I.A. 118, 1-15 (1991) Lessons from Hospices: Past-president Hugh Scurfield develops a topic raised at the ageing population’s conference earlier in 2002   == See also == Institute of Actuaries   == References == Hertford College News, Issue 7, Autumn 2002 EcclesiasticalInsurance Group: REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 31 DECEMBER 2004 at the Wayback Machine (archived October 14, 2007) Photo of Hugh Scurfield, Chairman, The Development Trust

Isaac Max Rubinow (1875–1936) was a leading theorist on social insurance and one of the most influential writers on the subject. Rubinow was an MD, and held a Ph.D. in economics from Columbia University. His 1913 book, Social Insurance, was the most influential early work on social security. His work impacted a generation of social reformers, including President Theodore Roosevelt, who used Rubinow's work in drafting the Progressive Party platform in 1912. The Progressive Party was the first of its kind to call for social insurance. Rubinow was a Russian Jew who immigrated to the United States in 1893, at the age of 18. Attending Columbia University and New York University Medical School, he trained as a medical doctor. He grew so upset with the misery of his patients that he decided he could do more good for the common man by helping to alleviate their economic woes than he could as a physician. Employed as an economic expert in the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Bureau of Statistics, Division of Foreign Markets, Rubinow wrote several extensive analyses of the development of the Russian wheat market and the impact of growing Russian wheat exports on U.S. and world markets. Employed as an actuary, Rubinow was central to the formation of the Casualty Actuarial and Statistical Society of America in 1914, which is known today as the Casualty Actuarial Society. Rubinow was elected its first president (CAS 2008). Rubinow's 1934 book, The Quest for Security, established him as the most recognized theorist on social insurance in the first three decades of the twentieth century. Rubinow also authored a series of articles that appeared in the Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Home Economics, and Journal of Sociology on the so-called domestic service problem, and the difficulties that white middle-class women faced in finding an adequate supply of domestic servants. Rubinow argued that the reluctance and refusal of white native-born and immigrant women to enter domestic service reflected the feudal labor conditions that informed the occupation. In particular, Rubinow criticized mistresses for failing to open their homes to the same reforms that had been implemented in industrial workplace such as contracts, set hours, and other standardizations. Dr Rubinow married (1) Sophie Himwich. Their son, Raymond S. Rubinow (1905–1996), was a noted New York civic leader. Their daughter, Olga Rubinow Lurie (1907–2004), was a child psychologist and specialist in the emotional health of children. Raymond Rubinow married (2) Consuelo Kamholz (1909–1993).   == References == 1. Shvarts S., and Theodore Brown, "Kupat Holim, Dr. Isaac Max Rubinow, and the American Zionist Medical Unit's Experiment to Establish Health Care Services in Palestine 1918-1923", Bulletin of the History of Medicine,72(1)28-46, 1998 2. Shvarts S., Shehory-Rubin Z., "Hadassah" for the Health of the People, Samuel         Watchman's Sons Inc. & Dekel Academic Press, Tel Aviv, 2012, 298 pp. (Peer         review, scientific publication). http://www.amazon.com/dp/B008YUOMPM

Ian Castles AO OBE (20 February 1935 – 2 August 2010) was Secretary of the Australian Government Department of Finance (1979–86), the Australian Statistician (1986–94), and a Visiting Fellow at the Asia Pacific School of Economics and Government at the Australian National University, Canberra.   == Life and career == Castles was born in Kyneton, Victoria and educated at state schools in Sale, Wesley College, Melbourne and Melbourne University. in 1954, he joined the Australian Public Service in the archives division of the National Library of Australia, then located in Melbourne, and moved to Canberra in 1957. He joined the Treasury in 1958. He was appointed Secretary of the Department of Finance commencing from 2 January 1979. In 1986 he was appointed Australian Statistician. Between 1995 and 2000, he was Executive Director and Vice President of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and he was also President of the International Association of Official Statistics. He was a contributor to Online Opinion, appeared at events hosted by the Institute of Public Affairs and Centre for Independent Studies, and published papers with The Lavoisier Group. Ian Castles was a skeptic known for his criticism of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, particularly its Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. His interests included research into the information requirements for public policy (especially at the international level) and the history of economic thought. Ian Castles died on 2 August 2010, aged 75. His death was in Canberra Hospital, from complications following a heart attack.   == Honours == Ian Castles was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in June 1978, and an Officer of the Order of Australia in June 1987.   == Publications == His publications include: Ian Castles and David Henderson (2003) The IPCC emission scenarios: An economic-statistical critique, Energy & Environment, vol. 14: nos.2-3. Ian Castles and David Henderson (2003) Economics, emissions scenarios and the work of the IPCC, Energy & Environment, vol. 14, no. 4. Castles, Ian (2000) 'Reporting on Human Development: Lies, Damned Lies and Statistics', In Facts and Fancies of Human Development. Castles, Ian (eds.). Canberra: Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia.   == References ==   == External links == Ian Castles at Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia Ian Castles at Online Opinion Sourcewatch : Ian Castles Works by or about Ian Castles in libraries (WorldCat catalog)

İbrahim Sirkeci (born 1972) is a British Turkish management scientist, Ria Financial Professor of Transnational Studies and Marketing at the European Business School London, Regent's University London, and Director of Regent's Centre for Transnational Studies.   == Biography == Sirkeci received his BA in Political Science and Public Administration from Bilkent University, Ankara and PhD in Human Geography from the University of Sheffield. Prior to joining the European Business School London of Regent's University London, he worked as a Leverhulme Research Fellow at the Centre for the Study of Ethnicity and Citizenship, University of Bristol, and also as Assistant Professor at a private university in Ankara, Turkey. He is editor of several international peer-reviewed scholarly journals including Migration Letters, Transnational Marketing Journal, and Goc Dergisi. He authored several books including Cultures of Migration published by University of Texas Press in 2011, and The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany, was published by Edwin Mellen Press in 2006.   == Work == Sirkeci's research focuses on human mobility, remittances, transnational marketing, marketing of higher education, transnational consumers, ethnicity, segmentation, segregation and labour markets, conflict, international migration with particular reference to minorities in the UK, Turkish, Kurdish migration to Germany, Turkey and Iraq. He has written widely on transnational marketing, international migration, internal migration, population movements, labour market, segregation, ethnic conflict, minorities, Turks, Kurds, and remittances. Sirkeci also writes a weekly column for Turkish daily newspaper Birgun. His research is published in journals including Environment and Planning A, Sociological Research Online, Ethnic and Racial Studies, International Migration, and Journal of Biosocial Science., and Population Review   == Bibliography == Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Cohen, J. H.; Ratha, D. (2012). Migration and Remittances during the Global Financial Crisis and Beyond. Washington, DC, USA: The World Bank. p. 480. ISBN 978-0-8213-8826-6.  Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2013). Transnational Marketing and Transnational Consumers. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. p. 72. ISBN 978-3-642-36774-8.  Cohen, J. H.; Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2011). Cultures of Migration. Austin, Texas, USA: Texas University Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-292-72685-7.  Milewski, Nadja; Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Yucesahin, M. M. (2015). Family and Human Capital in Turkish Migration. London, UK: Transnational Press London. p. 166. ISBN 978-1-910-78116-6.  Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Elcin, Doga; Seker, Guven (2015). Politics and Law in Turkish Migration. London, UK: Transnational Press London. p. 202. ISBN 978-1-910-78102-9.  Seker, B. Dilara; Sirkeci, Ibrahim & Yucesahin, M. Murat (2015). Göç ve Uyum. London, UK: Transnational Press London. p. 390. ISBN 978-1-910-78108-1.   Sirkeci, Ibrahim (9/8/2009). "Freelonya'da Daltonlar Acilimi". Istanbul: BirGün Gazetesi. p. 5.   Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Magnúsdóttir, L. B. (2011). "Understanding illegal music downloading in the UK: A multi-attribute model". Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing (UK: Emerald) 5 (1): 90–110. doi:10.1108/17505931111121543. ISSN 2040-7122.  Ratha, Dilip; Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2010). "Editorial: Remittances and the global financial crisis". Migration Letters (London, UK: Migration Letters & The London Publishers) 7 (2): 125–131. ISSN 1741-8992.  Johnston, Ron; Sirkeci, Ibrahim, Khattab, N. & Modood, T. (2010). "Ethno-religious categories and measuring occupational attainment in relation to Education in England and Wales: a multi-level analysis". Environment and Planning A (UK: Pion) 42 (3): 578–591. doi:10.1068/a42180. ISSN 1472-3409.   Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2006). The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany. New York: Edwin Mellen Press. p. 332. ISBN 0-7734-5739-9.  Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2005). Turkmen in Iraq and International Migration of Turkmen [Irak'tan Türkmen Göçleri ve Göç Eğilimleri]. Ankara: Global Strategy Institute. p. 88. ISBN 975-8975-02-1.  (bilingual: English and Turkish). Icduygu, A; Sirkeci, Ibrahim & Aydingün, I. (eds) (1998). Türkiye'de Içgöç [Internal Migration in Turkey]. Istanbul: Tarih Vakfi Yayinlari. ISBN 975-7306-31-2.  (in Turkish)   == See also == British Turks List of British Turks   == References ==   == External links == Direct Marketing, editorial advisory board Professor Ibrahim Sirkeci's talk at European Parliament Population Review, scientific review board Home page at EBSL Ibrahim Sirkeci, The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany, New York, Edwin Mellen Press, 2006, ISBN 978-0-7734-5739-3 BirGün columnists Ibrahim Sirkeci Londra Yazıları YOKSULLAR VE İŞÇİLER KONUŞULMADI, 28 Eylül 2008

Irénée-Jules Bienaymé (28 August 1796 – 19 October 1878), was a French statistician. He built on the legacy of Laplace generalizing his least squares method. He contributed to the fields of probability and statistics, and to their application to finance, demography and social sciences. In particular, he formulated the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality concerning the law of large numbers and the Bienaymé formula for the variance of a sum of uncorrelated random variables.   == BiographyEdit == With Irénée-Jules Bienaymé ends the line of great French probability thinkers that began with Pascal and Fermat, then continued with Laplace and Poisson. After Bienaymé, progress in statistics took place in the UK and Russia. His personal life was marked by bad fortune. He studied at the Lycée de Bruges and then at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris. After participating in the defense of Paris in 1814, he attended the École Polytechnique in 1815. Unfortunately that year's class was excluded in the following year by Louis XVIII because of their sympathy for Bonapartists. In 1818, he lectured on mathematics at the Académie militaire de Saint-Cyr but, two years later, he entered the Finance Ministry. He was rapidly promoted, first to inspector, then to inspector general. But the new Republican administration removed him in 1848 for his lack of support for the Republican regime. He became professor of probability at the Sorbonne, but he lost his position in 1851. He then became a consultant as an expert statistician for the government of Napoléon III. In 1852 he was admitted to the Académie des sciences. After 23 years, Bienaymé became the examiner for the attribution of the academy's prize in statistics. He was also a founding member of the Société Mathématique de France, holding its presidency in 1875.   == Contributions to mathematicsEdit == Bienaymé published only 23 articles, half of which appeared in obscure conditions. His first works concerned demographics and actuarial tables. In particular he studied the extinction of closed families (aristocratic families for instance) which declined even as the general population was growing. As a disciple of Laplace and under the influence of Laplace's Théorie analytique des probabilités (1812), he defended the latter's conceptions in a debate with Poisson on the size of juries and on the necessary majority for obtaining a conviction. He translated into French the works of his friend the Russian mathematician Pafnuty Chebyshev, and published the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality which gives a simple demonstration of the law of large numbers. He corresponded with Quételet, and also had links with Lamé. Bienaymé criticized Poisson's "law of large numbers" and was involved in a controversy with Cauchy. Both Bienaymè and Cauchy published regression methods at about the same time. Bienaymé had generalized the method of ordinary least squares. The dispute within the literature was over the superiority of one method over the other. It is now known that ordinary least squares is the best linear unbiased estimator provided errors are uncorrelated and homoscedastic. At the time, this was not known. Cauchy developed the Cauchy distribution to show a case where the method of ordinary least squares resulted in a perfectly inefficient estimator. This is due to the fact that the Cauchy distribution has no defined variance to minimize. This is the first direct appearance of the Cauchy distribution in the academic literature. The curve had been previously studied by others, though in the English language as the Witch of Agnesi.   == ReferencesEdit ==  « Actes de la journée du 21 juin 1996 consacrée à Irénée-Jules Bienaymé », 'Cahiers du Centre d'Analyse et de Mathématiques Sociales', n° 138, Série Histoire du Calcul des Probabilités et de la Statistique, n° 28, Paris, E.H.E.S.S.-C.N.R.S Stephen M. Stigler (1974) Studies in the history of probability and statistics. XXXIII: Cauchy and the witch of Agnesi: An historical note on the Cauchy distribution. Biometrika Vol. 61 No. 2 pp. 375–380   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Irénée-Jules Bienaymé", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Ivan Peter Fellegi, OC (Hungarian: Fellegi Péter Iván; born June 22, 1935) is a Hungarian-Canadian statistician and was the Chief Statistician of Canada from 1985 to 2008. Born in Szeged, Hungary, Ivan Fellegi was in his third year of studying mathematics at the Eötvös Loránd University, when the Hungarian uprising was crushed in 1956. He arrived in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, that year and soon began working for Statistics Canada (then known as the Dominion Bureau of Statistics), which is widely regarded as one of the best statistical agencies in the world. He completed his studies with night courses at Carleton University. In 1958 he was the first Carleton University student to receive a Master of Science degree. Upon completing his doctoral studies in mathematical statistics in 1961 he became Carleton's first Ph.D. graduate. In 1961 he was appointed Director of Sampling Research and Consultation staff, and Director General of the Methodology and systems Branch in 1971. He was promoted to Assistant Chief Statistician in 1973, and became Deputy Chief Statistician in 1984. On September 1, 1985, with close to 30 years experience, Ivan Fellegi was appointed Chief Statistician of Canada. He announced his retirement as Chief Statistician on February 15, 2008. In 1992, he was made a Member of the Order of Canada and was promoted to Officer in 1998. He is an honorary member of the International Statistical Institute and an honorary Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society. He provided advice on statistical matters to his native Hungary following its transition to democracy, and in 2004 he was awarded the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary.   == References == A newspaper profile from the Statistics Canada website Characteristics of an Effective Statistical System Carleton University Alumni Ottawa Citizen, February 16, 2008: A few less surveys, a few more poems Canadian Who's Who 1997 Statistics Canada (1993). 75 Years and Counting: A History of Statistics Canada. Ottawa: Minister Responsible for Statistics Canada. (Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 11-531).

Jahar Saha is a professor and former director of the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad, a position he held from 1998 to 2002.   == Biography == Jahar Saha was born on 14 December 1943 at Kaladi in Matlab (now in Bangladesh). While his grandparents were in business, his father was a lawyer who later became a school teacher. His elder brother was a senior government official and his younger sister is a professor in a medical college at Kolkata.   == Education == Saha did a four-year professional degree in Statistics (B.Stat.), Masters in Statistics (M.stat), and a one-year Post-Graduate Diploma in Statistical Quality Control and Operations Research from the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata. Jahar Saha obtained his Ph.D. in Operations Research from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. His Ph.D. thesis was titled "Some Problems in Railway Networks" which focused on two kinds of problems in railway networks: (i) scheduling trains, (ii) selecting an optimal configuration for railway networks. Many of the problems were structured mathematical programming problems and Saha made attempts to develop efficient algorithms to the problems.   == Career == Saha started his career as a Trainee Technical Officer of SQC Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Mumbai. He also worked as a Junior System Consultant with a consulting company in Mumbai. Since 1975, Saha has been teaching in the Production and Quantitative Methods Area of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (lIMA). During his tenure at the Institute, he held the position of Director between 1998 and 2002. He had also taught at Lake Erie College, USA and had been Visiting Associate Professor at the University ofNew Brunswick, Canada. Professor Saha has been associated with the development of first-year courses on Mathematics and Statistics for Management (MSM). He also developed second-year courses on Linear Programming, Applications of Operations Research, Advanced Topic in Operations Research and Selected Topics in Operations Research, and Quality Management. He is a member of the Operations research Society of India.   == References ==   == External links == Profile at the Operations research Society of India, Ahmedabad Chapter website

James Howard Goodnight (born January 6, 1943) is an American businessman and software programmer. He and several other faculty members of North Carolina State University left the university in 1976 to co-found SAS Institute. Since the first day of incorporation (July 1, 1976) he has served as the company's CEO. His leadership style and the work environment he created at SAS, now a multi-billion dollar company, have been studied by other businesses and by academics.   == Early life and careerEdit == Goodnight was born to Albert Goodnight and Dorothy Patterson in Salisbury, NC, on January 6, 1943. He lived in Greensboro, NC, until he was 12, when his family moved to Wilmington. In his youth, he often worked at his father's hardware store. Mathematics and chemistry were Goodnight's strongest subjects in school, thanks in part, he says, to a "wonderful chemistry teacher" at New Hanover High School. Goodnight's career with computers began when he took a computer course his sophomore year at North Carolina State University. At the time, he said, “a light went on, and I fell in love with making machines do things for other people.” The following summer he got a job writing software programs for the agricultural economics department. With contributions from other alumni, Goodnight was responsible for the construction of a new fraternity house in 2002. Goodnight received a Master's in statistics in 1968. While working on his Master's, his curiosity was piqued over the prospect of a man being sent to the moon. His programming skills helped him land a position at a company building electronic equipment for the ground stations that communicated with the Apollo space capsules. While working on the Apollo program, Goodnight experienced a work environment that had an annual turnover rate of approximately 50 percent. This shaped his views on corporate culture and his future role as an employer. Goodnight returned to North Carolina State University after working on the Apollo project. He earned a PhD in statistics with thesis titled Quadratic unbiased estimation of variance components in linear models with an emphasis on the one-way classification under the supervision of Robert James Monroe and became a faculty member from 1972 to 1976.   == CareerEdit ==  Goodnight joined another faculty at North Carolina State in a research project to create a general purpose statistical analysis system (SAS) for analyzing agricultural data. The project was operated by a consortium of eight land-grant universities and funded primarily by the USDA. Goodnight along with another faculty member Anthony James Barr became project leaders for the development of the early version of SAS. When the software had 100 customers in 1976, Goodnight and three others from the University left the college to form SAS Institute in an office across the street. Goodnight remained CEO of SAS Institute for more than 35 years as the company grew from $138,000 its first year in business, to $420 million in 1993 and $2.43 billion by 2010. Under his leadership, the company grew each year. Goodnight became known for creating and defending SAS’ corporate culture, often described by the media as "utopian." He rejected acquisition offers and chose against going public to protect the company's work environment. Goodnight has maintained a flat organizational structure with about 27 people who report directly to him and three organizational layers.  HSM Global described Goodnight's leadership style in a framework of three pillars: "help employees do their best work by keeping them intellectually challenged and by removing distractions; Make managers responsible for sparking creativity; eliminate arbitrary distinctions between 'suits' and 'creatives'; Engage customers as creative partners to help deliver superior products." In 2004, Goodnight was named a Great American Business Leader by Harvard; that same year he was named one of America's 25 Most Fascinating Entrepreneurs by Inc. Magazine. He has also been a frequent speaker and participant at the World Economic Forum.   == PersonalEdit == Goodnight met his wife, Ann, while he was a senior at North Carolina State University and she was attending Meredith College. They have three children. Goodnight was America's 61st richest individual, with a net worth of approximately $7.3 billion, as of 2014. Goodnight has an interest in improving the state of education, particularly elementary and secondary education. In 1996, Goodnight and his wife, along with his business partner, John Sall and his wife Ginger, founded an independent prep school Cary Academy. Both of the Goodnights are also involved in the local Cary, NC, community. He owns Prestonwood Country Club and The Umstead Hotel and Spa situated on the edge of the SAS campus. His wife also opened An Cuisines, an Asian fusion restaurant in Cary, NC.   == See alsoEdit == SAS (software) SAS Institute List of Americans by net worth List of Tau Kappa Epsilon brothers Prestonwood Country Club   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Oral History Interview with Jim Goodnight, Oral Histories of the American South  Karklgaard, Rich. "Jim Goodnight: King of Analytics". Forbes.    == External linksEdit == Jim Goodnight's Official Bio

James Joseph Sylvester FRS (3 September 1814 – 15 March 1897) was an English mathematician. He made fundamental contributions to matrix theory, invariant theory, number theory, partition theory and combinatorics. He played a leadership role in American mathematics in the later half of the 19th century as a professor at the Johns Hopkins University and as founder of the American Journal of Mathematics. At his death, he was professor at Oxford.   == Biography == Sylvester was born James Joseph in London, England. His father, Abraham Joseph, was a merchant. James adopted the surname Sylvester when his older brother did so upon emigration to the United States—a country which at that time required all immigrants to have a given name, a middle name, and a surname. At the age of 14, Sylvester was a student of Augustus De Morgan at the University of London. His family withdrew him from the University after he was accused of stabbing a fellow student with a knife. Subsequently he attended the Liverpool Royal Institution. Sylvester began his study of mathematics at St John's College, Cambridge in 1831, where his tutor was John Hymers. Although his studies were interrupted for almost two years due to a prolonged illness, he nevertheless ranked second in Cambridge's famous mathematical examination, the tripos, for which he sat in 1837. However, Sylvester was not issued a degree, because graduates at that time were required to state their acceptance of the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, and Sylvester, being an adherent of Judaism, refused to do so. For the same reason, he was unable to compete for a Fellowship or obtain a Smith's prize. In 1838 Sylvester became professor of natural philosophy at University College London. In 1841, he was awarded a BA and an MA by Trinity College, Dublin. In the same year he moved to the United States to become a professor at the University of Virginia for about six months, and returned to England in November 1843. On his return to England he studied law, alongside fellow British lawyer/mathematician Arthur Cayley, with whom he made significant contributions to matrix theory while working as an actuary. One of his private pupils was Florence Nightingale. He did not obtain a position teaching university mathematics until 1855, when he was appointed professor of mathematics at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, from which he retired in 1869, because the compulsory retirement age was 55. The Woolwich academy initially refused to pay Sylvester his full pension, and only relented after a prolonged public controversy, during which Sylvester took his case to the letters page of The Times. One of Sylvester's lifelong passions was for poetry; he read and translated works from the original French, German, Italian, Latin and Greek, and many of his mathematical papers contain illustrative quotes from classical poetry. Following his early retirement, Sylvester (1870) published a book entitled The Laws of Verse in which he attempted to codify a set of laws for prosody in poetry. In 1872, he finally received his B.A. and M.A. from Cambridge, having been denied the degrees due to him being a Jew. In 1876 Sylvester again crossed the Atlantic Ocean to become the inaugural professor of mathematics at the new Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. His salary was $5,000 (quite generous for the time), which he demanded be paid in gold. After negotiation, agreement was reached on a salary that was not paid in gold. In 1878 he founded the American Journal of Mathematics. The only other mathematical journal in the US at that time was the Analyst, which eventually became the Annals of Mathematics. In 1883, he returned to England to take up the Savilian Professor of Geometry at Oxford University. He held this chair until his death, although in 1892 the University appointed a deputy professor to the same chair. Sylvester invented a great number of mathematical terms such as "matrix", "graph" (combinatorics) and "discriminant". He coined the term "totient" for Euler's totient function φ(n). His collected scientific work fills four volumes. In 1880, the Royal Society of London awarded Sylvester the Copley Medal, its highest award for scientific achievement; in 1901, it instituted the Sylvester Medal in his memory, to encourage mathematical research after his death in Oxford. In Discrete geometry he is remembered for Sylvester's Problem and a result on the orchard problem. Sylvester House, a portion of an undergraduate dormitory at Johns Hopkins University, is named in his honor. Several professorships there are named in his honor also.   == See also == List of things named after James Joseph Sylvester   == Publications == Sylvester, James Joseph (1870), The Laws of Verse Or Principles of Versification Exemplified in Metrical Translations: together with an annotated reprint of the inaugural presidential address to the mathematical and physical section of the British Association at Exeter, London: Longmans, Green and Co, ISBN 978-1-177-91141-2  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1904], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester I, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-3654-5  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1908], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester II, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-4719-0  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1904], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester III, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-4720-6  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1904], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester IV, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-4238-6    == Notes == ^ a b "Sylvester, James Joseph (SLVR831JJ)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge.  ^ Bell, Eric Temple (1986). Men of Mathematics. Simon Schuster.  ^ "Preliminary Outline of Instructions for the Session Beginning October 3, 1876". Johns Hopkins University. Official Circulars. No. 5. September 1876.  ^ Hawkins, Hugh (1960). Pioneer: A History of the Johns Hopkins University, 1874-1889. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. pp. 41–43.  ^ Matrices and determinants, The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive ^ See: J. J. Sylvester (February 7, 1878) "Chemistry and algebra," Nature, 17 : 284. From page 284: "Every invariant and covariant thus becomes expressible by a graph precisely identical with a Kekuléan diagram or chemicograph." J. J. Sylvester (1878) "On an application of the new atomic theory to the graphical representation of the invariants and covariants of binary quantics, — with three appendices," American Journal of Mathematics, Pure and Applied, 1 (1) : 64-90. The term "graph" first appears in this paper on page 65.  ^ J. J. Sylvester (1851) "On a remarkable discovery in the theory of canonical forms and of hyperdeterminants," Philosophical Magazine, 4th series, 2 : 391–410; Sylvester coins the word "discriminant" on page 406. ^ J. J. Sylvester (1879) "On certain ternary cubic-form equations," American Journal of Mathematics, 2 : 357–393; Sylvester coins the term "totient" on page 361: "(the so-called Φ function of any number I shall here and hereafter designate as its τ function and call its Totient)" ^ a b Dickson, L. E. (1909). "Review: Sylvester's Mathematical Papers, vols. I & II, ed. by H. F. Baker". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 15 (5): 232–239. doi:10.1090/S0002-9904-1909-01746-X.  ^ Dickson, L. E. (1911). "Review: Sylvester's Mathematical Papers, vol. III, ed. by H. F. Baker". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 17 (5): 254–255. doi:10.1090/S0002-9904-1911-02040-7.    == References == Grattan-Guinness, I. (2001), "The contributions of J. J. Sylvester, F.R.S., to mechanics and mathematical physics", Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 55 (2): 253–265, doi:10.1098/rsnr.2001.0142, MR 1840760 . Macfarlane, Alexander (2009) [1916], Lectures on Ten British Mathematicians of the Nineteenth Century, Mathematical monographs 17, Cornell University Library, ISBN 978-1-112-28306-2  Parshall, Karen Hunger (1998), James Joseph Sylvester. Life and work in letters., The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-850391-0, MR 1674190, Review  Parshall, Karen Hunger (2006), James Joseph Sylvester. Jewish mathematician in a Victorian world, Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-8291-3, MR 2216541   Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Sylvester, James Joseph". Encyclopædia Britannica 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   Lee, Sidney, ed. (1898). "Sylvester, James Joseph". Dictionary of National Biography 55. London: Smith, Elder & Co.  Parshall, Karen Hunger. "Sylvester, James Joseph (1814–1897)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/26872.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "James Joseph Sylvester", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . James Joseph Sylvester at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Collected papers – from the University of Michigan Historical Math Collection J.J.Sylvester home page Selected Poetry of James Joseph Sylvester

James M. Robins is an epidemiologist and biostatistician best known for advancing methods for drawing causal inferences from complex observational studies and randomized trials, particularly those in which the treatment varies with time. He is the 2013 recipient of the Nathan Mantel Award for lifetime achievement in statistics and epidemiology. He graduated in medicine from Washington University in 1976. He is currently Mitchell L. and Robin LaFoley Dong Professor of Epidemiology at Harvard School of Public Health. He has published over 100 papers in academic journals and is an ISI highly cited researcher.   == Biography == Robins attended Harvard College with the class of 1971, concentrating in mathematics and philosophy. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa in his junior year, but did not graduate. He went on to attend Washington University School of Medicine, and practiced Occupational Medicine for several years. While working in occupational medicine, he attended basic courses in applied medical statistics at the Yale School of Public Health, but quickly came to the conclusion that the methodology used at the time was insufficiently rigorous to support causal conclusions.   == Research == In 1986, Robins published the paper "A New Approach to Causal Inference in Mortality Studies", which introduced a new framework for drawing causal inference from observational data. In this paper and in other articles published around the same time, Robins showed that in non-experimental data, exposure is almost always time-dependent, and that standard methods such as regression are therefore almost always biased. This framework is mathematically very closely related to Judea Pearl's graphical framework Non-Parametric Structural Equations Models, which Pearl developed independently around the same time. In his original paper on causal inference, Robins described two new methods for controlling for confounding bias, which can be applied in the generalized setting of time-dependent exposures: The G-formula and G-Estimation of Structural Nested Models. Later, he introduced a third class of models, Marginal Structural Models, in which the parameters are estimated using inverse probability of treatment weights. He has also contributed significantly to the theory of dynamic treatment regimes, which are of high significance in comparative effectiveness research and personalized medicine.   == Notes ==   == References == James Robins — Mitchell L. and Robin LaFoley Dong Professor of Epidemiology. Harvard School of Public Health (Accessed 15 March 2008). Dr. James M. Robins — Bibliography Harvard School of Public Health (Accessed 15 March 2008). Gehrman, Elizabeth (March 23, 2006) James Robins makes statistics tell the truth: Numbers in the service of health. Harvard University Gazette.   == Selected publications == Robins, J.M. (1989). "The control of confounding by intermediate variables". Statistics in Medicine 8 (6): 679–701. doi:10.1002/sim.4780080608. PMID 2749074.  Robins, J.M.; Tsiatis, A.A. (1991). "Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using rank preserving structural failure time models". Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods 20 (8): 2609–2631. doi:10.1080/03610929108830654.  Robins, J.M. (1994). "Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using structural nested mean models". Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods 23 (8): 2379–2412. doi:10.1080/03610929408831393.  Robins, J.M. (1997). "Causal inference from complex longitudinal data". In M. Berkane. Latent Variable Modeling and Applications to Causality. Lecture notes in statistics 120. Springer-Verlag. pp. 69–117.  Robins, J.M.; Ritov, Y. (1997). "Toward A Curse Of Dimensionality Appropriate (CODA) Asymptotic Theory For Semi-parametric Models". Statistics in Medicine 16 (3): 285–319. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19970215)16:3<285::AID-SIM535>3.3.CO;2-R. PMID 9004398.  Robins, J.M. (1998). "Correction for non-compliance in equivalence trials". Statistics in Medicine 17 (3): 269–302. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19980215)17:3<269::AID-SIM763>3.0.CO;2-J. PMID 9493255.  Robins, J.M.; Hernan, M.A.; Brumback, B. (2000). "Marginal Structural Models and Causal Inference in Epidemiology". Epidemiology 11 (5): 550–560. doi:10.1097/00001648-200009000-00011. JSTOR 3703997. PMID 10955408.  Van Der Laan, M.J.; Robins, J.M. (2003). Unified Methods for Censored Longitudinal Data and Causality. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer. ISBN 0-387-95556-9.

James Tobin (March 5, 1918 – March 11, 2002) was an American economist who served on the Council of Economic Advisers and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and taught at Harvard and Yale Universities. He developed the ideas of Keynesian economics, and advocated government intervention to stabilize output and avoid recessions. His academic work included pioneering contributions to the study of investment, monetary and fiscal policy and financial markets. He also proposed an econometric model for censored endogenous variables, the well-known "Tobit model". Tobin received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1981. Outside of academia, Tobin was widely known for his suggestion of a tax on foreign exchange transactions, now known as the "Tobin tax". This was designed to reduce speculation in the international currency markets, which he saw as dangerous and unproductive.   == Life and career ==   === Early life === Tobin was born on March 5, 1918 in Champaign, Illinois. His father was Louis Michael Tobin, (b. 1879) a journalist working at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His father had fought in World War I, was a member of the first Greek organization at Illinois (Delta Tau Delta fraternity Beta Upsilon chapter), and was credited as the inventor of 'Homecoming'. His mother, Margaret Edgerton Tobin (b. 1893), was a social worker. Tobin followed primary school at the University Laboratory High School of Urbana, Illinois, a laboratory school in the university's campus. In 1935, on his father's advice, Tobin took the entrance exams for Harvard University. Despite no special preparation for the exams, he passed and was admitted with a national scholarship from the university. Here among the faculty, he would meet Joseph Schumpeter, Alvin Hansen, Gottfried Haberler, Sumner Slichter, Seymour Harris, Edward Mason, Edward Chamberlin, John Kenneth Galbraith and Wassily Leontief. During his studies he first read Keynes' The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, published in 1936. Tobin graduated summa cum laude in 1939 with a thesis centered on a critical analysis of Keynes' mechanism for introducing equilibrium "involuntary" unemployment. His first published article, in 1941, was based on this senior's thesis. Tobin immediately started graduate studies, also at Harvard, earning his M.A. degree in 1940. His fellow graduate students included Paul Samuelson, Lloyd Metzler, Abram Bergson, Richard Musgrave and Richard M. Goodwin. In 1941, he interrupted graduate studies to work for the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply and the War Production Board in Washington, D.C.. The next year, after the United States entered World War II, he enlisted in the US Navy, spending the war as an officer on a destroyer. At the end of the war he returned to Harvard and resumed studies, receiving his Ph.D. in 1947 with a thesis on the consumption function written under the supervision of Joseph Schumpeter. In 1947 Tobin was elected a Junior Fellow of Harvard's Society of Fellows, which allowed him the freedom and funding to spend the next three years studying and doing research.   === Academic activity and consultancy === In 1950 Tobin moved to Yale University, where he remained for the rest of his career. He joined the Cowles Foundation, which moved to Yale in 1955, also serving as its president between 1955–1961 and 1964-1965. His main research interest was to provide microfoundations to Keynesian economics, with a special focus on monetary economics. In 1957 he was appointed Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale. Besides teaching and research, Tobin was also strongly involved in the public life, writing on current economic issues and serving as an economic expert and policy consultant. During 1961–62, he served as a member of John F. Kennedy's Council of Economic Advisors, under the chairman Walter Heller, then acted as a consultant between 1962–68. Here, in close collaboration with Arthur Okun, Robert Solow and Kenneth Arrow, he helped design the Keynesian economic policy implemented by the Kennedy administration. Tobin also served for several terms as a member of the Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System Academic Consultants and as a consultant of the US Treasury Department. Tobin was awarded the John Bates Clark Medal in 1955 and, in 1981, the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics. He was a fellow of several professional associations, holding the position of president of the American Economic Association in 1971. In 1972 Tobin, along with fellow Yale economics professor William Nordhaus, published Is Growth Obsolete?, an article that introduced the Measure of Economic Welfare as the first model for economic sustainability assessment, and economic sustainability measurement. In 1988 Tobin formally retired from Yale, but continued to deliver some lectures as Professor Emeritus and continued to write. He died on March 11, 2002, in New Haven, Connecticut. Tobin was a trustee of Economists for Peace and Security.   === Personal life === James Tobin married Elizabeth Fay Ringo, a former M.I.T. student of Paul Samuelson, on September 14, 1946. They had four children: Margaret Ringo (born in 1948), Louis Michael (born in 1951), Hugh Ringo (born in 1953) and Roger Gill (born in 1956). In late June, 2009, the family announced via a private email that Tobin's wife had died at the age of 90.   === Legacy === In August 2009 in a roundtable interview in Prospect magazine, Adair Turner supported the idea of new global taxes on financial transactions, warning that the “swollen” financial sector paying excessive salaries had grown too big for society. Lord Turner’s suggestion that a “Tobin tax” – named after James Tobin – should be considered for financial transactions made headlines around the world. Tobin's Tobit model of regression with censored endogenous variables (Tobin 1958a) is a standard econometric technique. His "q" theory of investment (Tobin 1969), the Baumol-Tobin model of the transactions demand for money (Tobin 1956), and his model of liquidity preference as behavior toward risk (the asset demand for money) (Tobin 1958b) are all staples of economics textbooks. In his 1958 article Tobin also led the way in showing how to deal with utility maximization under uncertainty with an infinite number of possible states. As Palda explains "One way to get out of the mess of figuring out asset prices using a model of maximizing the expected utility of investing in stocks is to make assumptions about either preferences or the probabilities of the different possible states of the world. Nobellist James Tobin (1958) took this line and discovered that in some cases you do not need to worry about the utility of income in thousands of states, and the attached probabilities, to solve the consumer’s choice on how to spread income among states. When preferences contain only a linear and a squared term (a case of diminishing returns) or the probabilities of different stock returns follow a normal distribution (an equation that contains a linear and squared terms as parameters), a simple formulation of a person’s investment choices becomes possible. Under Tobin’s assumptions we can reformulate the person’s decision problem as being one of trading off risk and expected return. Risk, or more precisely the variance of your investment portfolio creates spread in the returns you expect. People are willing to assume more risk only if compensated by a higher level of expected return. One can thus think of a tradeoff people are willing to make between risk and expected return. They invest in risky assets to the point at which their willingness to trade off risk and return is equal to the rate at which they able to trade them off. It is difficult to exaggerate how brilliant is the simplification of the investment problem that flows from these assumptions. Instead of worrying about the investor’s optimization problem in potentially millions of possible states of the world, one need only worry about how the investor can trade off risk and return in the stock market."   == Publications == Tobin, James (1941). "A note on the money wage problem". Quarterly Journal of Economics 55 (3): 508–516. doi:10.2307/1885642. JSTOR 1885642.  Tobin, James (1955). "A Dynamic Aggregative Model". Journal of Political Economy 63.2 (2): 103–15. doi:10.1086/257652.  Tobin, James (1956). "The Interest-Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash," Review of Economics and Statistics, 38(3), pp 241–247. Tobin, James (1958a). "Estimation of relationships for limited dependent variables". Econometrica (The Econometric Society) 26 (1): 24–36. doi:10.2307/1907382. JSTOR 1907382  Tobin, James (1958b). "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk". Review of Economic Studies 25.1: 65–86.  Tobin, James (1961). "Money, Capital, and Other Stores of Value," American Economic Review, 51(2), pp. 26–37. Reprinted in Tobin, 1987, Essays in Economics, v. 1, pp. 217–27. MIT Press. Tobin, James (1969). "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory". Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 1.1 (1): 15–29.  Tobin, James (1970). "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(2), pp. 301–317. Tobin, James and William C. Brainard (1977a). "Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital". In Richard Nelson and Bela Balassa, eds., Economic Progress: Private Values and Public Policy (Essays in Honor of William Fellner), Amsterdam: North-Holland, 235-62. Tobin, James (1977b). "How Dead is Keynes?". Economic Inquiry XV (4): 459–468.  Tobin, James (1992). “money,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Finance and Money, v. 2, pp. 770–79 & in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. 2008, 2nd Edition. Table of Contents and Abstract. Reprinted in Tobin (1996), Essays in Economics, v. 4, pp. 139–63. MIT Press. Tobin, James, Essays in Economics, MIT Press: v. 1 (1987), Macroeconomics. Scroll to chapter-preview links. v. 2 Consumption and Economics. Description. v. 3 (1987). Theory and Policy (in 1989 paperback as Policies for Prosperity: Essays in a Keynesian Mode). Description and links. v. 4 (1996). National and International. Links. Tobin, James, with Stephen S. Golub (1998). Money, Credit, and Capital. Irwin/McGraw-Hill. TOC. Tobin, James (2008). "Monetary Policy". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty. ISBN 978-0865976658. OCLC 237794267.    == See also == Basic income Guaranteed minimum income Q Ratio (Tobin's Q ratio) Tobit model (Tobin's model for censored endogenous variables) Tobin tax   == References ==   == External links == James Tobin at the Cowles Foundation site Short biography at nobel-winners.com IDEAS/RePEc John Mihaljevic's Equities and Tobin's Q Report The Q Ratio Sends a Modestly Bearish Long-Term Signal (July 2009) Tobin's Q Moderately Bullish on U.S. Equities (as of March 2009) The Manual of Ideas Launches Tobin's Q Research Service Based on James Tobin's Q Indicator Robert Huebscher on "The Market Valuation Q-uestion" James Tobin (1918–2002). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.

Jan Czekanowski (October 8, 1882, Głuchów–July 20, 1965, Szczecin) was a Polish anthropologist, statistician and linguist. Czekanowski is known for having played an important role in saving the Polish-Lithuanian branch of the Karaim people from Holocaust extermination. In 1942 he managed to convince a German "race scientists" that the Karaim were of Turkic origin although professing Judaism and using Hebrew as a liturgical language. This helped the Karaim people escape the tragic destiny of other European Jews and the Romas.   == Life == Czekanowski attended school in Warsaw but was transferred to Latvia, where he finished his education in 1901. He then entered a university in Zurich in 1902; there, he studied anthropology, mathematics, anatomy, and ethnography as a pupil of Swiss anthropologist Rudolph Martin, author of the popular anthropology textbook Lehrbuch der Anthropologie. In 1907 Czekanowski defended his PhD. dissertation. For the dissertation's research he traveled to the Royal Museum in Berlin and to Middle Africa from 1906-1907. While in Africa, he led a team into the Congo to collect ethnographic materials. While working on studying the societies of Africa, he developed various statistical methods and contributed to the field of taxonomy. The research he made in Africa has since been published in five volumes and sent in 1910 to Saint Petersburg ethnography. He then became a professor at the University of Lwów and University of Poznań. While working he introduced an innovative take on mathematical statistics. He worked in these universities from 1913 to 1945 and in the period 1923-1924 he was a president of Polish Copernicus Society of Naturalists. In addition, he worked at the University of Poznań from 1937-1946, where he researched the dynamics of evolution in human populations. He played numerous scientific roles at the University of Poznań, including vice-chairman of the Polish Social Statistic Company.   == Racial classification == Czekanowski classified Europe into four pure races. The four pure races were the Nordic, Mediterranean (Ibero-Insular), Lapponoid and Armenoid. The Lapponoid included the central and eastern Europeans along Europe longitudely as well as the Sami people of Northern Europe. Czekanowski classified six subraces in Europe which were mixed types of the pure races. The six mixed racial subraces were: the Northwestern (Nordic and Mediterranean), the Subnordic (Nordic and Lapponoid), Alpine (Lapponoid and Armenoid), the Littoral (Mediterranean and Armenoid), Sublapponoid (Mediterranean and Lapponoid) and the Dinaric (Nordic and Armenoid). The Sublapponoid subrace (also called Pile Dwelling race) lived around the Swiss lakes.   == Linguistics == Czekanowski introduced numerical taxonomy into comparative linguistics, thus founding the discipline of computational linguistics. He developed (1913) a still much-used index of similarity between two samples. He applied it to phonemes and words in text corpora of different languages. It was later introduced in analysis of ecological communities.   == Books == Zarys metod statystycznych w zastosowaniu do antropologii [An outline of statistical methods applied in anthropology]. Warszawa: Towarzystwo Naukowe Warszawskie (1913) Człowiek w czasie i przestrzeni (1934) Polska - Słowiańszczyzna. Perspektywy antropologiczne (1948)   == See also == List of Poles   == External links == Czekanowski's Diagram: a Method of Multidimensional Clustering   == References ==

Jan Piekałkiewicz (19 September 1892 – 19 February 1943) was a Polish economist and statistician, politician and the Polish Underground State's Government Delegate.   == Biography == He was born on the 19 September 1892 in Kursk, to a Polish intelligentsia family. He studied in St. Petersburg and in Poznań. He was an employee of the Central Statistical Office, and was one of the organizers of the Polish census of 1921. From 1923 to 1924 he was a professor at the University of Lwów. From 1924 to 1939 he lectured in the Main Political School in Warsaw, and published over 50 works on finances, economics (in particular, econometrics) and statistics. He was a member of the Polish Statistical Society, and on 1927 he became a member of the International Statistical Institute. He worked with the Statistical Commission of the League of Nations. He was considered a leading Polish expert on economical statistics. He was a member of the Polish People's Party "Piast" (PSL "Piast", from 1926) and People's Party (Stronnictwo Ludowe, from 1931). From 1938 to 1939 he was a member of the Main Council of the People's Party. Following the German invasion of Poland, from 1940 he was a member of the underground arm of the People's Party, the People's Party "Roch" (Stronnictwo Ludowe "Roch"). In December 1940 he became Deputy to the Polish Underground State's Government Delegate and on 2 August (or 17 September - sources vary) 1942 he replaced Cyryl Ratajski as Delegate. As Delegate, he confirmed the creation of the Council to Aid Jews Żegota and extension of full aid to Polish political prisoners. He also ordered the full documentation of the Nazi crimes against ethnic Poles and the Jews. He informed the Western Allies about the Holocaust. He supported the studies on the creation of the post-war Polish-German border on Lusatian Neisse and Oder. In his speeches to the nation, published in Biuletyn Informacyjny, he called up everyone to join in the civil struggles and warned collaborators that they faced the death penalty for betraying the Polish nation. He also wanted to establish cooperation between the Polish Underground State, loyal to the Polish government in exile in London, and the communist Polish Workers Party (PPR). As Delegate, he was succeeded by Jan Stanisław Jankowski. He was arrested by the Germans on 19 February 1943, tortured, then murdered on 19 June 1943. In 1995 he was posthumously awarded the Order of the White Eagle.   == Works == Atlas statystyczny Polski, with Ignacy Weinfeld and Edward Szturm de Sztrem, tome 1 in 1924, tome 2 in 1925 O programie gospodarczym Polski, with Brunon Balukiewicz La Pologne contemporaine : atlas statistique, 1926 Bilans płatniczy polski = La Balance des payements de la Pologne, 1926 Okrȩgi gospodarcze Polski : Les régions économiques de la Pologne, 1927 Długi samorządu terytorjalnego = Les dettes des administrations autonomes territoriales, 1929 Le service statistique des banques de crédit agricole hypothécaire, 1931 La statistique de l'activité économique des entreprises d'état, 1933 Statistique du crédit hypothécaire, 1933 Sprawozdanie z badań skladu ludności robotniczej w Polsce metoda̜ reprezentacyjna̜, 1934   == See also == Janusz Piekałkiewicz, nephew   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Janusz Gmitruk, Jan Piekałkiewicz - bohater zapomniany, Muzeum Historii Polskiego Ruchu Ludowego, 2009, ISBN 978-83-60093-36-8   == External links == Photo of Jan Piekałkiewicz Jan Piekałkiewicz (in the middle) on a 1988 Polish stamp

Jan Visman (2 July 1914, Deventer – 19 February 2006) was a Dutch statistician who played a key role in building a bridge between sampling theory with its homogeneous populations and sampling practice with its heterogeneous sampling units and sample spaces. Visman studied mining engineering at the Delft University of Technology, and was employed at the Dutch State Mines during the Second World War. He surfaced after the war with a massive amount of test results determined in samples selected from heterogeneous sampling units of coal. In fact, he had gathered so much valuable information that he was encouraged to write a PhD thesis on the sampling of coal. Jan Visman defended his PhD thesis titled “De Monsterneming van Heterogene Binomiale Korrelmengsels, in het Bijzonder Steenkool” at the Technical University of Delft on December 17, 1947. Visman proved that the variance of the primary sample selection stage (the sampling variance) is the sum of the composition variance and the distribution variance. The composition variance is a measure for variability between particles within primary increments. The distribution variance, in contrast, is a measure for variability between primary increments in a sampling unit, and, thus, for its degree of heterogeneity. He described a simple experiment to estimate the composition and distribution components of the sampling variance. The distribution heterogeneity causes spatial dependence between measured values in ordered sets determined in sampling units and sample spaces. Visman worked briefly in Ottawa after immigrating to Canada in 1951. Until his retirement in 1976, he headed the Western Regional Laboratories of the Department of Mines and Technical Surveys, which is nowadays known as Energy, Mines & Resources. These laboratories were located in Calgary until 1955 when they moved to Edmonton and are still operating alongside the Alberta Research Council at the Coal Research Centre in Devon, Alberta. Visman wrote Towards a Common Basis for the Sampling of Materials, Mines Branch Research Report R 93, which was published in July 1962. He participated in ASTM Committees D-5 on Coal and Coke and E-11 on Statistics. ASTM D 2234 Standard Practice for Collection of a Gross Sample of Coal was the first internationally recognized standard to specify a precision estimate for a measured variable. Visman’s sampling experiment with small and large increments is described in ASTM D 2234, Annex A1. Test Method for Determining the Variance Components of a Coal. Visman’s paper titled A General Sampling Theory was published in the November 1969 issue of Materials Research & Standards. Jan Visman was an accidental sampling expert because his true calling was coal processing but he became interested in sampling because of his need to understand this process. His innovative work inspired a great deal of progress in sampling theory and practice in many scientific disciplines. His brilliant mind succumbed long before he died on February 19, 2006. Jan Visman’s contribution to the bridging of the breach between sampling theory and sampling practice for materials in bulk should be remembered.   == References == Various authors, Approaches in Material Sampling, Bastiaan Geelhoed, Editor, IOS Press, 2010 Gy, P, "L’Ếchantillonnage des Minerais en Vrac, Tome 1 Théorie Générale", Jan 1967, Revue de L’Industrie Minérale Gy, P, "L’Ếchantillonnage des Minerais en Vrac, Tome 2, Théorie Générale Erreurs Opératoires Complements", Sep 1971, Revue de L’Industrie Minérale Merks, J W, Sampling and Weighing of Bulk Solids, Trans Tech Publications, Claustall-Zellerfeld, 1985 Merks, J and Merks, E, Precision Estimates for Ore Reserves, 1991, Erzmetall, October Merks, J and Merks, E, Metrology in Mineral Exploration, 2009, APCOM, September Visman, J, De monsterneming van heterogene binomiale korrelmengsels, in het bijzonder steenkool, PhD Thesis, Delft, 1947 Visman, J, Towards a Common Basis for the Sampling of Materials, Research Report R93, Department of Mines, Ottawa, 1962 Visman, J, "A General Sampling Theory", Materials Research and Standards, Vol 9, No 11, 1969   == External links == Visman's sampling equations Visman's sampling theory in practice

Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg (August 4, 1876, Helsinki – December 12, 1932, Helsinki) was a Finnish mathematician known for work on the central limit theorem.   == Life and work == Lindeberg was son of a teacher at the Helsinki Polytechnical Institute and at an early age showed mathematical talent and interest. The family was well off and later Jarl Waldemar would prefer to be a reader than a full professor. Lindeberg's career centred on the University of Helsinki. His early interests were in partial differential equations and the calculus of variations but from 1920 he worked in probability and statistics. In 1920 he published his first paper on the central limit theorem. His result was similar to that obtained earlier by Lyapunov whose work he did not then know. However, their approaches were quite different; Lindeberg's was based on a convolution argument while Lyapunov used the characteristic function. Two years later Lindeberg used his method to obtain a stronger result: the so-called Lindeberg condition. His work on probability led to him becoming involved in applied fields. He developed what we know as Kendall's tau and he found the first two moments of its sampling distribution. Lindeberg used line transect methods in forestry, and when in 1926 determining the necessary number of transects to obtain a sufficiently precise confidence interval, he seems to have rediscovered Student's t-distribution. The Swedish mathematician Harald Cramér met Lindeberg in 1922. He later recalled this story about Lindeberg and the beautiful farm he owned. "When he was reproached for not being sufficiently active in his scientific work, he said 'Well, I am really a farmer.' And if somebody happened to say that his farm was not properly cultivated, his answer was 'Of course my real job is to be a professor.' I was very fond of him and saw him often during the following years." Lindeberg's work wasn't known by Alan Turing, who proved the central limit theorem in his disseration in 1935.   == Writing available on the web == J. W. Lindeberg, Eine neue Herleitung des Exponentialgesetzes in der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, Mathematische Zeitschrift, 15 (1922) 211-225.   == Commentary == L. Le Cam (1986) The Central Limit Theorem Around 1935, Statistical Science, Vol. 1, No. 1. (Feb), pp. 78-91. Gustav Elfving (1981) The History of Mathematics in Finland 1828-1918. Societas Scientarium Fennica, Helsinki.   == Biography == G. Elfving (2001) Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 318-321. New York: Springer. Harald Cramér (1976) Half a Century with Probability Theory: Some Personal Recollections, Annals of Probability, Vol. 4, No. 4. (Aug.), pp. 509-546.   == Notes ==   == External links == Photograph of Lindeberg on the Portraits of Statisticians page ISI: Milestones of the history of statistics in Finland Tore Schweder: Early Statistics in the Nordic Countries

Jayanta Kumar Ghosh or Jaẏanta Kumāra Ghosha (Bengali: জয়ন্ত কুমার ঘোষ, born May 23, 1937) is an Indian statistician, currently emeritus professor at Indian Statistical Institute and a professor of statistics at Purdue University.   == Education == He obtained a B.S. from Presidency College, then affiliated with the University of Calcutta, and subsequently a M.A. and a Ph.D. from the University of Calcutta. He started his research career in the early 1960s, studying sequential analysis as a graduate student in the department of statistics at the University of Calcutta.   == Research == Among his best-known discoveries are the Bahadur–Ghosh–Kiefer representation (with R. R. Bahadur and Jack Kiefer) and the Ghosh–Pratt identity along with John W. Pratt. His research contributions fall within the fields of: Bayesian inference Asymptotics Modeling and model selection High dimensional data analysis Nonparametric regression and density estimation Survival analysis Statistical genetics   == Awards/Honors == Elected Member of the International Statistical Institute Advisory Editor, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics Fellow of the Indian National Science Academy Life Member and Director of the Calcutta Statistical Association Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences Japanese Society for Promotion of Sciences Fellowship, 1978 Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize for Science and Technology, 1981 President, Statistics Section of the Indian Science Congress Association, 1991 President, International Statistical Institute, 1993 Mahalanobis Gold Medal of Indian Science Congress Association, 1998 P. V. Sukhatme Prize for Statistics, 2000 Mahalanobis Memorial Lecture, State Science and Technology Congress, W. Bengal, 2003 D.Sc. (h.c.), B.C. Roy Agricultural University, W. Bengal, India, 2006 Padma Shree (2014) by the Government of India   == Bibliography == He has published over 50 research papers. He has also published four books, which are: Invariance in Testing and Estimation (Lecture Notes), 1967, published by Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. Higher Order Asymptotics (based on CBMS-NSF lecture), published jointly by Institute of Mathematical Statistics and American Statistical Association, 1994. (with R.V. Ramamoorthi) Bayesian Nonparametrics (Springer 2003). (with Mohan Delampady and Tapas Samanta) An Introduction to Bayesian Analysis - Theory and Methods, Springer 2006.   == References ==   == External links == Indian Statistical Institute Statistics Department homepage Dr. Ghosh's profile at Purdue University

Jerzy Neyman ForMemRS (April 16, 1894 – August 5, 1981), born Jerzy Spława-Neyman, was a Polish mathematician and statistician who spent the first part of his professional career at various institutions in Warsaw, Poland and then at University College London, and the second part at the University of California, Berkeley. Neyman first introduced the modern concept of a confidence interval into statistical hypothesis testing and co-devised null hypothesis testing (in collaboration with Egon Pearson).   == Life and career == He was born into a Polish family in Bendery, Bessarabia in Imperial Russia, the fourth of four children of Czesław Spława-Neyman and Kazimiera Lutosławska. His family was Roman Catholic and Neyman served as an altar boy during his early childhood. Later, Neyman would become an agnostic. Neyman's family descended from a long line of Polish nobles and military heroes. He graduated from the Kamieniec Podolski gubernial gymnasium for boys in 1909 under the name Yuri Cheslavovich Neyman. He began studies at Kharkov University in 1912, where he was taught by Russian probabilist Sergei Natanovich Bernstein. After he read 'Lessons on the integration and the research of the primitive functions' by Henri Lebesgue, he was fascinated with measure and integration. In 1921 he returned to Poland in a program of repatriation of POWs after the Polish-Soviet War. He earned his Doctor of Philosophy degree at University of Warsaw in 1924 for a dissertation titled "On the Applications of the Theory of Probability to Agricultural Experiments". He was examined by Wacław Sierpiński and Stefan Mazurkiewicz, among others. He spent a couple of years in London and Paris on a fellowship to study statistics with Karl Pearson and Émile Borel. After his return to Poland he established the Biometric Laboratory at the Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology in Warsaw. He published many books dealing with experiments and statistics, and devised the way which the FDA tests medicines today. Neyman proposed and studied randomized experiments in 1923. Furthermore, his paper "On the Two Different Aspects of the Representative Method: The Method of Stratified Sampling and the Method of Purposive Selection", given at the Royal Statistical Society on 19 June 1934, was the groundbreaking event leading to modern scientific sampling. He introduced the confidence interval in his paper in 1937. Another noted contribution is the Neyman–Pearson lemma, the basis of hypothesis testing. In 1938 he moved to Berkeley, where he worked for the rest of his life. Thirty-nine students received their Ph.D's under his advisorship. In 1966 he was awarded the Guy Medal of the Royal Statistical Society and three years later the U.S.'s National Medal of Science. He died in Oakland, California in 1981.   == See also == List of Poles   == References ==   == Further references == Fisher, Ronald "Statistical methods and scientific induction" Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 17 (1955), 69—78. (criticism of statistical theories of Jerzy Neyman and Abraham Wald) Neyman, Jerzy (1956). "Note on an Article by Sir Ronald Fisher". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 18 (2): 288–294. JSTOR 2983716.  (reply to Fisher 1955) Reid, Constance, Jerzy Neyman—From Life, Springer Verlag, (1982), ISBN 0-387-90747-5   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Jerzy Neyman", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Jerzy Neyman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ASA biographical article by Chin Long Chiang Jerzy Neyman — Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences

Jessica Utts (born 1952) is a parapsychologist and statistics professor at the University of California, Irvine. She is known for her textbooks on statistics and her investigation into remote viewing.   == Statistics education == In 2003, Utts published an article in American Statistician, a journal published by the American Statistical Association, calling for significant changes to collegiate level statistics education. In the article she argued that curricula do a fine job of covering the mathematical side of statistics, but do a poor job of teaching students the skills necessary to properly interpret statistical results in scientific studies. The argument continues that common errors found in news articles, such as the common misinterpretation that correlative studies show causation, would be reduced if there were significant changes made to standard statistics courses. Utts was elected to serve as the 111th president of the American Statistical Association, with her term as President-Elect to commence in January 2015, followed by her term as president in 2016.   == Investigation of remote viewing == In 1995, the American Institutes for Research (AIR) appointed a panel consisting primarily of Utts and Ray Hyman to evaluate a project investigating remote viewing for espionage applications, the Stargate Project, which was funded by the Central Intelligence Agency and Defense Intelligence Agency, and carried out initially by Stanford Research Institute and subsequently by SAIC. A report by Utts claimed the results were evidence of psychic functioning, however Hyman in his report argued Utts' conclusion that ESP had been proven to exist, especially precognition, was premature and the findings had not been independently replicated. According to Hyman "the overwhelming amount of data generated by the viewers is vague, general, and way off target. The few apparent hits are just what we would expect if nothing other than reasonable guessing and subjective validation are operating." Funding for the project was stopped after these reports were issued. Jessica Utts also co-authored papers with the parapsychologist Edwin May, who took over Stargate in 1985. The psychologist David Marks noted that as Utts has published papers with May "she was not independent of the research team. Her appointment to the review panel is puzzling; an evaluation is likely to be less than partial when an evaluator is not independent of the program under investigation." Utts is on the executive board of the International Remote Viewing Association (IRVA).   == Publications ==   === Books === Seeing Through Statistics, 3rd edition (2005) - The use of statistical methods to solve real world problems, and to gain understanding from the application of statistics in addition to simply calculating them. Mind On Statistics, 4th edition (2012), with R.F. Heckard - Textbook for an introductory statistics course, with emphasis on understanding the use of statistics in everyday life.   === Papers === Utts, J. (1988). Successful replication versus statistical significance. Journal of Parapsychology, 52(4): 305-320. Radin, D. and J. Utts. (1989). Experiments investigating the influence of intention on random and pseudorandom events. Journal of Scientific Exploration, 3(1): 65-79. Utts, J. (1989). Randomness and randomization tests: A reply to Gilmore. Journal of Parapsychology, 53(4): 345-351. May, E. C., J. M. Utts, B. S. Humphrey, W. Luke, T.J. Frivold, and V. V. Trask. (1990). Advances in Remote Viewing, Journal of Parapsychology, 54(3), 193-228. Hansen G. P., J. M. Utts, and B. Markwick. (1992). Critique of the PEAR remote viewing experiments. Journal of Parapsychology, 56(2), 97-113. Utts, J. (1993). Analyzing free-response data--a progress report. In PSI Research Methodology--A Reexamination, ed. L. Coly and J. D. S. McMahon, Parapsychology Foundation, New York, 71-83.   == References ==   == Further reading == Ray Hyman. (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment. Statistical Science Vol. 6, No. 4. pp. 389–392. Robert L. Morris. (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment. Statistical Science Vol. 6, No. 4. pp. 393–395.   == External links == Jessica Utts's UC Irvine page Parapsychology papers by Jessica Utts

Jianqing Fan (Chinese: 范剑青; born 1962), is a statistician and financial econometrician. He is the current Frederick L. Moore '18 Professor of Finance, Professor of Statistics and Chairman of Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering (since 2012) at Princeton University. In 2000, he received the COPSS Presidents' Award. He is also a recipient of the Morningside Gold Medal of Applied Mathematics (2007)  (2007), Guggenheim Fellow  (2009), Pao-Lu Hsu Prize (2013) and Guy Medal in Silver (2014). He was elected to Academician from Academia Sinica in 2012.   == Research == Fan is interested in statistical theory and methods in data science, finance, economics, risk management, machine learning, computational biology, biostatistics, with particular skills on High-dimensional statistics, nonparametric modeling, longitudinal and functional data analysis, nonlinear time series, wavelets, among others.   == Career == Jianqing Fan is a co-editor of Journal of Econometrics and associate editor of Journal of the American Statistical Association (1996-). In addition, he was the co-editor(-in-chief) of The Annals of Statistics (2004-2006), a co-editor of Econometrics Journal (2007-2012) and an editor of Probability Theory and Related Fields (2003-2005), as well as a member of the editorial boards of a number of other journals. The latter includes, Annals of Statistics, Econometrica, and Journal of Financial Econometrics. He has served as President of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (2006-2009), and as President of the International Chinese Statistical Association (2008-2010). After receiving his Ph.D. in Statistics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1989, he was appointed assistant, associate, and full professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (1989–2003), and as professor at the University of California at Los Angeles (1997–2000), Professor of Statistics and Chairman at the Chinese University of Hong Kong (2000–2003), and as professor at the Princeton University (2003-). He has directed the Committee of Statistical Studies at Princeton since 2006 and currently chairs Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering (since 2012). He has coauthored two well-known books on Local Polynomial Modeling (1996) and Nonlinear time series: Parametric and Nonparametric Methods (2003) and authored or coauthored over 170 articles on finance, economics, computational biology, semiparametric and non-parametric modeling, statistical learning, nonlinear time series, survival analysis, longitudinal data analysis, and other aspects of theoretical and methodological statistics. He has been consistently ranked as a top 10 highly cited mathematical scientist since the existence of such a ranking. His published work on statistics, financial econometrics, and computational biology has been recognized by the 2000 COPSS Presidents' Award, given annually to an outstanding statistician under age 40, invited speaker at The 2006 International Congress for Mathematicians, The Humboldt Research Award for lifetime achievement in 2006, The Morningside Gold Medal of Applied Mathematics in 2007, honoring triennially an outstanding applied mathematician of Chinese descent, Guggenheim Fellow in 2009, Pao-Lu Hsu Prize (2013), presented every three years by the International Chinese Statistical Association to individuals under the age of 50, and Guy Medal in Silver (2014), presented once a year by Royal Statistical Society, and the election to the fellow of American Association for the Advancement of Science, Institute of Mathematical Statistics, and American Statistical Association. He was elected to Academician from Academia Sinica (Chinese: 中央研究院院士) in 2012. Fan has many affiliations within Princeton University and around worldwide. He has been on scientific advisory boards to many institutions. These include Institute of Economics, Academia Sinica  (08--), Academia Sinica, Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute  (08–14), Institute of Mathematical Sciences (11--) at National University of Singapore, Department of Business Statistics and Econometrics (co-chair, 09--), Center for Statistical Science (10--) at Peking University, Center for Applied Statistics and Economics(10--), Humboldt University, among others. His research on statistics theory and methods has been funded by various federal agencies, including NSF, NIH and NSA. He has been frequently invited to various professional conferences and workshops and played various leadership roles in statistics and finance communities.   == Honors and awards == COPSS Presidents' Award 2000, Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies. Guggenheim Fellow, 2009. Morningside Gold Medal for Applied Mathematics, 2007. Humboldt Research Awards, Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, 2006. Academician (Chinese: 中央研究院院士), Academia Sinica, 2012. Fellow, American Association for Advancement of Science. Fellow, Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Fellow, American Statistical Association. Elected Member, International Statistical Institute   == References ==   == External links == Jianqing Fan at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Joel Ephraim Cohen (born February 10, 1944) is a mathematical biologist. He is currently Abby Rockefeller Mauzé Professor of Populations at the Rockefeller University in New York City and at the Earth Institute of Columbia University, where he holds a joint appointment in the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, the Department of Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Biology, and the School of International and Public Affairs. He is also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.    == Education == Cohen grew up in Washington DC and Michigan and graduated from Cranbrook School in 1961. He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in applied mathematics from Harvard University in 1965, and earned a Ph.D. in applied mathematics from Harvard in 1970. In 1973, he received from Harvard another doctorate in population sciences and tropical public health. He received an honorary Master's degree from the University of Cambridge UK in 1974.   == Research == Cohen has since taught or lectured at Harvard University, Yale University, Stanford University, the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, the College of Notre Dame of Maryland, the National University of San Luis, Argentina, the Central University of Venezuela, and the University of California at Berkeley. He has also held numerous fellowships, including ones with the Harvard Society of Fellows, John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. He was named "One of America's Top 100 Young Scientists" by Science Digest in 1984. His research has won him numerous awards, including the Sheps Award from the Population Association of America in 1992, the Distinguished Statistical Ecologist Award in 1994, the first Olivia Schieffelin Nordberg Award "for excellence in writing in the population sciences" in 1997, the Fred L. Soper Prize in 1998 of the Pan American Health Organization for his collaborative work on Chagas' disease, and the Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement in 1999. He is also a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society and has served on the governing boards of all three organizations. He served as a Special Master and member of the Selection Panel in the silicone gel breast implant products liability litigation before the United States District Court, Northern District of Alabama (Southern Division) in 1996; and as a U.S. Federal Court-appointed neutral expert (under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 706) for projection of asbestos-related claims against the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust, in the combined asbestos litigation in the Eastern and Southern Districts of New York, 1991-1995. He was a consultant to the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley and McCloy, New York, on the epidemiology of asbestos-related diseases from 1982 to 1986. Cohen was a member of the Board of Directors of The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, VA, 2000-2009, during which he co-chaired the Science Council, 2005-2009. He was also a member of the Board of Trustees of the New York State Nature Conservancy, 2001-2010, the Population Reference Bureau, Washington, DC, 2004-2010, and the Committee on Science, Technology and Law of the National Research Council, Washington, DC, 2000-2009.   == Personal life == He was married to Audrey J. Biller from 1970 to 2002. Their son is Adam Cohen, Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and of Physics at Harvard University. Their daughter is Zoe Cohen, a manager at WebMD in New York City.   == Publications == Cohen is the author or editor of 14 books and over 370 articles, including: Food webs and niche space How Many People Can the Earth Support? Comparison of Stochastic Matrices, with Applications in Information Theory, Statistics, Economics and Population Sciences  Forecasting Product Liability Claims: Epidemiology and Modeling in the Manville Asbestos Case Educating All Children: A Global Agenda International Perspectives on the Goals of Universal Basic and Secondary Education  Mathematics Is Biology's Next Microscope Human population: the next half century  The population biology of invasive species  Food web patterns and their consequences    == References ==   == External links == Video: Human population to 2050: problems and opportunities, Collège de France, Paris, France, 2009 Video interview at Big Think 2010 Video: How many people can the Earth support? Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC 2010 on YouTube

John Frederick MacGregor (b. 1943 in Ontario, Canada) is a statistician whose work in the field of statistical process control has received significant recognition. His pioneering work was in the area of latent variable/multivariate analysis (MVA) methods (principal components analysis and partial least squares) applied to industrial processes.   == Contributions == A latent variable framework for Model Predictive Control (MPC). Latent variable modeling, monitoring and control of batch processes. Differential Geometric control of polymer processes. Introduction of Stochastic states in the Extended Kalman Filter for integral action. Multivariate image analysis Model-based product development   == Education == He received his PhD degree in Statistics, and his M.S. degrees in both Statistics and in Chemical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin–Madison, and his Bachelor of Engineering degree from McMaster University in Canada. At Wisconsin, he worked under the statistician George EP Box.   == Honours and Awards == MacGregor is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, and has received many awards for his work in applied statistics and chemometrics, among them, the prestigious Shewhart Medal and the W.G. Hunter Award from the American Society for Quality, and the Herman Wold Medal from the Swedish Chemical Society. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering dedicated the October 2008 edition to MacGregor in celebration of his 65th birthday. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research published a Festschrift in his honour in September 2013, in honour of his 70th birthday. He holds the title of “Distinguished University Professor” (the highest honor awarded to faculty at McMaster University) as well as the Dofasco Chair in Process Automation and Information Technology at McMaster University. He is a cofounder of the McMaster Advanced Control Consortium that is sponsored by many international companies.   == Industrial and Entrepreneurial Activities == In 2002, MacGregor established ProSensus Inc., a company that he spun off from the McMaster Advanced Control Consortium and incorporated in 2004. MacGregor continues to consult and teach courses through ProSensus.   == References ==   == External links == R.S. Jane Memorial Award, CSChE Faculty web page at McMaster University McMaster Advanced Control Consortium ProSensus John F. MacGregor at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

John Hajnal FBA (born Hajnal-Kónyi; 26 November 1924 – 30 November 2008), was a Hungarian-British academic in the fields of mathematics and economics (statistics).   == Biography == Hajnal was born in Darmstadt, at the time the capital of the People's State of Hesse in Weimar Germany, to a Hungarian Jewish family. In 1936 his parents left Nazi Germany, and placed him in a Quaker school in the Dutch countryside while they arranged to settle in Britain. In 1937, John was reunited with his parents in London, where he attended University College School, Hampstead. At age 16, he entered Balliol College, Oxford. He gained a first there in economics, philosophy and politics in 1943. His skills in academic-level mathematics were mostly autodidactical. After the war, Hajnal worked on demography for the United Nations in New York, and later for the Office of Population Research, Princeton University. He met Berlin-born Nina Lande in New York. They were married from 1950 until her death in 2008 and had three daughters and a son. Returning to the United Kingdom, he worked at Manchester University as a statistician from 1953. The family moved to London in 1956, when John was assured a lectureship at the London School of Economics. He was Professor of Statistics at the London School of Economics from 1975 until his retirement in 1986.   == Career == Hajnal is best known for identifying, in a landmark 1965 paper, the historical pattern of marriage of northwest Europe in which people married late and many adults remained single. The geographical boundary of this unusual marriage pattern is now known as the Hajnal line. Royal Commission on Population, 1944–48 United Nations, New York, 1948–51 Office of Population Research, Princeton University, 1951–53 Manchester University, 1953–57 London School of Economics, 1957–86. Reader, 1966–75, Professor of Statistics 1975-1986 Visiting Fellow Commoner, Trinity College, Cambridge, 1974–75 Visiting Professor, Rockefeller University, 1981 He was a member of the International Statistical Institute and was elected FBA in 1966.   == References ==  Who's Who (2006) The Palgrave Dictionary of Anglo-Jewish History, ed. W. D. Rubinstein, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011, p. 387. Obituary, The Jewish Chronicle, 5 February 2009.

John Law (baptised 21 April 1671 – 21 March 1729) was a Scottish economist who believed that money was only a means of exchange that did not constitute wealth in itself and that national wealth depended on trade. He was appointed Controller General of Finances of France under the Duke of Orleans, regent for the youthful king, Louis XV. In 1716 Law established the Banque Générale in France, a private bank, but three-quarters of the capital consisted of government bills and government-accepted notes, effectively making it the first central bank of the nation. He was responsible for the Mississippi Company bubble and a chaotic economic collapse in France, which has been compared to the early-17th century tulip mania in Holland. The Mississippi Bubble was contemporaneous with the South Sea Company bubble of England. Law was a gambler and a brilliant mental calculator. He was known to win card games by mentally calculating the odds. He originated economic ideas such as "The Scarcity Theory of Value" and the "real bills doctrine". Law’s views held that money creation will stimulate the economy, that paper money is preferable to metallic money, and that shares are a superior form of money since they pay dividends.   == Biography ==  Law was born into a family of bankers and goldsmiths from Fife; his father had purchased Lauriston Castle, a landed estate at Cramond on the Firth of Forth and was known as Law of Lauriston. Law joined the family business at age fourteen and studied the banking business until his father died in 1688. Law subsequently neglected the firm in favour of more extravagant pursuits and travelled to London, where he lost large sums of money in gambling. On 9 April 1694, John Law fought a duel with Edward Wilson in Bloomsbury Square in London. Wilson had challenged Law over the affections of Elizabeth Villiers. Law killed Wilson with a single pass and thrust of his sword. He was arrested, charged with murder and stood trial at the Old Bailey. He appeared before the infamously sadistic 'hanging-judge', Salathiel Lovell and was found guilty of murder, and sentenced to death. He was initially incarcerated in Newgate Prison to await execution. His sentence was later commuted to a fine, upon the ground that the offence only amounted to manslaughter. Wilson's brother appealed and had Law imprisoned, but he managed to escape to Amsterdam.  Law urged the establishment of a national bank to create and increase instruments of credit and the issue of banknotes backed by land, gold, or silver. The first manifestation of Law's system came when he had returned to Scotland and contributed to the debates leading to the Treaty of Union 1707. He published a text entitled Money and Trade Consider'd with a Proposal for Supplying the Nation with Money (1705). Law's propositions of creating a national bank in Scotland were ultimately rejected, and he left to pursue his ambitions abroad. He spent ten years moving between France and the Netherlands, dealing in financial speculations. Problems with the French economy presented the opportunity to put his system into practice. He had the idea of abolishing minor monopolies and private farming of taxes. He would create a bank for national finance and a state company for commerce, ultimately to exclude all private revenue. This would create a huge monopoly of finance and trade run by the state, and its profits would pay off the national debt. The council called to consider Law's proposal, including financiers such as Samuel Bernard, rejected the proposition on 24 October 1715. Law made his home in Place Louis-le-Grand, a royal square where he could host and entertain various Parisian nobles. Gaining the attention of such notable people as the Duke of Orleans, Law quickly found himself a regular in high-stakes gambling parties attended by only the most affluent of Paris. His tall stature and eloquent dress allowed Law to charm his way across Europe’s financial hubs, ranging from Amsterdam to Venice. These travels heavily influenced Law’s theories on monetary policies and the importance of paper money as credit. Law’s idea of a centralized bank which would deal in a new form of paper money was years ahead of its time. Despite this forward concept, Law still championed mercantilist beliefs with the promotion of monopolistic companies through government charters. The wars waged by Louis XIV left the country completely wasted, both economically and financially. The resultant shortage of precious metals led to a shortage of coins in circulation, which in turn limited the production of new coins. With the death of Louis XIV seventeen months after Law’s arrival, the Duke of Orleans finally presented Law with the opportunity to showcase his ingenuity. On May 1, 1716, Law presented a modified version of his centralized bank plan to the Banque Generale which approved a private bank that allowed investors to supply one-fourth of an investment in currency and the other parts in defunct government bonds. The second key feature of the proposal centered on the premise that this private bank was able to issue its own currency backed by Louis of gold. This enabled the currency to be redeemed by the weight of silver from the original deposit instead of the fluctuation of livres which had been devaluing rapidly. From this new banking platform, Law was able to pursue the monopoly companies he envisioned by having France bankroll the endeavor with 100 million livres’ in the form of company stock. As how the bank was financed, so too was the foundation of the Mississippi Company which was later renamed the Occident Company and eventually a part of the Company of the Indies. It was in this context that the regent, Philippe d'Orléans, appointed John Law as Controller General of Finances in 1720, effectively giving him control over external and internal commerce. The rapid ascension of this new global monopoly led to massive speculation and stock prices to balloon to over sixty times their original value. As Controller General, Law instituted many beneficial reforms (some of which had lasting effect, others of which were soon abolished). He tried to break up large land-holdings to benefit the peasants; he abolished internal road and canal tolls; he encouraged the building of new roads, the starting of new industries (even importing artisans but mostly by offering low-interest loans), and the revival of overseas commerce—and indeed industry increased 60% in two years, and the number of French ships engaged in export went from sixteen to three hundred. Since, following the devastating War of the Spanish Succession, France's economy was stagnant and her national debt was crippling, Law proposed to stimulate industry by replacing gold with paper credit and then increasing the supply of credit, and to reduce the national debt by replacing it with shares in economic ventures. Speculation gave way to panic as people flooded the market with future shares trading as high as fifteen thousand livres per share. By May 1720, prices fell to 4,000 livres per share, a 73% decrease within a year. The rush to convert paper money to coins led to sporadic bank hours and riots. Squatters now occupied the square of Palace Louis-le-Grand and openly attacked the financiers that inhabited the area. It was under these circumstances and the guise of night that John Law fled Paris some seven months later. The meteoric rise of a relatively unknown man came as fast as his descent as an economic power vacuum was left in the wake.Though they failed, his theories ironically live on 300 years later and "captured many key conceptual points which are very much a part of modern monetary theorizing".   === Company of the West === In May 1716, the Banque Générale Privée ("General Private Bank"), which developed the use of paper money, was set up by Law. It was one of only six such banks to have issued paper money, joining Sweden, England, Holland, Venice, and Genoa. Law would become the architect of what would later be known as "The Mississippi Bubble", an event that would begin with the consolidation of the trading companies of Louisiana into a single monopoly (The Mississippi Company), and ended with the collapse of the Banque Générale and subsequent devaluing of the Mississippi Company's shares.  In 1719, the French government allowed Law to issue 50,000 new shares in the Mississippi Company at 500 livres with just 75 livres down and the rest due in nineteen additional monthly payments of 25 livres each. The share price rose to 1,000 livres before the second installment was even due, and ordinary citizens flocked to Paris to participate. Based on this success, Law offered to pay off the national debt of 1.5 billion livres by issuing an additional 300,000 shares at 500 livres paid in ten monthly installments.  By mid-1719, the Mississippi Company had issued more than 600,000 shares and the par value of the company stood at 300 million livres. That summer, the share price skyrocketed from 1,000 to 5,000 livres and it continued to rise through year-end, ultimately reaching dizzying heights of 15,000 livres per share. The word millionaire was first used, and in January 1720 Law was appointed Controller General.  The spillover to the economy was immediate and most notable in food prices. By May 21 (1720), Law was forced to deflate the value of banknotes and cut the stock price. As the public rushed to convert banknotes to coin, Law was forced to close Banque Generale for ten days, then limit the transaction size once the bank reopened. But the queues grew longer, the Mississippi Company stock price continued to fall, and food prices soared by as much as 60 percent.  The fractional reserve ratio was one fifth, and a Royal edict to criminalise the sale of gold was decreed. A later Royal edict decreed that gold coin was illegal, which was soon reversed, leading 50 people to be stampeded to death. The company's shares were ultimately rendered worthless, and initially inflated speculation about their worth led to widespread financial stress, which saw Law dismissed at the end of 1720 from his sinecure as Controller General and his post as Chief Director of the Banque Générale.   == Later years == Law initially moved to Brussels in impoverished circumstances. He spent the next few years gambling in Rome, Copenhagen and Venice but never regained his former prosperity. Law realised he would never return to France when Orléans died suddenly in 1723 and Law was granted permission to return to London, having received a pardon in 1719. He lived in London for four years and then moved to Venice where he contracted pneumonia and died a poor man in 1729.   == Books == John Law: Economic Theorist and Policy-Maker by Antoin E. Murphy (Oxford University Press, 1997) is the most extensive account of Law's writings. It is given credit for completing the transformation of opinion about Law from a con man (see Mackay below) to an important economic theorist and successful financial leader. Letters to John Law by Gavin John Adams (Newton Page, 2012) is a collection of early eighteenth-century political propagandist pamphlets documenting the hysteria surrounding John Law's return to Britain after the collapse of his Mississippi Scheme and expulsion from France. It also contains a very useful chronology and extensive biographical introduction to John Law and the Mississippi Scheme (ISBN 9781934619087). Millionaire: The Philanderer, Gambler, and Duelist Who Invented Modern Finance by Janet Gleeson (2000). (ISBN 0-684-87295-1) is a straightforward biography. The Poker Face of Wall Street by Aaron Brown (John Wiley & Sons, 2006) credits Law for the inspiration of the modern futures exchange and also the game of Poker. John Law – The History of an Honest Adventurer by H. Montgomery Hyde (W. H. Allen, 1969) is one of the earliest favorable accounts of Law's ideas. John Law, the father of paper money by Robert Minton (Association Press, 1975) treats Law's financial innovations that led to modern paper money. Crime, Cash, Credit and Chaos by Colin McCall (Solcol, 2007) examines the events and circumstances that became Law's dramatic and tragic life. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds by Charles Mackay, published 1841, contains a colorful negative account of Law's financial activities in France. Available as a reprint and online, including as a free Kindle text. The Gamester by Rafael Sabatini (Houghton Mifflin Company Boston, 1949) is a sympathetic fictionalized account of Law's career as financial adviser to the Duke of Orléans, Regent under Louis XV.   == Films == Richard Condie's 1978 National Film Board of Canada (NFB) animated short John Law and the Mississippi Bubble is a humorous interpretation. The film was a collaboration between Condie and his sister, Sharon Condie, who had been inspired to make a film on the Mississippi Bubble after reading Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. The film was produced by the NFB at its newly opened Winnipeg studio. It opened in Canadian cinemas starting in September 1979 and was sold to international broadcasters. The film received an award at the Tampere Film Festival.   == See also == Tulip mania (early 17th century) Mississippi Company Banque Royale Early modern France South Sea Company bubble (early 18th Century) Assignat, a bank note system of the French Revolution   == References ==   == External links == John Law Project Gutenberg Edition of Fiat Money Inflation in France: How ... John Law: Proto-Keynesian, by Murray Rothbard  Texts on Wikisource: "Law, John". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Law, John". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.

John William Mauchly (August 30, 1907 – January 8, 1980) was an American physicist who, along with J. Presper Eckert, designed ENIAC, the first general purpose electronic digital computer, as well as EDVAC, BINAC and UNIVAC I, the first commercial computer made in the United States. Together they started the first computer company, the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation (EMCC), and pioneered fundamental computer concepts including the stored program, subroutines, and programming languages. Their work, as exposed in the widely read First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC (1945) and as taught in the Moore School Lectures (1946), influenced an explosion of computer development in the late 1940s all over the world.   == Moore School == In 1941 Dr. Mauchly took a course in wartime electronics at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering, part of the University of Pennsylvania. There he met J. Presper Eckert, a recent Moore School graduate. Mauchly accepted a teaching position at the Moore School, which was a center for wartime computing. Eckert encouraged Mauchly to believe that vacuum tubes could be made reliable with proper engineering practices. The critical problem that was consuming the Moore School was ballistics: the calculation of firing tables for the large number of new guns that the U.S. Army was developing for the war effort.   === ENIAC ===  In 1942 Mauchly wrote a memo proposing the building of a general-purpose electronic computer. The proposal, which circulated within the Moore School (but the significance of which was not immediately recognized), emphasized the enormous speed advantage that could be gained by using digital electronics with no moving parts. Lieutenant Herman Goldstine, who was the liaison between the United States Army and Moore School, picked up on the idea and asked Mauchly to write a formal proposal. In April 1943, the Army contracted with the Moore School to build the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC). Mauchly led the conceptual design while Eckert led the hardware engineering on ENIAC. A number of other talented engineers contributed to the confidential "Project PX". Because of its high-speed calculations, ENIAC could solve problems that were previously unsolvable. It was roughly a thousand times faster than the existing technology. It could add 5,000 numbers or do 357 10-digit multiplications in one second. ENIAC could be programmed to perform sequences and loops of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, square-root, input/output functions, and conditional branches. Programming was initially accomplished with patch cords and switches, and reprogramming took days. It was redesigned in 1948 to allow the use of stored programs with some loss in speed. In 2002, for his work on ENIAC he was inducted, posthumously, into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.   == EDVAC == The ENIAC design was frozen in 1944 to allow construction. Eckert and Mauchly were already aware of the limitations of the machine and began plans on a second computer, to be called EDVAC. By January 1945 they had procured a contract to build this stored-program computer. Eckert had proposed a mercury delay line memory to store both program and data. Later that year, mathematician John von Neumann learned of the project and joined in some of the engineering discussions. He produced what was understood to be an internal document describing the EDVAC. The term von Neumann architecture arose from von Neumann's paper, First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. Dated June 30, 1945, it was an early written account of a general purpose stored-program computing machine (the EDVAC). Goldstine, in a move that was to become controversial, removed any reference to Eckert or Mauchly and distributed the document to a number of von Neumann's associates across the country. The ideas became widely known within the very small world of computer designers. Besides the lack of credit, Eckert and Mauchly suffered additional setbacks due to Goldstine's actions. The ENIAC patent U.S. Patent 3,120,606, issued in 1964 was filed on June 26, 1947, and granted February 4, 1964, but the public disclosure of design details of EDVAC in the First Draft (which were also common to ENIAC) was later cited as one cause for the 1973 invalidation of the ENIAC patent.   == The Moore School Lectures ==  In March 1946, just after the ENIAC was announced, the Moore School decided to change their patent policy, in order to gain commercial rights to any future and past computer development there. Eckert and Mauchly decided this was unacceptable; they resigned. However they had already been contracted to do one more thing at the Moore School: to give a series of talks on computer design. The course "The Theory and Techniques for Design of Digital Computers", ran from July 8 to August 31, 1946. Eckert gave 11 of the lectures; Mauchly and Goldstine each delivered 6. "The Moore School Lectures", as they came to be known, were attended by representatives from the army, the navy, MIT, the National Bureau of Standards, Cambridge University, Columbia, Harvard, the Institute for Advanced Study, IBM, Bell Labs, Eastman Kodak, General Electric, and National Cash Register. A number of the attendees were to later go on to develop computers, such as Maurice Wilkes, of Cambridge, who built EDSAC.   == Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation == In 1947 Eckert and Mauchly formed the first computer company, the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation (EMCC); Mauchly was president. They secured a contract with the National Bureau of Standards to build an "EDVAC II", later named UNIVAC. UNIVAC, the first computer designed for business applications, had many significant technical advantages such as magnetic tape for mass storage. As an interim product, the company created and delivered a smaller computer, BINAC, but were still in a shaky financial situation. They were purchased by Remington Rand and became the UNIVAC division.   == Software == Very early in the history of EMCC, John Mauchly assumed responsibility for programming, coding, and applications for the planned computer systems. His early interaction with representatives of the Census Bureau in 1944 and 1945, and discussion with people interested in statistics, weather prediction, and various business problems in 1945 and 1946 focused his attention on the need to provide new users with the software to accomplish their objectives. He knew it would be difficult to sell computers without application materials, and without training in how to use the systems. And so, EMCC began to assemble a staff of mathematicians interested in coding in early 1947. (from Norberg) Mauchly’s interest lay in the application of computers, as well as to their architecture and organization. His experience with programming the ENIAC and its successors led him to create Short Code (see "The UNIVAC SHORT CODE"), the first programming language actually used on a computer (predated by Zuse’s conceptual Plankalkul). It was a pseudocode interpreter for mathematical problems proposed in 1949 and ran on the UNIVAC I and II. Mauchly's belief in the importance of languages led him to hire Grace Murray Hopper to develop a compiler for the UNIVAC. John Mauchly has also been credited for being the first one using the verb "to program" in his 1942 paper on electronic computing, although in the context of ENIAC, not in its current meaning.   == Career == Dr. Mauchly stayed involved in computers for the rest of his life. He was a founding member and president of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and also helped found the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), serving as its fourth president. The Eckert-Mauchly Corporation was bought by Remington Rand in 1950 and for ten years Dr. Mauchly remained as Director of Univac Applications Research. Leaving in 1959 he formed Mauchly Associates, a consulting company that later introduced the critical path method (CPM) for construction scheduling by computer. In 1967 he founded Dynatrend, a computer consulting organization. In 1973 he became a consultant to Sperry Univac.   == Awards == Mauchly received numerous award and honors. He was a life member of the Franklin Institute, the National Academy of Engineering and the Society for Advancement of Management. He was elected a Fellow of the IRE, a predecessor society of IEEE, in 1957, and was a Fellow of the American Statistical Association. He received an LLD (Hon) degree from the University of Pennsylvania and aDSc(Hon) degree from Ursinus College. He was a recipient of the Philadelphia Award, the Scott Medal, the Goode Medal of AFIPS (American Federation of Information Processing Societies), the Pennsylvania Award, the Emanual R. Piore Award, the Howard N. Potts Medal, and numerous other awards.   == Patent controversy == Mauchly and Eckert's patent on the ENIAC was invalidated by U.S. Federal Court decision in October, 1973 for several reasons. Some had to do with the time between publication (the First Draft) and the patent filing date (1947). The federal judge who presided over the case ruled that "the subject matter was derived" from the earlier Atanasoff–Berry Computer (ABC). This statement has become the center of a controversy. Critics note that while the court said that the ABC was the first electronic digital computer, it did not define the term computer. It had originally referred to a person who computes, but was adapted to apply to a machine. Critics of the court decision also note that there is, at a component level, nothing in common between the two machines. The ABC was binary; the ENIAC was decimal. The ABC used regenerative drum memory; The ENIAC used electronic decade counters. The ABC used its tubes to implement a binary serial adder while the ENIAC used tubes to implement a complete set of decimal operations. The ENIAC's general-purpose instruction set, together with the ability to automatically sequence through them, made it a general-purpose computer. Proponents for the court decision emphasize that the testimony established that Mauchly definitely had complete access to Atanasoff's machine and the documents describing it. Letters he wrote to Atanasoff show that he was at one time at least considering building on Atanasoff's approach. Mauchly consistently maintained that it was the use of high-speed electronic flip-flops in cosmic-ray counting devices at Swarthmore College that gave him the idea for computing at electronic speeds.   == See also == Mauchly's sphericity test   == References ==  McCartney, Scott (1999). ENIAC: The Triumphs and Tragedies of the World's First Computer. Walker & Co. ISBN 0-8027-1348-3.  Shurkin, Joel N. (1996). Engines of the Mind: The Evolution of the Computer from Mainframes to Microprocessors. W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-01804-0.  Antonelli, Kathleen R. (April 1984). "John Mauchly's Early Years". Annals of the History of Computing 6 (2): 116–138. doi:10.1109/MAHC.1984.10022.  Stern, Nancy (1981). From ENIAC to UNIVAC: An Appraisal of the Eckert-Mauchly Computers. Bedford, Massachusetts: Digital Press. ISBN 0-932376-14-2.  Norberg, Arthur L. (2005-06-01). Computers and Commerce: A Study of Technology and Management at Eckert-Mauchly Computer Company, Engineering Research Associates, and Remington Rand, 1946-1957. The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-14090-X.    == External links == Oral history interview with J. Presper Eckert at Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Eckert, a co-inventor of the ENIAC, discusses its development at the University of Pennsylvania and the interaction of the personnel at the Moore School. John W. Mauchly and the Development of the ENIAC Computer - by Asaf Goldschmidt and Atsushi Akera, An Exhibition in the Department of Special Collections Van Pelt Library, University of Pennsylvania Mauchly: The Computer and the Skateboard. The only work to contain archival footage of John Mauchly speaking about the development of the ENIAC. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John Mauchly", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

John Ashworth Nelder FRS (8 October 1924 – 7 August 2010) was a British statistician known for his contributions to experimental design, analysis of variance, computational statistics, and statistical theory.   == Contributions == Nelder's work was influential in statistics. While leading research at Rothamsted Experimental Station, Nelder developed and supervised the updating of the statistical software packages GLIM and GenStat: Both packages are flexible high-level programming languages that allow statisticians to formulate linear models concisely. GLIM influenced later environments for statistical computing such as S-PLUS and R. Both GLIM and GenStat have powerful facilities for the analysis of variance for block experiments, an area where Nelder made many contributions. In statistical theory, Nelder and Wedderburn proposed the generalized linear model. Generalized linear models were formulated by John Nelder and Robert Wedderburn as a way of unifying various other statistical models, including linear regression, logistic regression and Poisson regression. They proposed an iteratively reweighted least squares method for maximum likelihood estimation of the model parameters. In statistical inference, Nelder (along with George Barnard and A. W. F. Edwards) emphasized the importance of the likelihood in data analysis, promoting this "likelihood approach" as an alternative to frequentist and Bayesian statistics. In response-surface optimization, Nelder and Roger Mead proposed the Nelder-Mead simplex heuristic, widely used in engineering and statistics.   == Biography == Born in Brushford, near Dulverton, Somerset, Nelder was educated at Blundell's School and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he read mathematics. Nelder's appointments included Head of the Statistics Section at the National Vegetable Research Station, Wellesbourne from 1951 to 1968 and Head of the Statistics Department at Rothamsted Experimental Station from 1968 to 1984. During his time at Wellesbourne he spent a year (1965–1966) at the Waite Institute in Adelaide, South Australia, where he worked with Graham Wilkinson on Genstat. He held an appointment as Visiting Professor at Imperial College London from 1972 onwards. He was responsible, with Max Nicholson and James Ferguson-Lees, for debunking the Hastings Rarities – sightings of a series of rare birds, preserved by a taxidermist and provided with bogus histories. Nelder died on 7 August 2010 in Luton and Dunstable Hospital, taken there after a fall at home, which was incidental to the cause of death.   == Awards and distinctions == Nelder was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1976 and received the Royal Statistical Society's Guy Medal in Gold in 2005. He was also the recipient of the inaugural Karl Pearson Prize of the International Statistical Institute, with Peter McCullagh, "for their monograph Generalized Linear Models (1983)". As tribute on his eightieth birthday, a festschrift Methods and Models in Statistics: In Honour of Professor John Nelder, FRS was edited by Niall Adams, Martin Crowder, David J Hand & Dave Stephens, Imperial College Press (2004). The first annual John Nelder memorial lecture was help at Imperial College London, on 8 March 2012, as part of the Mathematics department Colloquium series. The lecture was given by John's long term co-author, Prof Peter McCullagh. An interview with Peter McCullagh, about statistical modelling, includes some reminiscences about John.   == Selected publications == JN and R. W. M. Wedderburn, "Generalized Linear Models", J. R. Statist. Soc. A, 135 (1972) 370–384. McCullagh, P. and J.A. Nelder. 1989. Generalized Linear Models. 2nd ed. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, Florida. ISBN 0-412-31760-5 Lee, Y., J.A. Nelder, and Y. Pawitan. 2006. Generalized Linear Models with Random Effects: Unified Analysis via H-likelihood. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, Florida. ISBN 1-58488-631-5   == References ==   == External links == A Conversation with John Nelder Photographs

John Panaretos (Greek: Γιάννης Πανάρετος; born 1948 in Kythera) is a Greek educator and statistician. He is Professor of Probability and Statistics at the Athens University of Economics and Business. He was Deputy Minister of Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs (October 6, 2009 – June 17, 2011). He has also been appointed by the Prime Minister to be in charge of the Open Government project. Before joining the Athens University of Economics and Business, he taught at the universities of Patras and Crete in Greece, University of Iowa and University of Missouri in the United States, and at Trinity College, Dublin in Ireland. He has been Director of the Institute of Statistical Documentation Research and Analysis since 1996, a life member of the Scientific Council of the Greek Parliament since 1987, and a member of the governing board of the Institute of Strategic and Development Studies (ISTAME) - Andreas Papandreou (2005–2008). Since 2004, he is the education adviser of George Papandreou, leader of Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK, the main opposition party of Greece) and the Socialist International. He was a member of the National Council of Education, the Council of University Education, the Council of Technical Education and the Council of Primary and Secondary Education. He has acted as Chairman of the Department of Statistics (1993–1996 & 2000-2002) and as member of the research committee of the University (1993–1996). At the University of Patras, he served as Vice Rector for Academic Affairs, as Chairman of the Research Committee, as Associate Dean of the Engineering School and as Chairman of the Division of Mathematics of the School. Panaretos has served as Vice President of the European Network of the National Councils of Education (1997–2000), Chairman of the National Council of Education of Greece (1996–2000), the Council of Higher Education (1988–1989), and the Secretary General of the Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs in Greece (1988–1989 and 1995–1996), and member of the governing board of the Institute of Strategic and Development Studies (ISTAME) - Andreas Papandreou (2004–2008). He has published more than fifty papers in international scientific journals, was an invited speaker in many scientific meetings, and served as Associate Editor of Communications in Statistics (A), Theory and Methods.   == Initiatives as Deputy Minister of Education == The preparation of a new Law of Higher Education in Greece that introduced, for the first time in Greece, a new model of Governance (Board of Trustees) and a selection of the Rector and the deans by means of an open call of interest, at an international level. The formation of an international advisory committee for the reforms on higher education consisting of nine internationally known figures in HE from all over the world (Linda P.B. Katehi (Chair), Chancellor, University of California, Davis, USA – Patrick Aebischer, President, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland – Gavin Brown, Former Vice-Chancellor, University of Sydney, Australia – James J. Duderstadt, President Emeritus, University of Michigan, USA – Gudmund Hernes, Former Minister of Education, Norway – David Naylor, President, University of Toronto, Canada – Jozef Ritzen, Former President, Maastricht University, Former Minister of Education, Netherlands – John Sexton, President, New York University, USA – Lap-Chee Tsui, President and Vice-Chancellor, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong). Their report can be found here. The preparation of a new law for research that removed the existed bureaucratic procedures and restructured the research Institutes. The complete change of procedures for submitting and evaluating research proposals in Greece. All proposals are now submitted in English electronically in a tailored-made platform and are evaluated by international experts outside Greece. The initiative to set up community colleges in Greece and allowing movement of students between the various levels of higher education Institutions. Changes in the national entrance exams for tertiary education that eliminated injustices. Also, implemented the introduction of an electronic system of submitting applications for participating in the national entrance exams for universities that replaced the paper-based one. The introduction of transparency in all political activities. All decisions signed by the deputy minister were immediately uploaded in the Internet and all policy initiatives were made available on the Internet for comments before taking their final form. Wide public consultation on the recognition of professional qualifications for higher education graduates.   == Initiatives as Chairman of the Department of Statistics and Director of the Graduate Studies == New undergraduate program based on the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS). It was the first undergraduate program in Greek universities that was fully restructured in this direction. (1996).(http://www.stat-athens.aueb.gr/en/prop/ili.htm) Introduced the International Graduate Program in Statistics, where all courses are taught in English and the M.Sc theses are sent to external examiner abroad for evaluation. (1996). (http://www.stat-athens.aueb.gr/en/master/full/general.htm) Introduced the Professional Graduate Degree Program. The first such program in Statistics in Greece. (1999). (http://www.stat-athens.aueb.gr/en/master/part/general.htm) Established the Distinguished Visiting Professorship Program in which the following scientists taught: 1997: Leslie Kish, Michigan, USA ("Survey Sampling"), 1998: Sir David R. Cox, Oxford, UK ("Theories of Statistical Inference") and Jef Teugels, Lueven, Belgium ("Statistics of Extremes"), 1999: C. R. Rao, Penn State, USA ("An overview of Linear Models: Past, Present and the Future") and Samuel Kotz, Washington, USA ("Modern Topics in Industrial Statistics"), 2000: David J. Bartholomew, LSE, USA ("Latent Variable Models and Factor Analysis"), 2001: David Freedman, Berkeley, USA ("Association, Regression and Causation"). 2002: Donald Rubin, Harvard, USA (Basic Concepts of Statistical Inference for Causal Effects in Experiments and Observational Studies). Organised, and was responsible for, the first external review of the Department (2000). The reviewers were C.R.Rao, (Chairman). Eberly Professor of Statistics, Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, USA. P. Florides, Professor of Applied Mathematics, Department of Mathematics, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland. J. Teugels, Professor of Probability and Statistics, University Center for Statistics, Catholic University of Lueven, Belgium. W. Urfer, Professor of Statistics, Department of Statistics, University of Dortmund, Germany. (The full review is available at http://www.aueb.gr/statistical-institute/external-evaluation_en.html) Established the practice of short courses (2001). These courses introduce students to the latest developments in statistics without adding material to the core curriculum.   == References ==   == External links == Personal webpage Ministerial webpage Ministry of Education Athens University of Economics & Business Institute of Statistical Documentation Research & Analysis

John Rickman (22 August 1771 – 11 August 1840) was an English government official and statistician of the early nineteenth century. He was born in Newburn, Northumberland, son of the Rev Thomas Rickman and educated at Guildford Grammar School, Magdalen Hall, Oxford and Lincoln College, Oxford. The poet Robert Southey was one of his friends. From 1799 to 1801 he edited the Commercial, Agricultural, and Manufactures' Magazine which published his article 'On ascertaining the population' in 1800. An earlier version of this paper entitled 'Thoughts on the Utility and Facility of a general enumeration of the People of the British Empire' was brought to the attention of Charles Abbot. Shortly after, in 1800, Abbot appointed Rickman his Private Secretary. Rickman is credited with drafting the first bill which became the 1800 Census Act, the full title of which was An Act for taking an Account of the Population of Great Britain, and of the Increase or Diminution thereof, which became law in December 1800. Rickman was instrumental in carrying out the first four censuses of Great Britain, including not only a population count, but also the collection and analysis of parish register returns. Following Abbot's election to the post of Speaker of the House of Commons in February 1802, Rickman took the post of Speaker's Secretary, which he held until July 1814 when he was appointed Second Clerk Assistant at the Table of the House of Commons. He became Clerk Assistant in 1820, a post which he held to his death. It is often stated, but never the case that Rickman was Clerk of the House of Commons. Rickman served as Secretary to two Parliamentary Commissions established in 1803. The first for the making of roads and bridges in Scotland; the second for the construction of the Caledonian Canal through Scotland's Great Glen. The civil engineer Thomas Telford was amongst the commissioners on both these Commissions: John Rickman was a close friend of Telford, and was his executor. Besides Rickman's work on the census, he also collected and mustered other statistics. Between 1816 and 1836 he abstracted the poor rate returns for the Poor Law Committee; later he produced returns on Education for Lord John Russell's Education Committee and in 1839 he compiled a return of Local Taxation. In April 1815 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. The subtitle to Orlo William's biography of Rickman: Lamb's Friend the Census Taker under-emphasises his extensive parliamentary work.   == References == ^ Diaries of George Turnbull (Chief Engineer, East Indian Railway Company) held at the Centre of South Asian Studies at Cambridge University, England ^ George Turnbull, C.E. page 18 of the 437-page memoirs published privately 1893, scanned copy held in the British Library, London on compact disk since 2007 ^ "Library and Archive Catalogue". The Royal Society. Retrieved 6 October 2010.    == Biography == W. C. Rickman, Biographical memoir of John Rickman, esq., F. R. S., &c. &c. (London, privately published, 1841). Orlo Williams, Life and Letters of John Rickman (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1912).

John Russell, 1st Earl Russell KG GCMG PC (18 August 1792 – 28 May 1878), known as Lord John Russell before 1861, was a leading Whig and Liberal politician who served as Prime Minister on two occasions during the mid-19th century. Scion of one of the most powerful aristocratic families, his great achievements, says A. J. P. Taylor, were based on his indefatigable battles in Parliament over the years on behalf of the expansion of liberty; after each loss he tried again and again, until finally his efforts were largely successful. Woodward, however, argued that he was too much the abstract theorist, so that "He was more concerned with the removal of obstacles to civil liberty than with the creation of a more reasonable and civilized society. Nevertheless Russell led his Whig Party into support for reform; he was the principal architect of the great Reform Act of 1832. As Prime Minister his luck ran out. He took much of the blame for the government's failures in dealing with the Irish famine. Taylor concludes that as prime minister, he was not a success. Indeed, his Government of 1846 to 1852 was the ruin of the Whig party: it never composed a Government again, and his Government of 1865 to 1866, which might be described as the first Liberal Government, was very nearly the ruin of the Liberal party also.   == Background and educationEdit == Russell was born small and premature into the highest echelons of the British aristocracy. The Russell family had been one of the principal Whig dynasties in England since the 17th century, and were among the richest handful of aristocratic landowning families in the country, but as a younger son of the 6th Duke of Bedford he was not expected to inherit the family estates. As a younger son of a Duke, he bore the courtesy title "Lord John Russell", but as he was not a peer in his own right he was entitled to sit in the House of Commons until he was made an earl and moved to the House of Lords in 1861. After being withdrawn from Westminster School due to ill health, Russell was educated by tutors. He attended the University of Edinburgh, 1809 and 1812; he did not take a degree. Although of small stature and often in poor health, he traveled widely in Britain and on the continent.   == Public lifeEdit == Russell entered the House of Commons as a Whig in 1813. In 1819, Russell embraced the cause of parliamentary reform, and led the more reformist wing of the Whigs throughout the 1820s. When the Whigs came to power in 1830 in Earl Grey's government, Russell entered the government as Paymaster of the Forces, and was soon elevated to the Cabinet. He was one of the principal leaders of the fight for the Reform Act 1832, earning the nickname Finality Jack from his complacency pronouncing the Act a final measure. In 1834, when the leader of the Commons, Lord Althorp, succeeded to the peerage as Earl Spencer, Russell became the leader of the Whigs in the Commons, a position he maintained for the rest of the decade, until the Whigs fell from power in 1841. In this position, Russell continued to lead the more reformist wing of the Whig party, calling, in particular, for religious freedom, and, as Home Secretary in the late 1830s, played a large role in democratizing the government of British cities (other than London). During his career in Parliament, Lord John Russell represented the City of London. Taylor emphasizes Russell's central role in the expansion of liberty and leading his Whig Party to a commitment to a reform agenda. In 1845, as leader of the Opposition, Russell came out in favour of repeal of the Corn Laws, forcing Conservative Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel to follow him. When the Conservatives split the next year over this issue, the Whigs returned to power and Russell became Prime Minister. Russell's premiership was frustrated, because due to party disunity and infighting, he was unable to secure the success of many of the measures he was interested in passing. Russell's first government coincided with the Great Irish Famine of the late 1840s. Russell was unable to find a solution. He fought with his headstrong Foreign Secretary, Lord Palmerston, whose belligerence and support for continental revolution he found embarrassing. Palmerston was forced to resign when he recognized Napoleon III's coup of 2 December 1851, without royal approval. Palmerston turned the vote on a militia bill into a vote of confidence on the government. The majority vote in favour of an amendment proposed by Palmerston caused the downfall of Russell's ministry on 21 February 1852. This was Palmerston's famous "tit for tat with Johnny Russell", a revenge for his dismissal by Russell as Foreign Minister.   == In Opposition February 1852 – December 1852Edit == The July 1852 general election saw the election of 330 Conservatives and 324 Whigs to the Parliament. Neither had an overall majority for 38 members who were technically Conservatives, were actually Peelites (followers of the late Robert Peel). The Peelites had deserted the Conservatives to vote for the repeal of the Corn Laws in June 1846. The Corn Laws had imposed a tariff on all cheap imported wheat and, thus, kept the price of wheat and the bread made from wheat high. This served the interests of landed aristocracy which was the main body of support for the Conservative Party. However, the high price of wheat and bread added greatly to the desperation of poor and hungry in England and Ireland. The new Parliament included 113 "Free Traders" who were more radical than the Peelites. They felt that the tariffs on all imported consumer goods should be removed, not just the tariff on wheat or "corn." There were also 63 members of the "Irish Brigade," made up of Irish members interested in the Tenant Rights legislation for the protection of the tenant farmers in Ireland. None of these minor groups were interested in forming a government with the Conservatives because of the bitterness left over from the repeal of the Corn Laws. However, John Russell of the Whigs could not attract enough of the minor party members to form a government either. Other issues handled during the recent Russell government had alienated these three minor groups from the Whigs also. Thus, Queen Victoria asked the Earl of Derby to form a minority government. It only lasted until December 1852.   == Foreign Minister in the Aberdeen GovernmentEdit == Russell, as the leader of the Whig Party, then brought it into a new coalition government with the Peelite Conservatives, headed by the Peelite Lord Aberdeen. Palmerston could not possibly be appointed as Foreign Minister but he had to be a part of the new Aberdeen government and became Home Secretary. Russell continued to serve as Leader of the Whig Party in the House of Commons. As the leader of the largest party in the Aberdeen coalition government, Russell was needed in the new government. Accordingly, on 28 December 1852, Russell was appointed Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. In the eyes of many, including the Queen and Aberdeen, his jockeying for position against Palmerston was one of the causes of the inability of the administration to take a firm direction. It was a contest that Palmerston won; having entered the administration as the expected Whig heir, Russell left it having been overtaken by Palmerston.   == The Crimean WarEdit ==  Together with Palmerston, Russell was instrumental in getting Britain to join France in thwarting the threat of Russia against the Ottoman Empire. They did so as a member of the Aberdeen government and against the wishes of the cautious, Russophile Earl of Aberdeen. The Ottoman Empire was in a state of decline and several nations in Europe sought acquire portions of its territory. Russia sought to assert its territorial claims to the Balkans. However, just as soon as Louis Bonaparte had completed his coup against the Second Republic of France and assumed the title Napoleon III, he sent an ambassador to the Ottoman Empire with instructions to obtain from the Ottomans, a guarantee that France was to be the exclusive "protector of Christian sites" in Jerusalem and the Holy Land. Louis Bonaparte was the nephew of Napoleon I, Emperor of France, and many British public officials - like Aberdeen - felt that Louis Bonaparte was merely seeking foreign adventure and aggrandizement and would sooner or later involve Britain in another series of wars like those wars against France and Napoleon from 1793 to 1815. France had long been seen as an opponent of British interests, and that perception had not changed since 1815. Accordingly, much of the British public sided with Russia in what was now being called the "Eastern Question." However, as time passed, the horrific losses of British soldiers, reported in detail in the press, caused British public opinion to turn hostile. The British government was worried about the outcome of the rising tensions over Eastern Question. Accordingly, Aberdeen sent, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, a diplomat of considerable experience, to the Ottoman Empire, to oversee British interests. When the Ottomans gave way to Louis Bonaparte's demands, Russia strongly objected and on 7 May 1853 one of Russia's leading statesmen, Prince Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov, arrived in Turkey to demands an agreement favourable to Russia. During the Russo-Turkish War of 1768-1774, Russia had occupied the Turkish/Ottoman-controlled provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia (modern Romania). Under the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca signed in 1774, Russia had given these Danubian provinces back to the Ottoman Empire in exchange for Turkish recognition of Russia's exclusive right to "protect the Christian sites in Jerusalem and the Holy Land." Menshikov, using threats, obtained his agreement with The Porte. The British elite saw a growing Russian threat not just to the Ottomans but also to Europe and even India. The balance of power was being upset. London cooperated with Paris. France sent the French ship-of-the-line to the Black Sea, in the spring of 1852, as a show of force against the Russians. The Ottomans reversed themselves and signed a treaty acknowledging the French and the Vatican as the official protectors of the Christian sites in the Holy Land. The Russians responded by sending its 4th and 5th Army Corps into Wallachia and Moldavia. It expected Austria and Prussia would support this move, but they were opposed and Russia had no allies. The Aberdeen government resisted active pursuit of the war. Lord Russell, frustrated by the Prime Minister's delays, resigned from the government on 21 February 1853. Aberdeen replaced Russell with Lord Clarendon. The Ottoman Empire declared war on Russia on 23 October 1853. The Russian fleet defeated the Turkish fleet at the Battle of Sinope on 30 November 1853. After Russia had ignored the Anglo-French ultimatum, both France and Britain declared war on Russia on 28 March 1854. The war was fought chiefly in the Black Sea, with the great Russian base of Sebastopol in Crimea as the main target. In September 1854, British, French and Turkish troops landed on the Crimean Peninsula and set siege to Sevastopol. After a campaign marked by gross mismanagement and very high rates of death from disease, Sevastopol finally fell. Public opinion had turned hostile. A motion in Parliament to investigate the mismanagement became a vote of confidence in the Aberdeen government and in the Secretary for War. Accordingly, when the Robuck motion passed, Aberdeen treated the vote as a vote of "no confidence" on his government and resigned. Upon the resignation of the Earl of Aberdeen, Lord Palmerston was asked formed a new government. John Russell was sent to Vienna to negotiate (accepting the Colonial Office) but sacrificed himself to protect negotiation confidentiality, and temporarily retired from politics in 1855, focusing on writing.   == Foreign Minister in the Palmerston Government 1859–1865Edit == In 1859, following another short-lived Conservative government, Palmerston and Russell made up their differences, and Russell consented to serve as Foreign Secretary in a new Palmerston cabinet - usually considered the first true Liberal Cabinet. This period was a particularly eventful one in the world outside Britain, seeing the Unification of Italy, the American Civil War, and the 1864 war over Schleswig-Holstein between Denmark and the German states. Russell arranged the London Conference of 1864, but failed to establish peace in the war. His tenure of the Foreign Office was noteworthy for the famous dispatch in which he defended Italian independence: "Her Majesty's Government will turn their eyes rather to the gratifying prospect of a people building up the edifice of their liberties, and consolidating the work of their independence, amid the sympathies and good wishes of Europe" (27 October 1860).   == The House of Lords 1860Edit == Russell was elevated to the peerage as Earl Russell, of Kingston Russell in the County of Dorset, and Viscount Amberley, of Amberley in the County of Gloucester and of Ardsalla in the County of Meath, and in 1861. As a peer in his own right, he sat in the House of Lords for the remainder of his career.   == Prime Minister again 1865–1866Edit == When Palmerston suddenly died in late 1865, Russell again became Prime Minister. His second premiership was short and frustrating, and Russell failed in his great ambition of expanding the franchise - a task that would be left to his Conservative successors, Derby and Benjamin Disraeli. In 1866, party disunity again brought down his government. Russell never again held any office. His last contribution to the House of Lords was on 3 August 1875.   == Marriages and childrenEdit ==  On 11 April 1835, Russell married Adelaide, Lady Ribblesdale, the eldest daughter of Thomas Lister Esq. and the widow of Thomas Lister, 2nd Baron Ribblesdale, who had died in 1832. Her death in 1838 cut the marriage short after three years. They had two daughters, Lady Georgiana Adelaide Russell (1836–1922), who married Archibald Peel and had a daughter, Grace (1878–1973); and Lady Victoria Russell (1838–1880), who married the Rev. Henry Montagu Villiers, and left many descendants. On 20 July 1841 Russell married secondly Lady Frances Anna-Maria Elliot-Murray-Kynynmound, daughter of Gilbert Elliot, 2nd Earl of Minto. Their children were John Russell, Viscount Amberley (1842–1876), George Gilbert William Russell (1848–1933); Francis Albert Rollo Russell (1849–1914) and Mary Augusta Russell (1853–1933). They lived at Pembroke Lodge, Richmond Park After his 1876 death, Russell and his second wife brought up the children of his eldest son Lord Amberley, including philosopher Bertrand Russell, who recalled his grandfather in his later life as "a kindly old man in a wheelchair". The 1st Earl Russell is buried at the 'Bedford Chapel' at St. Michael’s Church, Chenies.   == LegacyEdit == He was succeeded as Liberal leader by former Peelite William Gladstone, and was thus the last true Whig to serve as Prime Minister. Generally taken as the model for Anthony Trollope's Mr Mildmay, aspects of his character may also have suggested those of Plantagenet Palliser. An ideal statesman, said Trollope, should have "unblemished, unextinguishable, inexhaustible love of country...But he should also be scrupulous, and, as being scrupulous, weak." The 1832 Reform Act and extension of the franchise to British cities are partly attributed to his efforts. He also worked for emancipation, leading the attack on the Test and Corporation acts, which were repealed in 1828, as well as towards legislation limiting working hours in factories in the 1847 Factory Act, and the Public Health Act of 1848. His government's approach to dealing with the Great Irish Famine is now widely condemned as counterproductive, ill-informed and disastrous. Russell himself was sympathetic to the plight of the Irish poor, and many of his relief proposals were blocked by his cabinet or by the British Parliament. Queen Victoria's attitude to Russell had been coloured by his role in the Aberdeen administration. On visiting Windsor Castle to resign, Aberdeen had told the Queen: "Nothing could have been better", he said, "than the feeling of the members towards each other. Had it not been for the incessant attempts of Ld John Russell to keep up party differences, it must be acknowledged that the experiment of a coalition had succeeded admirably", which attitude she shared. The Queen continued to criticise Russell for his behaviour for the rest of his life, and on his death in 1878 her journal records that he was: "A man of much talent, who leaves a name behind him, kind, & good, with a great knowledge of the constitution, who behaved very well, on many trying occasions; but he was impulsive, very selfish (as shown on many occasions, especially during Ld Aberdeen's administration) vain, & often reckless & imprudent".   == Russell's governmentsEdit == First Russell ministry (July 1846–February 1852) Second Russell ministry (October 1865–June 1866)   == LiteratureEdit == In 1819 Lord John Russell published his book Life of Lord Russell about his famous ancestor; and a year later his Essays and Sketches of Life and Character, "By a Gentleman who has left his lodgings" (1820), a series of social and cultural commentaries ostensibly found in a missing lodger's rooms. In 1822 Russell published a historical drama Don Carlos : or, Persecution. A tragedy, in five acts. Between 1853 and 1856, he edited the Memoirs, Journal and Correspondence of Thomas Moore, which was published by Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans over 8 volumes. A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens was dedicated to Lord John Russell "In remembrance of many public services and private kindnesses."   == AncestryEdit ==   == See alsoEdit == Internationalization of the Danube River Confederate States of America: International diplomacy   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Wood, James, ed. (1907). "article name needed". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. London and New York: Frederick Warne.    == BibliographyEdit == Chamberlain, Muriel E. (1983). Lord Aberdeen: A Political Biography. London.  Halevy, Elie (1950). "The Triumph of Reform 1830-1841". History of the English People in the Nineteeth Century 3.  detailed political narrative Halevy, Elie (1951). "Victorian Years". History of the English People in the Nineteeth Century 4.  detailed political narrative Krein, David F. (1976). "War And Reform: Russell, Palmerston and the Struggle for Power in the Aberdeen Cabinet, 1853-54". Maryland Historian 7#2.  Partridge, M. S. (1987). "The Russell Cabinet and National Defence, 1846-1852". History. 72# 235.  Prest, John (2009). "Russell, John, first Earl Russell (1792–1878)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Retrieved 31 Aug 2014.  short scholarly biography Prest, John M. (1972). Lord John Russell. Macmillan.  a scholarly biography Prest, J. M. (1966). "Gladstone and Russell". Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 16.  Reid, Stuart Johnson (1895). Lord John Russell.  Saunders, Robert (2005). "Lord John Russell and Parliamentary Reform, 1848-67". English Historical Review. 120#489.  Scherer, Paul (1999). Lord John Russell: A Biography.  a scholarly biography Scherer, Paul H. (1987). "Partner or Puppet? Lord John Russell at the Foreign Office, 1859-1862". Albion: A Quarterly Journal Concerned with British Studies.  Taylor, A. J. P. (1976). Essays in English History.  Wyatt, Tilby A. (1931). Lord John Russell: A study in civil and religious liberty. London.  Woodward, Llewellyn (1962) [1938]. "The Age of Reform, 1815-1870" (2nd ed.). Oxford History of England.  political narrative and analysis   === HistoriographyEdit === Beales, Derek (1974). "Peel, Russell and Reform". Historical Journal 17#4.  Loades, David Michael (2003). Reader's guide to British history.    == External linksEdit == Lord John Russell 1st Earl Russell, short biography from the 10 Downing Street website Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Lord John Russell Lord John Russell 1792-1878 biography from the Liberal Democrat History Group Lord John Russell by Stuart J. Reid Works by or about John Russell, 1st Earl Russell at Internet Archive Works by John Russell, 1st Earl Russell at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  More about Earl Russell on the Downing Street website Pembroke Lodge (principal residence and museum) Portraits of John Russell, 1st Earl Russell at the National Portrait Gallery, London

John Wilder Tukey ForMemRS (/ˈtuːki/; June 16, 1915 – July 26, 2000) was an American mathematician best known for development of the FFT algorithm and box plot. The Tukey range test, the Tukey lambda distribution, the Tukey test of additivity, and the Teichmüller–Tukey lemma all bear his name.   == BiographyEdit == Tukey was born in New Bedford, Massachusetts in 1915, and obtained a B.A. in 1936 and M.Sc. in 1937, in chemistry, from Brown University, before moving to Princeton University where he received a Ph.D. in mathematics. During World War II, Tukey worked at the Fire Control Research Office and collaborated with Samuel Wilks and William Cochran. After the war, he returned to Princeton, dividing his time between the university and AT&T Bell Laboratories. He became a full professor at 35 and founding chairman of the Princeton statistics department in 1965. Among many contributions to civil society, Tukey served on a committee of the American Statistical Association that produced a report challenging the conclusions of the Kinsey Report, Statistical Problems of the Kinsey Report on Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. He was awarded the National Medal of Science by President Nixon in 1973. He was awarded the IEEE Medal of Honor in 1982 "For his contributions to the spectral analysis of random processes and the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm." Tukey retired in 1985. He died in New Brunswick, New Jersey on July 26, 2000.   == Scientific contributionsEdit == Early in his career Tukey worked on developing statistical methods for computers at Bell Labs where he invented the term "bit". His statistical interests were many and varied. He is particularly remembered for his development with James Cooley of the Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm. In 1970, he contributed significantly to what is today known as the jackknife estimation—also termed Quenouille-Tukey jackknife. He introduced the box plot in his 1977 book, "Exploratory Data Analysis". Tukey's range test, the Tukey lambda distribution, Tukey's test of additivity and Tukey's lemma all bear his name. He is also the creator of several little-known methods such as the trimean and Median-Median line, an easier alternative to linear regression. In 1974, he developed, with Jerome H. Friedman, the concept of the projection pursuit.   === Statistical practiceEdit === He also contributed to statistical practice and articulated the important distinction between exploratory data analysis and confirmatory data analysis, believing that much statistical methodology placed too great an emphasis on the latter. Though he believed in the utility of separating the two types of analysis, he pointed out that sometimes, especially in natural science, this was problematic and termed such situations uncomfortable science. A D Gordon offered the following summary of Tukey's principles for statistical practice: ... the usefulness and limitation of mathematical statistics; the importance of having methods of statistical analysis that are robust to violations of the assumptions underlying their use; the need to amass experience of the behaviour of specific methods of analysis in order to provide guidance on their use; the importance of allowing the possibility of data's influencing the choice of method by which they are analysed; the need for statisticians to reject the role of 'guardian of proven truth', and to resist attempts to provide once-for-all solutions and tidy over-unifications of the subject; the iterative nature of data analysis; implications of the increasing power, availability and cheapness of computing facilities; the training of statisticians.   == Statistical termsEdit == Tukey coined many statistical terms that have become part of common usage, but the two most famous coinages attributed to him were related to computer science. While working with John von Neumann on early computer designs, Tukey introduced the word "bit" as a contraction of "binary digit". The term "bit" was first used in an article by Claude Shannon in 1948. In 2000, Fred Shapiro, a librarian at the Yale Law School, published a letter revealing that Tukey's 1958 paper "The Teaching of Concrete Mathematics" contained the earliest known usage of the term "software" found in a search of JSTOR's electronic archives, predating the OED's citation by two years. This led many to credit Tukey with coining the term, particularly in obituaries published that same year, although Tukey never claimed credit for any such coinage. In 1995, Paul Niquette claimed he had originally coined the term in October 1953, although he could not find any documents supporting his claim. The earliest known publication of the term "software" in an engineering context was in August 1953 by Richard R. Carhart, in a Rand Corporation Research Memorandum.   == QuotesEdit == Doing statistics is like doing crosswords except that one cannot know for sure whether one has found the solution. The greatest value of a picture is when it forces us to notice what we never expected to see.   == PublicationsEdit == Andrews, David F; Peter J Bickel; Frank R Hampel; Peter J Huber; W H Rogers & John W Tukey (1972). Robust estimates of location: survey and advances. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-08113-1. OCLC 369963.  Basford, Kaye E & John W Tukey (1998). Graphical analysis of multiresponse data. Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 0-8493-0384-2. OCLC 154674707.  Blackman, R B & John W Tukey (1959). The measurement of power spectra from the point of view of communications engineering. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-60507-8.  Cochran, William G; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (1954). Statistical problems of the Kinsey report on sexual behavior in the human male. Journal of the American Statistical Association.  Hoaglin, David C; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (eds) (1983). Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-09777-2. OCLC 8495063.  Hoaglin, David C; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (eds) (1985). Exploring Data Tables, Trends and Shapes. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-09776-4. OCLC 11550398.  Hoaglin, David C; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (eds) (1991). Fundamentals of exploratory analysis of variance. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-52735-1. OCLC 23180322.  Morgenthaler, Stephan & John W Tukey (eds) (1991). Configural polysampling: a route to practical robustness. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-52372-0. OCLC 22381036.  Mosteller, Frederick & John W Tukey (1977). Data analysis and regression : a second course in statistics. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-04854-X. OCLC 3235470.  Tukey, John W (1940). Convergence and Uniformity in Topology. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-09568-X. OCLC 227948615.  Tukey, John W (1977). Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-07616-0. OCLC 3058187.  Tukey, John W; Ian C Ross; Verna Bertrand (1973). Index to statistics and probability. R & D Press. ISBN 0-88274-001-6. OCLC 745715.  The collected works of John W Tukey, edited by William S Cleveland Brillinger, David R (ed) (1984). Volume I: Time series, 1949–1964. Wadsworth. ISBN 0-534-03303-2. OCLC 10998116.  Brillinger, David R (ed) (1985). Volume II: Time series, 1965–1984. Wadsworth. ISBN 0-534-03304-0. OCLC 159731367.  Jones, Lyle V (ed) (1985). Volume III: Philosophy and principles of data analysis, 1949–1964. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-03305-9. OCLC 159731367.  Jones, Lyle V (ed) (1986). Volume IV: Philosophy and principles of data analysis, 1965–1986. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05101-4. OCLC 165832503.  Cleveland, William S (ed) (1988). Volume V: Graphics, 1965–1985. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05102-2. OCLC 230023465.  Mallows, Colin L (ed) (1990). Volume VI: More mathematical, 1938–1984. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05103-0. OCLC 232966724.  Cox, David R (ed) (1992). Volume VII: Factorial and ANOVA, 1949–1962. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05104-9. OCLC 165366083.  Braun, Henry I (ed) (1994). Volume VIII: Multiple comparisons, 1949–1983. Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 0-412-05121-4. OCLC 165099761.  About John Tukey O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John Tukey", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Interview of John Tukey about his experience at Princeton   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Royal Society obit. by Peter McCullagh John W. Tukey: His Life and Professional Contributions published in The Annals of Statistics John Wilder Tukey (1915–2000) in Notices of the American Mathematical Society Memories of John Tukey Short biography by Mary Bittrich Obituary from The New York Times "Remembering John W. Tukey", special issue of Statistical Science John Wilder Tukey at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Joseph Camp Griffith Kennedy (April 1, 1813 – July 13, 1887) of Pennsylvania, was a 19th-century Whig politician, lawyer and journalist who supervised the United States Census for 1850 and 1860. Initially a prosperous farmer and journalist from a prominent Pennsylvania family, Kennedy was appointed to supervise the Census because of his political activism in the 1848 Pennsylvania election.   == Biography == Kennedy graduated from Allegheny College, in Meadville, Pennsylvania. He received an M.A. in 1856, followed by an LL.D. in 1864. Upon the appointment to supervise the Census, Kennedy and his family, his wife Catherine and children Joey, John, Sallie and Annie lived in Washington, D.C. from 1849 until at least 1868. On July 13, 1887, Kennedy was stabbed and killed in Washington D.C. by John Dailey who believed that Kennedy had cheated him in a business affair. A small group of Kennedy's papers are held in the Walter Willcox Collection, Library of Congress.   == Census == Under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior and with contentious Congressional oversight, Kennedy was responsible for the redesign of census methodology and forms, for negotiations with Congressional leaders and committees and for the gathering of census data throughout the United States. He was also responsible for supervising the ultimate compilation of census data, tabulation of statistics, and publication of census summaries. The Seventh Census of the United States (1850) was taken 1 June 1850. This was the first year in which the census bureau attempted to count every member of every household, including women, children and slaves. Accordingly, the first slave schedules were produced in 1850. Prior to 1850, census records had only recorded the name of the head of the household and broad statistical accounting of other household members, (three children under age five, one woman between the age of 35 and 40, etc.).. The Eighth Census of the United States (1860) estimated the population of the United States at 31,400,000. This was the first census where American Indians were officially counted, but only those who had 'renounced tribal rules'. That figure for the nation was 40,000. Results of this census were tabulated by 184 clerks in the Bureau of the Census. However, by the time the 1860 census returns were ready for tabulation, the United States was moving toward the American Civil War. As a result, Superintendent Kennedy and his staff produced only an abbreviated set of reports, which included no graphic or cartographic representations. As the war began, however, Kennedy and the Census staff used the new statistics to produce maps of Southern states for Union field commanders. These maps displayed militarily vital topics, including white population, slave population, predominant agricultural products (by county), and rail and post-road transportation routes.   == Publications == Agriculture of the United States in 1860; Compiled from the Original Returns of the Eighth Census, Under the Direction of the Secretary of the Interior. Washington D. C., Government Printing Office, 1864. Population of the United States in 1860; compiled from the original returns of the eighth census, under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior. Washington D.C., Government printing office, 1864. complete text online, [1]   == See also == Annie Kennedy Bidwell   == References ==   == Further reading == Anderson, Margo J. The American Census: A Social History. Yale University Press, 1988. ISBN 0-300-04709-6 Fitzpatrick, Paul J. Leading American Statisticians in the Nineteenth Century II", JASA 53 (September 1958) pp. 692–694. McDonald, Lois H. "Annie Kennedy Bidwell: An Intimate History." Stansbury Publishing. 2004. ISBN 0-9708922-7-6   == External links == Kennedy's 1879 letter to the NY Times regarding Laws governing the 1880 census.

Joseph Michael Hilbe (born December 30, 1944) is an American statistician and philosopher, founding President of the International Astrostatistics Association(IAA) and one of the most prolific authors of books on statistical modeling in the early twenty-first century. Hilbe is an elected Fellow of the American Statistical Association as well as an elected member of the International Statistical Institute (ISI), for which he founded the ISI astrostatistics committee in 2009. Hilbe is also a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and Full Member of the American Astronomical Society. Hilbe has made a number of contributions to the fields of count response models and logistic regression. Among his most influential books are two editions of Negative Binomial Regression (Cambridge University Press, 2007, 2011), Modeling Count Data (Cambridge University Press, 2014), and Logistic Regression Models (Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2009). Modeling Count Data won the 2015 PROSE honorable mention award for books in mathematics as the second best mathematics book published in 2014.  Hilbe is also editor-in-chief of the Springer Series in Astrostatistics, which began in 2011, is one of two co-editors for the Astrostatistics and AstroInformatics Portal, a co-ordinated website for the major astrostatistical organizations worldwide, hosted by the Pennsylvania State University Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, and is coordinating editor of the Cambridge University Press Series on Predictive Analytics in Action, commencing in 2012. A listing of his books, book chapters and encyclopedia articles are listed below (Publications). Hilbe was also a two-time national champion track & field athlete,  a US team and NCAA Division 1 head coach, and Olympic Games official.  He was also chair of the ISI sports statistics committee from 2007 to 2011 and chair of the 2014 Section on Statistics and Sports of the American Statistical Association.    == Life and Works == Born in Los Angeles, California, son of Rader John Hilbe (1910–1980) and Nadyne Anderson Hilbe (1910–1988), Hilbe was raised in Arcadia, CA, attended three years of high school at Woodside Priory School in Portola Valley, CA, before graduating from Paradise, CA high school in 1962. Hilbe attended California State University, Chico, from where he graduated in 1968 with a degree in philosophy. Hilbe studied for his doctorate in philosophy at U.C.L.A. where he was a graduate reader for visiting professor and Nobel Laureate Fredrick von Hayek and personal assistant to Rudolf Carnap, one of the founders of the Vienna Circle of Logical Positivism. Hilbe secured a position at the University of Hawaii, where he retired as an emeritus professor of philosophy in 1990. During this time he authored several texts in philosophy and logic. In 1988 he earned a doctorate in statistics (applied mathematics, U.C.L.A.) and in 1990 was hired by HCFA to develop statistical and data management tools for the study of Medicare data. Hilbe served as the founding editor of the Stata Technical Bulletin (predecessor to The Stata Journal) from 1991 to 1993, for which he developed a variety of statistical software commands, including the first generalized linear models (GLM) program having a negative binomial regression family (1993). The negative binomial family is now incorporated into the GLM routines of all major commercial statistical software. Hilbe is regarded as having popularized negative binomial regression, particularly in the disciplines of biostatistics and health outcomes analysis. It is now a standard method used for modeling overdispersed count data. Hilbe's 2007 text, Negative Binomial Regression, was the first text specifically devoted to the model and its many variations. His 2014 Modeling Count Data is regarded as the first text on applied count models. In 1992 Hilbe was appointed as an Adjunct Professor of Statistics in the Department of Sociology at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ. In 2007 the Sociology department merged with several other departments to become the School of Social and Family Dynamics. Hilbe served in several corporate positions during the 1990s, including the positions of lead statistician for Genentech's noted National Registry for Myocardial Infarctions (NRMI-2;1996–97) and lead statistician for Hoffman-La Roche's Canadian National Registry for Cardiovascular Disease (FASTRAK;1997–99). During this period Hilbe played an important role in the formation of the Health Policy Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association, serving as a member of its initial executive committee  and as a member of the founding scientific organizing committee (1995) for the International Conferences on Health Policy Statistics (ICHPS), which has been continuously held on a biannual basis. Hilbe was also one of the longest serving editors for a publication of the American Statistical Association, holding the position of Software Reviews Editor for The American Statistician for twelve years from 1997 to 2009. Hilbe's long-term interest in astronomy and meteorites led to his selection in 2006 as a Solar System Ambassador with NASA / Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, CA commencing January 2007. In 2008 Hilbe initiated the International Statistical Institute's (ISI) Astrostatistics Interest Group. In December 2009, the ISI Council approved the creation of an astrostatistics committee and network with Hilbe as inaugural chair. It was the first such interest-working group or committee authorized under the auspices of an astronomical of statistical organization. In August 2012 the International Astrostatistics Association (IAA) was formed with Hilbe elected as its founding President. The IAA is the first worldwide professional association for astrostatisticians. Its goal is to enhance collaboration between astrophysists, statisticians, and computer-information scientists, with an aim of enabling researchers to better understand and interpret astronomical data. In 2012, the Network and IAA stimulated the creation of the first working groups in astrostatistics and astroinformations within both the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and International Astronomical Union (IAU), with Hilbe as an initial member in both. Hilbe was also on the scientific organizing committee of the first IAU symposium on astrostatistics, Statistical Challenges in 21st Century Cosmology, held in May 2013 in Lisbon, Portugal. In 2009 Hilbe received the Distinguished Alumnus award from California State University, Chico.  Two years before he was inducted into the Chico State Athletic Hall of Fame. He is the only graduate of the university to receive both awards.  In 2010 Hilbe was inducted into the Paradise High School Athletic Hall of Fame, and in 2011 was inducted into the Woodside Priory High School Athletic Hall of Fame. Hilbe was married to Cheryl Swisher (1984) in Honolulu, Hawaii, and has four children.    == Athletics == Known as Joe Hilbe when involved with athletics, Hilbe won the National AAU Pentathlon Championships in 1968 and 1978. He was also listed in the Track & Field News World List rankings in the 100 yards (9.4, 1967) and 400 meters (45.9, 1965). Hilbe set Hawaii state records in the 100 meters (10.40, 1973) and the Javelin (78.51/257'7", 1976), which is still the recognized state mark. Hilbe served as National Chair for AAU Girl's Junior Olympic Track & Field from 1979 to 1982, and was Head Women's Track & Field coach at the University of Hawaii from 1979 to 1985.  His foremost athletes were Gwen Loud, 1984 NCAA Division 1 Long Jump Champion (6.72/22'5¾") and a member of the U.S. team to the first International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) World Championships in Helsinki, 1983, and Gwen Gardner, second at the 1980 U.S. Olympic Trials 400 meters, earning a berth on the Olympic team that boycotted the Moscow Olympic Games. As assistant men's coach at the University of Hawaii (1973–1977), Hilbe coached Terry Albritton, who broke the Shot Put world record (21.85/71'8½") in 1976, and won numerous AAU and NCAA titles. Hilbe was elected to serve as a U.S. team coach and manager during the 1980s for several major competitions in the U.S., Australia/New Zealand, the Caribbean, and in Europe. Hilbe was a member of the founding committee that formed the National Track & Field Officials Association in 1977. He was a lead competition official and IAAF technical official at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games and was hired by Turner Broadcasting System to serve as Athletics Broadcast Coordinator for the 1990 Goodwill Games held in Seattle, WA.   == Publications: Books == Hilbe, Joseph M., Practical Guide to Logistic Regression, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2015) ISBN 978-1-4987-0957-6 Miner, L.A., P.S. Bolding, J.M. Hilbe, et al., Practical Predictive Analytics and Decisioning Systems in Medicine, Elsevier (2014), ISBN 978-0-1241-1643-6 Hilbe, Joseph M., Modeling Count Data, Cambridge University Press (2014) ISBN 978-1-1076-1125-2 Shults, J. and J.M. Hilbe,Quasi-Least Squares Regression, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2014) ISBN 978-1-4200-9993-5 Zuur, A.F, J.M. Hilbe, E.N Ieno, A Beginners Guide to GLM and GLMM with R, Highlands (2013) ISBN 978-0-9571-7413-9 Hilbe, J.M. and A.P. Robinson, Methods of Statistical Model Estimation, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2013) ISBN 978-1-4398-5802-8 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Estimating Equations, Second Edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2012) ISBN 978-1-4398-8113-2 Hilbe, Joseph M., Astrostatistical Challenges for the New Astronomy, Springer (2012) ISBN 978-1-4614-3507-5 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, Third Edition, Stata Press (2012) ISBN 978-1-5971-8105-1 Hilbe, Joseph M., Negative Binomial Regression, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press (2011) ISBN 978-0-521-19815-8 Muenchen, R.A. and J.M. Hilbe, R for Stata Users, Springer (2010) ISBN 978-1-4419-1317-3 Hilbe, Joseph M., Logistic Regression Models, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2009) ISBN 978-1-4200-7575-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., Solutions Manual for Logistic Regression Models, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2009) ISBN 978-1-4398-2066-7 Hilbe, Joseph M., Negative Binomial Regression, Cambridge University Press (2007) ISBN 978-0-521-85772-7 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, Second Edition, Stata Press (2007) ISBN 978-1-59718-014-6 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Estimating Equations, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2003) ISBN 978-1-58488-307-4 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, Stata Press (2001) ISBN 1-881228-60-6 Hilbe, Joseph, Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints, Volume 2, (editor) Stata Press (1993) ISBN 1-881228-07-X Hilbe, Joseph, Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints, Volume 1, (editor) Stata Press (1992) ISBN 1-881228-05-3 Hilbe, Joseph, Sentential Logic, Educational Services Pub. Co. (1983) ASIN: 1881228606 Hilbe, Joseph M., Fundamentals of Conceptual Analysis, Kendall/Hunt (1977) ISBN 0-8403-1759-X Hilbe, Joseph, Philosophical Foundations of Law, Educational Services Pub. Co. (1973) ASIN: B005ONKCO2 HIlbe, J.M, Philosophy: Past and Present (2 vol), Educational Services Pub Co (1972) ASIN: B0052GQ4JI Hilbe, J.M., Experiencing Philosophy, Educational Services Pub. Co. (1970) ASIN: B0082YUQLE   == Publications: Major Book Chapters and Encyclopedia Articles == Hilbe, Joseph M., (2012), Astrostatistics: A Brief History and View into the Future in Hilbe, J.M (ed) Astrostatistical Challenges for the New Astronomy, New York: Springer ISBN 978-1-4614-3507-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., (2012), Astrostatistics in the International Arena in Feigelson, E.D. and G.J. Babu, (ed) Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy V, New York: Springer ISBN 978-1-4614-2596-0 Hilbe, J.M. and W.H. Greene, (2011), Chapter 4: Count Response Regression Models, in C. R. Rao, J.P. Miller, and D.C.Rao (Eds), Essential Statistical Methods for Medical Statistics, Oxford, UK: New Holland ISBN 978-0-4445-3737-9 Hilbe, Joseph M., Logistic Regression, StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies (2010). Hilbe, Joseph M., Modeling Count Data, StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies (2010). Hilbe, Joseph M., Generalized Linear Models, StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies (2010),. Hilbe, Joseph M., Logistic Regression in M. Lovric (editor), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science, New York: Springer (2010). ISBN 978-3-642-04897-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., Modeling Count Data in M. Lovric (editor), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science, New York: Springer (2010). ISBN 978-3-642-04897-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., Generalized Linear Models in M. Lovric (editor), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science, New York: Springer (2010). ISBN 978-3-642-04897-5 Hilbe, Joseph M, Statistical Software for the Social Sciences, in Kolenikov, S., L A. Thombs, and D. Steinley, (Eds), Statistics in the Social Sciences: Current Methodological Developments, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. pp. 175–189.(2010) Hilbe, J.M., G. Miner, and R. Nisbet, Astro-Statistics: Data Mining of SkyLab Project: Hubble Telescope Star and Galaxy Data, Tutorial SS, in Nisbet, R, J. Elder, and G. Miner (Eds), Handbook of Statistical Analysis & Data Mining Applications, New York:Elsevier (2009),ISBN 978-0-12-374765-5 Hilbe, J.M. and J.W. Hardin, Generalized Estimating Equations for Longitudinal Panel Analysis in S. Menard (Editor), Handbook of Longitudinal Research: Design, Measurement, and Analysis across the Social Sciences, London, UK: Academic Press/Elsevier (2007). Hilbe, Joseph and William Greene, Count Response Regression Models, in C.R. Rao, J.P. Miller, and D.C.Rao (Editors), Handbook of Statistics, Vol 27: Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, London, UK: North Holland/Elsevier (2007). Holmes, J.D., J. Rohn, and J. Hilbe, Informatics and Software Applications for Data Analyses in Van Beneden, C. and N. Mikanatha, (editors), Infectious Disease Surveillance, London: Blackwell (2007). Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe (2007). "Generalized Estimating Equations" in Encyclopedia of Clinical Trials, New York: Wiley & Son Pub. Hilbe, Joseph M., The Coevolution of Statistics and Hz. In S. Sawilowsky (ed.),Real Data Analysis, American Educational Research Association, SIG/Educational Statisticians: Information Age Publishing (2006). Hamilton, L. and J. Hilbe Statistical Analysis Using Stata, in R. Stine & J. Fox (Editors), Statistical Computing Environments for Social Research, Sage Publishing Co. (1997). Hilbe, J. and B. Turlach, Generalized Linear Models, in W. Haerdle, S. Klinke, B Turlach (Editors), XploRe: An interactive Statistical Computing Environment, Springer-Verlag (1995).   == See also == Stata Statistics International Astrostatistics Association The American Statistician American Statistical Association Royal Statistical Society International Statistical Institute American Astronomical Society   == References ==

Joseph Bernard Kruskal, Jr. (/ˈkrʌskəl/; January 29, 1928 – September 19, 2010) was an American mathematician, statistician, computer scientist and psychometrician. He was a student at the University of Chicago earing a bachelor of science in mathematics in the year of 1948 ,and a master of science in mathematics in the following year 1949. After his time at the University of Chicago Kruskal attended Princeton University, where he completed his Ph.D. in 1954, nominally under Albert W. Tucker and Roger Lyndon, but de facto under Paul Erdős with whom he had two very short conversations. Kruskal has worked on well-quasi-orderings and multidimensional scaling. He was a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, former president of the Psychometric Society, and former president of the Classification Society of North America. He also initiated and was first president of the Fair Housing Council of South Orange and Maplewood in 1963, and actively supported civil rights in several other organizations such as CORE. In statistics, Kruskal's most influential work is his seminal contribution to the formulation of multidimensional scaling. In computer science, his best known work is Kruskal's algorithm for computing the minimal spanning tree (MST) of a weighted graph. The algorithm first orders the edges by weight and then proceeds through the ordered list adding an edge to the partial MST provided that adding the new edge does not create a cycle. Minimal spanning trees have applications to the construction and pricing of communication networks. In combinatorics, he is known for Kruskal's tree theorem (1960), which is also interesting from a mathematical logic perspective since it can only be proved nonconstructively. Kruskal also applied his work in linguistics, in an experimental lexicostatistical study of Indo-European languages, together with the linguists Isidore Dyen and Paul Black. Their database is still widely used (available at the link below). Kruskal was born to a Jewish family in New York City to a successful fur wholesaler, Joseph B. Kruskal, Sr. His mother, Lillian Rose Vorhaus Kruskal Oppenheimer, became a noted promoter of Origami during the early era of television. He worked at Bell Labs from 1959 to 1993. Joseph Kruskal should not be confused with his two brothers Martin David Kruskal (1925–2006; co-inventor of solitons and of surreal numbers) and William Kruskal (1919–2005; developed the Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance), or his nephew Clyde Kruskal.   == Concepts named after Joseph Kruskal == Kruskal's algorithm (1956) Kruskal's tree theorem (1960) Kruskal–Katona theorem (1963) Kruskal rank or k-rank (1997)   == References ==   == External links == Joseph Kruskal at the Mathematics Genealogy Project The Dyen, Kruskal and Black lexicostatistical database : the 200-meaning Swadesh lists for 95 Indo-European languages. http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/departments/sia/kruskal/ : his Bell Labs page

Joseph L. Fleiss (November 13, 1937 – June 12, 2003) was a professor of biostatistics at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, where he also served as head of the Division of Biostatistics from 1975 to 1992. He is known for his work in mental health statistics, particularly assessing the reliability of diagnostic classifications, and the measures, models, and control of errors in categorization.   == Early life and education == Fleiss was born in Brooklyn, New York. He attended Columbia College of Columbia University and was awarded a bachelor's degree in 1959. He earned an M.S. in biostatistics in 1961 from the Columbia University School of Public Health (now called the Mailman School of Public Health), and a Ph.D. in statistics in 1967 from the Department of Mathematical Statistics in the Columbia Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.   == Career == Fleiss began his career as a biostatistician at the Biometrics Research Unit of the New York State Psychiatric Institute. While working at the Psychiatric Institute, he became a professor at the Columbia University School of Public Health. Fleiss served as head of the Division of Biostatistics at the School of Public Health from 1975 to 1992. Under his leadership, the Division increased in size and stature. Fleiss transformed the Division from a small program consisting chiefly of New Yorkers into a department with international prestige by recruiting top faculty from major institutions around the world.   == Field of expertise == One of Fleiss's chief concerns was mental health statistics, particularly assessing the reliability of diagnostic classifications, and the measures, models, and control of errors in categorization. He was among the first to notice the equivalence of weighted kappa and the intraclass correlation coefficient as measures of reliability in categorical data (see Fleiss' kappa). In an influential 1974 paper co-authored with Dr. Robert Spitzer, Fleiss demonstrated that the second edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-II) was an unreliable diagnostic tool. They found that different practitioners using the DSM-II were rarely in agreement when diagnosing patients with similar problems. In reviewing previous studies of 18 major diagnostic categories, Fleiss and Spitzer concluded that "there are no diagnostic categories for which reliability is uniformly high. Reliability appears to be only satisfactory for three categories: mental deficiency, organic brain syndrome (but not its subtypes), and alcoholism. The level of reliability is no better than fair for psychosis and schizophrenia and is poor for the remaining categories."   == Publications == Fleiss wrote two textbooks that are considered classics in biostatistics. According to the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions (1973) continues to be particularly influential in the fields of psychiatry and epidemiology. Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments (1986) was influential among medical researchers and biostatisticians, with its challenges concerning the planning and interpretation of studies involving human subjects. Fleiss also contributed chapters to more than two dozen books and authored or co-authored more than 200 statistical and scientific papers concerning the application of statistics in fields ranging from psychiatry and cardiology to dentistry.   == Awards == Among his many honors, Fleiss was given the Mortimer Spiegelman Award by the Statistics Section of the American Public Health Association in 1973. In 1997, the Harvard Institute of Psychiatric Epidemiology and Genetics recognized Fleiss with a Lifetime Contribution Award for his contributions to psychiatric epidemiology and biostatistics. Named a Fellow of the American Statistical Association in 1973.   == See also == Fleiss' kappa Cohen's kappa   == Notes and references ==   == Bibliography ==   === Books === Fleiss, J. L. (1973). Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions. New York: John Wiley & Sons.  Fleiss, J. L. (1986). Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments. New York: John Wiley & Sons.  Fleiss, J. L.; Levin, B.; Paik, M.C. (2003). Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions (3rd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.    === Selected papers === Spitzer, R., Cohen, J., Fleiss, J. L., and Endicott, J. (1967). "Quantification of agreement in psychiatric diagnosis". Archives of General Psychiatry 17: 83–87. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1967.01730250085012.  Fleiss, J. L. (1971). "Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters". Psychological Bulletin 76 (5): 378–382. doi:10.1037/h0031619.  Spitzer, R., and Fleiss, J. L. (1974). "A re-analysis of the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis". British Journal of Psychiatry 125 (0): 341–347. doi:10.1192/bjp.125.4.341. PMID 4425771.  Shrout, P. E., and Fleiss, J. L. (1979). "Intraclass correlations: Uses in assessing rater reliability". Psychological Bulletin 86 (2): 420–428. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.86.2.420. PMID 18839484.

Joseph Moses Juran (December 24, 1904 – February 28, 2008) was a Romanian-born American engineer and management consultant. He was an evangelist for quality and quality management, having written several books on those subjects. He was the brother of Academy Award winner Nathan H. Juran.   == Early life == Juran was born in Brăila, Romania, one of the six children born to a Jewish couple, Jakob and Gitel Juran; they later lived in Gura Humorului. He had three sisters: Rebecca (nicknamed Betty), Minerva, who earned a doctoral degree and had a career in education, and Charlotte. He had two brothers: Nathan H. Juran and Rudolph, known as Rudy. Rudy founded a municipal bond company In 1912, he emigrated to America with his family, settling in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Juran excelled in school, especially in mathematics. He was a chess champion at an early age, and dominated chess at Western Electric. Juran graduated from Minneapolis South High School in 1920. In 1924, with a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Juran joined Western Electric's Hawthorne Works. His first job was troubleshooting in the Complaint Department. In 1925, Bell Labs proposed that Hawthorne Works personnel be trained in its newly developed statistical sampling and control chart techniques. Juran was chosen to join the Inspection Statistical Department, a small group of engineers charged with applying and disseminating Bell Labs' statistical quality control innovations. This highly visible position fueled Juran's rapid ascent in the organization and the course of his later career.   == Personal life == In 1926, he married Sadie Shapiro. Joseph and Sadie met in 1924 when his sister Betty moved to Chicago and he and Sadie met her [on the] train; in his autobiography he wrote of meeting Sadie "There and then I was smitten and have remained so ever since". They were engaged in 1925 on Joseph's 21st birthday. 15 months later they were married. They had been married for nearly 82 years when he died in 2008. Joseph and Sadie raised four children (3 sons and 1 daughter.) Robert, Sylvia, Charles, and Donald. Robert was an award-winning newspaper editor, and Sylvia earned a doctorate in Russian literature.   == Department chief == Juran was promoted to department chief in 1928, and the following year became a division chief. He published his first quality-related article in Mechanical Engineering in 1935. In 1937, he moved to Western Electric/AT&T's headquarters in New York City, where he held the position of Chief Industrial Engineer. As a hedge against the uncertainties of the Great Depression, he enrolled in Loyola University Chicago School of Law in 1931. He graduated in 1935 and was admitted to the Illinois bar in 1936, though he never practiced law. During the Second World War, through an arrangement with his employer, Juran served in the Lend-Lease Administration and Foreign Economic Administration. Just before war's end, he resigned from Western Electric, and his government post, intending to become a freelance consultant. He soon joined the faculty of New York University as an adjunct professor in the Department of Industrial Engineering, where he taught courses in quality control and ran round table seminars for executives. He also worked through a small management consulting firm on projects for Gilette, Hamilton Watch Company and Borg-Warner. After the firm's owner's sudden death, Juran began his own independent practice, from which he made a comfortable living until his retirement in the late 1990s. His early clients included the now defunct Bigelow-Sanford Carpet Company, the Koppers Company, the International Latex Company, Bausch & Lomb and General Foods.   == Japan == The end of World War II compelled Japan to change its focus from becoming a military power to becoming an economic one. Despite Japan's ability to compete on price, its consumer goods manufacturers suffered from a long-established reputation of poor quality. The first edition of Juran's Quality Control Handbook in 1951 attracted the attention of the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers (JUSE), which invited him to Japan in 1952. When he finally arrived in Japan in 1954, Juran met with ten manufacturing companies, notably Showa Denko, Nippon Kōgaku, Noritake, and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. He also lectured at Hakone, Waseda University, Ōsaka, and Kōyasan. During his life, he made ten visits to Japan, the last in 1990. Working independently of W. Edwards Deming (who focused on the use of statistical process control), Juran—who focused on managing for quality—went to Japan and started courses (1954) in quality management. The training started with top and middle management. The idea that top and middle management needed training had found resistance in the United States. For Japan, it would take some 20 years for the training to pay off. In the 1970s, Japanese products began to be seen as the leaders in quality. This sparked a crisis in the United States due to quality issues in the 1980s.   == Contributions ==   === Pareto principle === In 1941, Juran stumbled across the work of Vilfredo Pareto and began to apply the Pareto principle to quality issues (for example, 80% of a problem is caused by 20% of the causes). This is also known as "the vital few and the trivial many". In later years, Juran preferred "the vital few and the useful many" to signal the remaining 80% of the causes should not be totally ignored.   === Management theory === When he began his career in the 1920s, the principal focus in quality management was on the quality of the end, or finished, product. The tools used were from the Bell system of acceptance sampling, inspection plans, and control charts. The ideas of Frederick Winslow Taylor dominated. Juran is widely credited for adding the human dimension to quality management. He pushed for the education and training of managers. For Juran, human relations problems were the ones to isolate and resistance to change was the root cause of quality issues. Juran credits Margaret Mead's book Cultural Patterns and Technical Change for illuminating the core problem in reforming business quality. He wrote Managerial Breakthrough, which was published in 1964, outlining the issue. Juran's concept of quality management extended outside the walls of the factory to encompass nonmanufacturing processes, especially those that might be thought of as service related. For example, in an interview published in 1997 he observed:  The key issues facing managers in sales are no different than those faced by managers in other disciplines. Sales managers say they face problems such as "It takes us too long...we need to reduce the error rate." They want to know, "How do customers perceive us?" These issues are no different than those facing managers trying to improve in other fields. The systematic approaches to improvement are identical. ... There should be no reason our familiar principles of quality and process engineering would not work in the sales process.   === The Juran trilogy === Juran was one of the first to write about the cost of poor quality. This was illustrated by his "Juran trilogy", an approach to cross-functional management, which is composed of three managerial processes: quality planning, quality control, and quality improvement. Without change, there will be a constant waste, during change there will be increased costs, but after the improvement, margins will be higher and the increased costs get recouped.   === Transferring quality knowledge between East and West === During his 1966 visit to Japan, Juran learned about the Japanese concept of quality circles, which he enthusiastically evangelized in the West. Juran also acted as a matchmaker between U.S. and Japanese companies looking for introductions to each other.   == Juran Institute == Juran founded the Juran Institute in 1979. The Institute is an international training, certification, and consulting company which provides training and consulting services in quality management, Lean manufacturing management and business process management, as well as Six Sigma certification. The institute is based in Southbury, Connecticut.   == Retirement == Juran was active well into his 80s, and only gave up international travel at age 86. He retired at the age of 90 but still gave interviews. His activities during the second half of his life include: Consulting for U.S. companies such as Armour and Company, Dennison Manufacturing Company, Merck, Sharp & Dohme, Otis Elevator Company, Xerox, and the United States Navy Fleet Ballistic Missile System. Consulting for Western European and Japanese companies, such as Rolls-Royce Motors, Philips, Volkswagen, Royal Dutch Shell and Toyota Motor Company Pro bono consulting for Soviet-bloc countries (Hungary, Romania, Czechoslovakia, Russia, Poland, and Yugoslavia) Founding the Juran Institute and the Juran Foundation.   == Later life and death == He started to write his memoirs at 92, which were published two months before he celebrated his 99th birthday. He gave two interviews at 94 and 97. In 2004, he turned 100 years old and was awarded an honorary doctorate from Luleå University of Technology in Sweden. A special event was held in May to mark his 100th birthday. He and Sadie celebrated their 81st wedding anniversary in June 2007. They were both at the age of 102 at the time of the event. Juran died of a stroke on 28 February 2008, at the age of 103 in Rye, New York. He was active on his 103rd birthday and was caring for himself and Sadie who was in poor health when he died. Sadie died on 2 December 2008, at the age of 103 years. They were survived by their four children, nine grandchildren and ten great-grandchildren. Juran left a book that was 37% complete, which he began at age 98.   == See also == Quality by Design   == Bibliography == Juran cites the following as his most influential works:   === Books ===  Quality Control Handbook, New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1951, OCLC 1220529  Eventually published in six editions: 2nd edition, 1962, 3rd edition, 1974, 4th edition, 1988, 5th edition, 1999, 6th edition, 2010 Managerial Breakthrough, New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964  Management of Quality Control, New York, New York: Joseph M. Juran, 1967, OCLC 66818686  Quality Planning and Analysis, New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970  Upper Management and Quality, New York, New York: Joseph M. Juran, 1980, OCLC 8103276  Juran on Planning for Quality, New York, New York: The Free Press, 1988, OCLC 16468905    === Published papers ===  "Directions for ASQC", Industrial Quality Control (Buffalo, New York: Society of Quality Control Engineers), November 1951  "Universals in Management Planning and Control", Management Review (New York, New York: American Management Association), November 1954: 748–761  "Improving the Relationship between Staff and Line", Personnel (New York, New York: American Management Association), May 1956  "Industrial Diagnostics", Management Review (New York, New York: American Management Association), June 1957  "Operator Errors—Time for a New Look", ASQC Journal (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), February 1968  "The QC Circle Phenomenon", Industrial Quality Control (Buffalo, New York: Society of Quality Control Engineers), January 1967  "Mobilizing for the 1970s", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), August 1969  "Consumerism and Product Quality", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), July 1970  "And One Makes Fifty", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), March 1975  "The Non-Pareto Principle: Mea Culpa", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), May 1975  "Khrushchev's Venture into Quality Improvement", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), January 1976  "Japanese and Western Quality—a Contrast", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), December 1978    === In Japanese ===  Planning and Practices in Quality Control, Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers, 1956  a collection of Juran's 1954 lectures Lectures in Quality Control, 1956 Lectures in General Management, 1960   == References ==   == External links == The Juran Institute's official web site List of people with the longest marriages

Joshua Milne (1776–1851), was an English actuary.   == Life == He was appointed actuary to the Sun Life Assurance Society on 15 June 1810, and reconstructed the life tables then in use. He gave evidence before the select committee on the laws respecting friendly societies (1825 and 1827). By 1839 Milne had lost interest in the values of life contingencies, and turned to natural history; he is said to have possessed one of the best botanical libraries in London. He resigned his position in the Sun Life Office on 19 December 1843, and died at Upper Clapton on 4 January 1851.   == Actuarial works == When Milne entered the field, life tables were based on the data taken by Richard Price from the burial registers (1735–80) of All Saints' Church, Northampton. Milne took as the basis of his calculations the bills of mortality from Carlisle, which had been prepared by John Heysham. After a long correspondence (12 September 1812 – 14 June 1814) with Heysham, he published his major work A Treatise on the Valuation of Annuities and Assurances (1815). Milne's new "Carlisle table" marked an epoch in actuarial science. Considering the narrow base of data from which he had to work, it was quite accurate, and was widely adopted by insurance societies. The Carlisle Table was largely superseded by that published by the Institute of Actuaries in 1870. But it was still considered useful in the early 20th century. Subsequent writers built on Milne's work. He was the first to compute accurately, at the cost of heavy algebra, the value of fines (i.e. payments to be made at the successive deaths of persons). His notation for the expression of life contingencies suggested that of Augustus De Morgan in his Essay on Probabilities. Milne also contributed to the Encyclopædia Britannica, fourth edition, articles on "Annuities", "Bills of Mortality", and "Law of Mortality".   == References ==  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Lee, Sidney, ed. (1894). "Milne, Joshua". Dictionary of National Biography 38. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Josiah Charles Stamp, 1st Baron Stamp GCB GBE FBA (21 June 1880 – 16 April 1941), was an English industrialist, economist, civil servant, statistician, writer, and banker. He was a director of the Bank of England and chairman of the London, Midland and Scottish Railway.   == Life and career == Stamp was born in Hampstead, London, the third of seven children; his youngest brother L. Dudley Stamp became an internationally renowned geographer. At the time of his birth his father owned and managed a provision and general shop in London. Educated at a private Baptist school, Bethany House at Goudhurst, Kent, Josiah left school at 16 and joined the Civil Service as a boy clerk in the Inland Revenue Department. With a brief interval in the Board of Trade, he rose to assistant inspector of taxes at Hereford in 1903, an inspector of taxes in London in 1909, and assistant secretary in 1916. Meanwhile, he was studying economics as an external student. He was awarded a first class degree (1911) by the University of London and a doctorate (1916) by the London School of Economics. The thesis, published as British Incomes and Property, became a standard work on the subject and established his academic reputation. Stamp met his future wife, Olive Jessie Marsh, a soprano and student teacher, when he was seventeen. Pursuing their work and studies separately for several years until their marriage in 1903, they engaged in a correspondence that gives us a rich sense of Stamp's formative years (Jones 1964). Between 1904 and 1917 they had four sons, Wilfred, Trevor, Maxwell and Colin. It was as a result of this marriage that Stamp, son of a Baptist father and Church of England mother, converted to the Wesleyan Methodist Church. A few of his writings (see below), such as Christianity and Economics (1939), discuss the relevance of Christian values to contemporary economics systems. In 1919 Stamp changed career, leaving the civil service for business, to join as secretary and director of Nobel Industries Ltd, from which Imperial Chemical Industries developed. In 1926 he became Chairman of the LMS and was instrumental in getting William Stanier appointed in 1932 as Chief Mechanical Engineer to resolve the locomotive problems of the Company. In 1928 he was appointed a director of the Bank of England. Stamp was often called to serve on public commissions, committees and boards: he was a member of the Royal Commission on Income Tax, 1919, the Northern Ireland Finance Arbitration Committee, 1923–24, the Committee on Taxation and National Debt, 1924, the Dawes Reparation Commission's Committee on German Currency and Finance, 1924, the Young Committee in 1929 and the Economic Advisory Council, 1930–39. From 1927 until his death he was Colonel commanding the Royal Engineers Railway and Transport Corps, and became Honorary Colonel of Transportation Units in the Royal Engineers Supplementary Reserve in 1938. Stamp was widely regarded as the leading British expert on taxation, and took an active part in the work of the Royal Statistical Society, serving as president from 1930 to 1932. Stamp was appointed Commander in the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1918, Knight in the Order (KBE) in 1920, and Knight Grand Cross (GBE) in 1924 and Knight Grand Cross of the Bath (GCB) in 1936. He was a Knight of Grace of the Order of St John of Jerusalem. He also held the Grand Cross of the Austrian Order of Merit (awarded 1936) and the Afghan Order of Astaur. He was raised to the peerage on 28 June 1938 as Baron Stamp of Shortlands, in the County of Kent. He was first Mayor of the Borough of Beckenham, Kent, within which he had settled at Shortlands, in 1935. He was made an honorary Freeman of the same borough in 1936 and of Blackpool in 1937. Stamp refused to be moved out of his house, 'Tantallon', in Park Hill Road, Shortlands, because of German bombing during The Blitz. He, aged sixty, and his wife, aged sixty-three, were killed by a bomb's direct hit on the air-raid shelter at their home on 16 April 1941. They were buried at Beckenham Cemetery. Ironically in 1935, he had been a founder member of the Anglo-German Fellowship and had made low key visits to Nuremberg in 1936 (when he met Adolf Hitler – whom Stamp noted was a "statesman and demagogue combined" – and Franz von Papen), and 1937, to view the Nazi Party Congress with the unspoken support of the then Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax. Stamp's son Wilfred was killed at the same time and in the same place, but English law has legal fiction that in the event of the order of deaths being indeterminable, the elder is deemed to have died first. Legally therefore, Wilfred momentarily inherited the peerage: and as a consequence the family had to pay death duty twice. The peerage passed to the second of Stamp's four sons, Trevor.   == Quotes == A well known quote from Stamp (often referred to as Stamp's Law) is: "The government are very keen on amassing statistics. They collect them, add them, raise them to the nth power, take the cube root and prepare wonderful diagrams. But you must never forget that every one of these figures comes in the first instance from the chowky dar (village watchman in India), who just puts down what he damn pleases." (Stamp recounting a story from Harold Cox who quotes an anonymous English judge). Another quote often attributed to Stamp is: "Banking was conceived in iniquity and was born in sin. The bankers own the earth. Take it away from them, but leave them the power to create money, and with the flick of the pen they will create enough deposits to buy it back again. However, take away from them the power to create money and all the great fortunes like mine will disappear and they ought to disappear, for this would be a happier and better world to live in. But, if you wish to remain the slaves of bankers and pay the cost of your own slavery, let them continue to create money." (Said to be from an informal talk at the University of Texas in the 1920s, but as yet unverified.)   == Sources == Beveridge, 'Stamp, Josiah Charles, first Baron Stamp (1880–1941)', rev. Jose Harris, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004. A. L. Bowley Lord Stamp Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 104, No. 2 (1941), pp. 193–196. J. Harry Jones, M.A., LL.D., Josiah Stamp, Public Servant: The Life of the First Baron Stamp of Shortlands, London: Sir Isaac Pitman and Sons, 1964, 365 pp. With an Epilogue by his youngest son, Colin, from a talk broadcast over Springbok Radio from Johannesburg, South Africa, 5 October 1960.   == Books by Josiah Stamp == Sourced from Who Was Who. British Incomes and Property 1916 Wealth and Income of the Chief Powers 1919 The Fundamental Principles of Taxation 1921 The National Income 1924 with A. L. Bowley 1927 The Christian Ethic as an Economic Factor 1926 On Stimulus 1927 Some Economic Matters in Modern Life 1929 Criticism and other addresses 1931 Internationalism 1931 The Financial Aftermath of War 1932 Taxation During the [Great] War 1932 Ideals of a Student 1933 Motive and Method in a Christian Order 1936 The National Capital and Other Statistical Studies 1937 The Science of Social Adjustment 1937 We live and learn 1937 Christianity and Economics 1939   == References ==   == External links == Stamp, Josiah Charles at economia.unipv.it – Brief notes on Stamp's life Steam Index: Sir Josiah Charles Stamp – A biography emphasising Stamp's management of the LMS railway Josiah Charles Stamp, 1st Baron Stamp on the National Portrait Gallery website STAMP, Josiah Charles STAMP, Rt Hon Lord, GCB, GBE, KBE, CBE at the Wayback Machine (archived 28 August 2004) – Record at the British Academy to which Stamp was elected in 1926

Julius Bartels (August 17, 1899, Magdeburg – March 6, 1964) was a German geophysicist and statistician who made notable contributions to the physics of the Sun and Moon; to geomagnetism and meteorology; and to the physics of the ionosphere. He also made fundamental contributions to statistical methods for geophysics. Bartels was the first President of the International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy. With Sydney Chapman, he wrote the influential book Geomagnetism.   == Life and career == Bartels was awarded his Ph.D. from Göttingen in 1923, then worked at the Potsdam magnetic observatory as a post-doctorate. In 1928 he was named professor at Eberswalde, teaching meteorology. He became full professor at Berlin University in 1936, and director of the Potsdam Geophysical Institute. From 1931 until the second year of World War II he was also a research associate at the Carnegie Institution of Washington. He collaborated with Sydney Chapman to publish the two-volume work Geomagnetism, a definitive reference on geophysics. Following the war in 1946 he became professor in Göttingen. He was also a director at the Max Planck Institute for Physics of the Stratosphere (today Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research) between 1955 and 1964. When 1958 ICSU created the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR). Bartels became chairman of the (West-)German branch. From 1954 until 1957 he served as first President of the IAGA. Between 1960 and 1963 he was vice-president of the IUGG.   == Research == Among his contributions was the development of the Kp-index, and he suggested the existence of "M-regions" on the Sun that resulted in geomagnetic activity. These coronal holes were later confirmed by the Skylab mission. Finally he also helped initiate the International Geophysical Year, which took place in 1957/8. The Bartels' Rotation Number of the Sun based on a regular 27 day cycle is named after him. It is similar to the Carrington rotation which is based on 27.2753 days.   == Awards and honors == Posthumously awarded the William Bowie Medal of the American Geophysical Union. The Julius Bartels Medal, of the European Geosciences Union Division on Solar-Terrestrial Sciences, was named in his honor. The crater Bartels on the Moon is named after him. The Chree Medal and Prize in 1953   == See also == List of geophysicists   == References ==

Kantilal Vardichand ("Kanti") Mardia, MSc, PhD, DSc, (born 1935) is a statistician specializing in directional statistics, multivariate analysis, geostatistics, statistical bioinformatics and statistical shape analysis. He was born in Sirohi, Rajasthan, India in a Jain family and now resides and works in Leeds. He is known for his series of tests of multivariate normality based measures of multivariate skewness and kurtosis as well as work on the statistical measures of shape.   == Life and career == Mardia was educated at the Ismail Yusuf College at the University of Bombay (BSc 1955, MSc in Statistics 1957), the University of Poona (MSc in Pure Mathematics 1961), the University of Rajasthan (PhD 1965) and the University of Newcastle Upon Tyne (PhD 1967, DSc 1973). He held academic positions at the Institute of Science, Mumbai and the University of Hull. Mardia was appointed Professor of Applied Statistics and Head of the Department of Statistics in the School of Mathematics at the University of Leeds in 1973. He retired in 2000 with the title Emeritus Professor and is currently Senior Research Professor of Applied Statistics at Leeds. He is also a long term Visiting Professor at the University of Oxford from March 2013. He was instrumental in founding the Centre of Medical Imaging Research (CoMIR) in the University of Leeds where he held the position of joint director. He was the driving force behind the exchange programs between Leeds and other scholarly centres such as the University of Granada, Spain, and the Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. He has written several scholarly books and edited conference proceedings and other special volumes. In 1973, Mardia founded the University of Leeds Annual Statistics Research Workshops (LASR) which have run for most years and he has edited all the proceedings. These workshops attract an international audience and focus on applied statistical topics especially those involving shape and images, and more recently, bioinformatics. Due to his initiative and efforts, the Centre of Statistical Bioinformatics (CoSB), Leeds, has been recently established. Mardia is the centre's Adjunct Director. In 2003 he was awarded the Guy Medal in Silver by the Royal Statistical Society. In 2013 he was awarded the Wilks Memorial Award by the American Statistical Association.  He is a practicing Jain and is strict vegetarian. His book The Scientific Foundations of Jainism[1] is already a classic introducing Four Nobles Truths of Jains. He is the Founding and Current Chairman of the Yorkshire Jain Foundation .   == Books == Multivariate Analysis (coauthored with John T. Kent and John Bibby) Statistics of Directional Data (second edition coauthored with Peter Jupp) Statistical Shape Analysis (coauthored with Ian Dryden) Bayesian methods in structural bioinformatics, (co-edited with Thomas Hamelryck and Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg)   == References ==   == External links == Home page at Leeds University Review of the LASR on the occasion of Mardias 65th Birthday by Fred Bookstein. Yorkshire Jain Foundation In Conversation with Prof. Kanti V. Mardia . . . in Research Newsletter of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad. February 2009.

Kaoru Ishikawa (石川 馨, Ishikawa Kaoru, July 13, 1915 - April 16, 1989) was a Japanese organizational theorist, Professor at the Faculty of Engineering at The University of Tokyo, noted for his quality management innovations. He is considered a key figure in the development of quality initiatives in Japan, particularly the quality circle. He is best known outside Japan for the Ishikawa or cause and effect diagram (also known as fishbone diagram) often used in the analysis of industrial processes.   == Biography == Born in Tokyo, the oldest of the eight sons of Ichiro Ishikawa. In 1939 he graduated University of Tokyo with an engineering degree in applied chemistry. After graduating from the University of Tokyo he worked as a naval technical officer from 1939-1941. Between 1941-1947 Ishikawa worked at the Nissan Liquid Fuel Company. In 1947 Ishikawa started his academic career as an associate professor at the University of Tokyo. He undertook the presidency of the Musashi Institute of Technology in 1978. In 1949, Ishikawa joined the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers (JUSE) quality control research group. After World War II Japan looked to transform its industrial sector, which in North America was then still perceived as a producer of cheap wind-up toys and poor quality cameras. It was his skill at mobilizing large groups of people towards a specific common goal that was largely responsible for Japan's quality-improvement initiatives. He translated, integrated and expanded the management concepts of W. Edwards Deming and Joseph M. Juran into the Japanese system. After becoming a full professor in the Faculty of Engineering at The University of Tokyo (1960) Ishikawa introduced the concept of quality circles (1962) in conjunction with JUSE. This concept began as an experiment to see what effect the "leading hand" (Gemba-cho) could have on quality. It was a natural extension of these forms of training to all levels of an organization (the top and middle managers having already been trained). Although many companies were invited to participate, only one company at the time, Nippon Telephone & Telegraph, accepted. Quality circles would soon become very popular and form an important link in a company's Total Quality Management system. Ishikawa would write two books on quality circles (QC Circle Koryo and How to Operate QC Circle Activities). Among his efforts to promote quality were the Annual Quality Control Conference for Top Management (1963) and several books on quality control (the Guide to Quality Control was translated into English). He was the chairman of the editorial board of the monthly Statistical Quality Control. Ishikawa was involved in international standardization activities. 1982 saw the development of the Ishikawa diagram which is used to determine root causes. At Ishikawa's 1989 death, Juran delivered this eulogy:   == Contributions to quality of improvement == User Friendly Quality Control Fishbone Cause and Effect Diagram - Ishikawa diagram Implementation of Quality Circles Emphasised the Internal customer Shared Vision   == Awards and recognition == 1972 American Society for Quality's Eugene L. Grant Award 1977 Blue Ribbon Medal by the Japanese Government for achievements in industrial standardization 1982 Walter A. Shewhart Medal 1988 Awarded the Order of the Sacred Treasures, Second Class, by the Japanese government.   == Publications == Ishikawa, Kaoru (1980) [original Japanese ed. 1970]. QC Circle Koryo : General Principles of the QC Circle. Tokyo: QC Circle Headquarters, Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers.  Ishikawa, Kaoru (1985). How to Operate QC Circle Activities. Tokyo: QC Circle Headquarters, Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers.  Ishikawa, Kaoru (1985) [First published in Japanese 1981]. What is Total Quality Control? The Japanese Way [Originally titled: TQC towa Nanika—Nipponteki Hinshitsu Kanri]. D. J. Lu (trans.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-952433-9.  Ishikawa, Kaoru (1990). Introduction to Quality Control. J. H. Loftus (trans.). Tokyo: 3A Corporation. ISBN 4-906224-61-X. OCLC 61341428.  About Kaoru Ishikawa Kondo, Yoshio (July 1994). "Kaoru Ishikawa: What He thought and Achieved, A Basis for Further Research". Quality Management Journal 1 (4): 86–91. ISSN 1068-6967.  Watson, Greg (April 2004). "The Legacy Of Ishikawa". Quality Progress 37 (4): 54–57. ISSN 0033-524X.  Dewar, Donald L. (May 1988). "A Serious Anomaly: TQC without Quality Circles". Annual Quality Congress, Dallas, TX 42 (0): 34–38.  title=The Japanese Approach to Product Quality |Professor Sasaki and David Hutchins 1980 Pub Pergamon Press | 0-08-028 159-1 |HBK 0-0273-028B 160-5 title=Quality Circles Handbook | last= Hutchins | first=David (1983)| |Pub PITMAN BOOKS 0-273 02644-5| PBK AND 0-273-02024-2 HBK A special tribute to Professor Kaoru Ishikawa 1990 | title= The man and his work | David Hutchins invited author of one chapter| Published by JUSE JAPAN + Special Committee| E 03(5379)1240 title= Hoshin Kanri - the Strategic Approach to Continuous Improvement | last= Hutchins | first=David | | 2008 | pub – GOWER PRESS 13:9780566087 400   == References ==   == External links == Biography by the American Society for Quality Biography by De La Salle University

Dame Karen Hope Dunnell, DCB, FAcSS (born 16 June 1946) was National Statistician and Chief Executive of the Office for National Statistics of the United Kingdom and head of the Government Statistical Service from 1 September 2005 until retiring on 28 August 2009. Since its inception in 2008, she was also the Chief Executive of the UK Statistics Authority. She now has a range of non-executive roles including membership of Pricewaterhouse Coopers Public Interest Body, Trustee of National Heart Forum, member of the Court of Governors, University of Westminster.   == Background == Born Karen Williamson in Los Angeles, USA, she moved to Britain when she was a young child and was educated at Maidstone Grammar School for Girls and Bedford College, London. Her father was a US serviceman during World War II and her mother, who was English, was a teacher. Karen Dunnell has been married twice: to Keith Dunnell (1969–76) and Professor Michael Adler (1979–94). She has two adult daughters by her second marriage and two grandchildren. She lives in London and has a home in the Var in SE France.   == Career == Karen Dunnell studied sciences at school because she wanted to go into medicine. However, a growing interest in politics and society led her to study sociology at Bedford College, London, from where she graduated in 1967. She began her career as a health care researcher with the Institute of Community Studies, where much of her work involved healthcare surveys, and, in 1972, she wrote a book, Medicine Takers, Prescribers and Hoarders with Ann Cartwright,. This established a measure of morbidity and the relationship between medicines acquired through the NHS and over-the-counter. Dunnell then joined the Department of Epidemiology & Public Health at St Thomas' Hospital Medical School, working on multi-disciplinary projects alongside doctors, social scientists, statisticians and economists, including a major project that measured the cost of caring for people with severe disabilities in the community compared with the cost of caring for them in institutions. She joined the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) in 1974, as a social survey officer in the Survey Division, where she stayed for 15 years, working on, among other things, two major surveys. One of these was the UK's contribution to the World Fertility Survey, published as a book, Family Formation, in 1976. This measured cohabitation for the first time and first asked the question, now a standard, "At what age did you first have sexual intercourse?". The other studied the work of community nurses, using an intensive survey combined with diary-keeping. She was promoted to Assistant Director, overseeing all health surveys in the OPCS. These included surveys on drinking and smoking and a major survey on disability that established what proportion of people in different age groups had different disabilities. She was responsible, in this post, for liaising with the Department of Health. In 1990, she moved from working with health surveys in the OPCS to medical statistics. When OPCS merged with the Central Statistical Office to form the ONS in 1996, she became Director of Demography and Health Statistics, working on general practice statistics and inequalities in health, and established the Health Statistics Quarterly journal. In 1999, she moved to a central post responsible for launching National Statistics and dealing with the arrival of Len Cook, the first National Statistician, in 2000. She was promoted to Group Director in Social Statistics in 2000, managing health, demography, population, labour market and social reporting and was temporarily promoted to the Board of the ONS in 2001 in the run-up to the 2001 census. A major reorganisation, which divided the activities of ONS into 'sources' and 'analysis', followed and Dunnell was given the job of setting up the new "Sources" Directorate, bringing together household and business surveys, the infrastructure that supported them, the statistical modernisation programme and planning for the 2011 Census. She took up this post on the ONS Executive in 2002.   === National Statistician === Karen Dunnell was appointed National Statistician and Director of the Office for National Statistics from 1 September 2005 at a time when the government was being criticised for the quality, credibility and uses to which it put the statistics generated both by ONS and by governments departments. Soon afterwards, Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, announced that, following the success of the idea of independence for the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England as a means of gaining trust in the its interest-rate decisions, a form of independence should be applied to ONS so that its data could also gain public trust. ONS is now accountable to Parliament via a Statistics Board, known as the UK Statistics Authority (UKSA), rather than, as previously, via a Treasury minister. Following the implementation of the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007, the role of Registrar-General for England and Wales, an ancient additional title, held by the National Statistician since the inception of ONS, was transferred, with the General Register Office for England and Wales, which she also headed, to the Identification and Passport Service in the Home Office   === Controversy === A government policy inherited by Karen Dunnell as National Statistician aroused controversy. Following the efficiency reviews initiated by the Chancellor and Prime Minister (viz. Review of Public Sector Relocation by Sir Michael Lyons, 2003-4, and Releasing Resources to the Front Line, Sir Peter Gershon, 2004), the government adopted a policy, criticised by unions, of dispersal of certain public service posts and functions out of London. The policy was initially applied to ONS during Len Cook's tenure as National Statistician but after Karen Dunnell succeeded to the post, ONS accelerated the policy of relocating the Office for National Statistics away from London and concentrating staff in its offices in Titchfield, near Southampton, and in Newport, South Wales, to which the ONS headquarters has moved. The announcement, in January 2007, of the almost complete closure of the ONS's London offices by 2010 reversed a decision to retain a sizeable office in the capital. This relocation policy, together with substantial expenditure cutbacks in recent government spending settlements, resulted in disquiet among London-based staff whose representatives reported morale problems and a high staff turnover rate among staff still in London. To set against the risks to data quality of any loss of expertise, especially among London-based staff who were unwilling to move, including analysts in National Accounts and in health statistics, Ms. Dunnell defended ONS implementation of government policy on civil service relocation. In the face of some Bank of England disquiet, reported in 2007 to the Treasury Select Committee, about risks to economic data quality, combined with opposition from London staff (including a lack of confidence in management expressed in a staff survey highlighted by staff unions), she asserted that the ONS Board had agreed a process of managed and gradual change to take account of these risks, building up expertise in Newport before shifting functions there. She also cited the benefits to the local economy, the skills of existing ONS staff in Newport and access to universities and other resources in the region as well as the benefits of operating key functions from a single location.   === Other roles === Outside the OPCS, Karen Dunnell has been a member of the British Sociology Association and was on the committee of its BSA Medical Sociology Group. She later chaired the Society for Social Medicine. She is a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, is a visiting professor at the London School of Hygiene. She has been elected to a second term as a Visiting Fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford. Karen Dunnell was awarded an Honorary Doctorate degree by Middlesex University in July 2008, was appointed an Honorary Fellow of Cardiff University in July 2009  and was appointed Dame Commander of the Order of the Bath (DCB) in the Queen's Birthday Honours List in June 2009.   == References ==   == External links == Dame Karen Dunnell, DCB at Debrett's People of Today

Karl Gustav Jöreskog (born 25 April 1935) is a Swedish statistician. Jöreskog is a Professor Emeritus at Uppsala University, and a co-author (with Dag Sörbom) of the LISREL statistical program. He is also a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Jöreskog received his bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees in Uppsala University. He is also a former student of Herman Wold. He was a statistician at Educational Testing Service (ETS) and a visiting professor at Princeton University.   == Research == Jöreskog proposed a reliable numerical method for computing maximum-likelihood estimates in factor analysis; similarly reliable methods were also proposed by Gerhard Derflinger, Robert Jennrich, and Stephen M. Robinson at roughly the same time. Jöreskog's Fortran codes helped to popularize factor analysis around the world. While working at the Educational Testing Service and giving lectures at Princeton University, Jöreskog proposed a linear model for the analysis of covariance structures, a fundamental contribution to structural equation modeling (SEM). His other research interests include multivariate analysis, item response theory, statistical computing, and factor-analysis in geology.   == Awards == In 2007 Jöreskog received the Award for distinguished scientific applications of psychology from the American Psychological Association (APA).   == Selected bibliography == Jöreskog, K. G. (1969). A general approach to confirmatory maximum likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrika, 34, 183–202. Jöreskog, K. G. (1970). "A general method for analysis of covariance structures". Biometrika 57: 239–251. doi:10.1093/biomet/57.2.239.  Reprinted as Jöreskog, K. G. (2001). "A general method for analysis of covariance structures". In D. M. Titterington and D. R. Cox. Biometrika: One Hundred Years. Oxford University Press. pp. 345–357. ISBN 0-19-850993-6.   Jöreskog, K. G., and Goldberger, A. S. (1975). "Estimation of a model with multiple indicators and multiple causes of a single latent variable". Journal of the American Statistical Association 70 (351): 631–639. doi:10.2307/2285946. JSTOR 2285946.  Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1979). Advances in factor analysis and structural equation models. New York: University Press of America. Jöreskog, K. G., & Moustaki, I. (2001). Factor analysis of ordinal variables: A comparison of three approaches. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 36, 347–387.   === Festschrift === Cudeck, R., Jöreskog, K. G., Du Toit, S. H. C., & Sörbom, D. (2001). Structural Equation Modeling: Present and Future : a Festschrift in Honor of Karl Jöreskog. Scientific Software International.   == Notes ==   == See also ==   == External links == Jöreskog's presentation of the econometric research that was recognized with the 2000 Nobel Prize in economics Profile of Karl Jöreskog on the website of SSI company Karl Gustav Jöreskog at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Kenneth Massey is an American sports statistician known for his development of a methodology for ranking and rating sports teams in a variety of sports. His ratings have been a part of the Bowl Championship Series since the 1999 season. He is an assistant professor of mathematics at Carson–Newman University in Tennessee.   == MethodsEdit == Massey, unlike the developers of other sports rating systems, gives quite a lot of information on how his system works, but omits enough details to prevent someone from copying the calculations in their entirety. The Massey Ratings are designed to measure past performance, not necessarily to predict future outcomes. The first challenge for any computer rating system is to account for the variability in performance. A team will not always play up to its full potential. Other random factors (officiating, bounce of the ball) may also affect the outcome of a game. The model must somehow eliminate the "noise" which obscures the true strength of a team. The second goal is to account for the differences in schedule. When there is a large disparity in schedule strength, win-loss records lose their significance. The model must evaluate games involving mismatched opponents, as well as contests between well matched teams. It is necessary to achieve a reasonable balance between rewarding teams for wins, convincing wins, and playing a tough schedule. This issue is difficult to resolve, and rating systems exist that are based on each of the extremes.The overall team rating is a merit based quantity, and is the result of applying a Bayesian win-loss correction to the power rating. Only the score, venue, and date of each game are used to calculate the Massey ratings. Stats such as rushing yards, rebounds, or field-goal percentage are not included. Nor are game conditions such as weather, crowd noise, day/night, or grass/artificial turf. Overtime games are not treated any differently. Finally, neither injuries nor psychological factors like motivation are considered.   == JustificationEdit == Massey's ratings are particularly relevant in the world of American college football, where, with over 100 teams in NCAA Division I competition, there is no way a team can play against more than a small fraction of its competitors. Therefore, in determining the participants in championship games and tournaments, it is necessary to distinguish between teams that have compiled impressive win-loss records against strong competition and teams that have defeated weaker opponents. Massey's analysis is a valuable tool for leagues that need to fairly seed playoff brackets, or schedule games that will encourage competitive play and good sportsmanship. Sports rating systems are generally used by gamblers to forecast results, but Massey is not affiliated with this industry. Massey's ratings came under some scrutiny ine late 2008 due to his controversial rankings at the end of the season. Although Massey's rating system came under fire near the end of the 2008 season for rating undefeated Utah ahead of then-consensus human poll #1 Alabama, his ratings seemed to be justified following Utah's 31-17 one-sided victory in the 2009 Sugar Bowl.   == BackgroundEdit == Massey first got the idea to do sports ratings as an undergraduate at Bluefield College. He developed various rating models at that time, and presented his work in the form of an honors project. While doing graduate work in mathematics at Virginia Tech, Massey was invited by Roy Kramer, then commissioner of the Southeastern Conference and president of the Bowl Championship Series, to submit his ratings for inclusion in the BCS ranking formula. Massey's college football rankings were part of the BCS formula from 1999-2013. Massey also consults for various amateur and professional athletic leagues.   == Personal LifeEdit == Massey resides in Jefferson City, TN with his wife, a native of Sibiu, Romania. They are expecting their first child to be born in 2015.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Official website Massey, Ken. "Massey Ratings". High School Sports.  Massey, Ken (Spring 1997). "Honors Project in Mathematics, Bluefield College".   available at Statistical Models Applied to the Rating of Sports Teams at the Internet ArchivePDF

Kingsley Davis (August 20, 1908 – February 27, 1997) was an internationally recognized American sociologist and demographer. He was identified by the American Philosophical Society as one of the most outstanding social scientists of the twentieth century, and was a Hoover Institution senior research fellow.   == Education and careerEdit == Davis received his Ph.D. from Harvard University and taught at Smith College, Clark University, Pennsylvania State University, Princeton University, Columbia University, the University of California at Berkeley and the University of Southern California. Among his other accomplishments, Davis served as president of the Population Association of America and the American Sociological Association represented the United States on the United Nations Population Commission member of the Advisory Council of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Advisory Committee on Population for the U.S. Bureau of the Census was the first sociologist in the United States to be elected to the National Academy of Sciences (1966). Davis won the Irene B. Taeuber Award for outstanding research in demography (1978), the Common Wealth Award for distinguished work in sociology (1979), and the Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award from the American Sociological Association (1982).   == ResearchEdit == Davis led and conducted major studies of societies in Europe, South America, Africa and Asia, coined the term "population explosion,", and played a major role in the naming and development of the demographic transition model. He was also one of the original scholars in the development of the theory of overurbanization. He is also credited with coining the term "zero population growth"  although George Stolnitz claimed to have that distinction. Davis had several children while espousing limitations on childbearing world-wide. Davis also published an influential article with Wilbert E. Moore entitled "Some Principles of Stratification," which was a very influential functionalist account of the reasons for social inequality. Davis and Moore synthesize Durkheim and Parsons to argue for the "functional necessity" of some positions over others: those that are highest paid go to the most deserving individuals; at the same time, the differential rewards motivates individuals to work to fill positions they might otherwise not. Thus, from this perspective, illness is a deviant state because it means that the individual may not be able to fill their role. Sociologists see this article as a paradigmatic case of functionalist logic, and indeed, Davis came to be a leading figure in this school of sociology. As a demographer, Davis was internationally recognized for his expertise in world population growth and resources, the history and theory of international migration, world urbanization, demographic transition and population policy.   == Published WorksEdit == Kingsley Davis was a prolific scholar who published numerous research articles, book chapters and books.   === Other writingEdit === In the popular press, Davis' work appeared in "Scientific American," "Science," the "New York Times Magazine," "Commentary," "Foreign Affairs" and numerous newspapers. In 1957, Davis predicted that population of the world would reach six billion by the year 2000. He was remarkably close; that population figure was reached in October 1999.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == David Heer and Kingsley Davis. "Kingsley Davis: A Biography and Selections from His Works" (Transaction Publishers, 2005) —— (July 1951). Population and Progress in Puerto Rico. Foreign Affairs (Council on Foreign Relations).  CS1 maint: Date and year (link)   == External linksEdit == Kingsley Davis at Encyclopædia Britannica Obituary at Stanford News Biography at the American Sociological Association Biography from Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society

Ladislaus Josephovich Bortkiewicz (August 7, 1868 – July 15, 1931) was Russian economist and statistician of Polish ancestry, who lived most of his professional life in Germany, where he taught at Strassburg University (Privatdozent, 1895–1897) and Berlin University (1901–1931).   == Life and work == Bortkiewicz was born in Saint Petersburg, Imperial Russia, where he graduated from the Law Faculty in 1890. In 1898 he published a book about the Poisson distribution, titled The Law of Small Numbers. In this book he first noted that events with low frequency in a large population follow a Poisson distribution even when the probabilities of the events varied. It was that book that made the Prussian horse-kick data famous. The data give the number of soldiers killed by being kicked by a horse each year in each of 14 cavalry corps over a 20-year period. Bortkiewicz showed that those numbers follow a Poisson distribution. The book also examined data on child-suicides. Some have suggested that the Poisson distribution should have been named the "Bortkiewicz distribution." In political economy, Bortkiewicz is important for his analysis of Karl Marx's reproduction schema in the last two volumes of Capital. Bortkiewicz identified a transformation problem in Marx's work. Making use of Dmitriev's analysis of Ricardo, Bortkiewicz proved that the data used by Marx was sufficient to calculate the general profit rate and relative prices. Though Marx's transformation procedure was not correct—because it did not calculate prices and profit rate simultaneously, but sequentially—Bortkiewicz has shown that it is possible to get the correct results using the Marxian framework, i.e. using the marxian variables constant capital and variable capital it is possible to obtain the profit rate and the relative prices in a three-sector model. This "correction of the Marxian system" has been the great contribution of Bortkiewicz to classical and Marxian economics but it was completely unnoticed until Paul Sweezy's 1942 book "Theory of Capitalist Development". Piero Sraffa (1960) has provided the complete generalization of the simultaneous method for classical and Marxian analysis. Bortkiewicz died in Berlin, Germany. His papers, including a voluminous correspondence file (some 1,000 letters 1876–1931), were deposited at Uppsala University in Sweden, except for his correspondence with Léon Walras which went into the collection of the Walras scholar William Jaffe in the USA.   == Major publications == Die mittlere Lebensdauer. Die Methoden ihrer Bestimmung und ihr Verhältnis zur Sterblichkeitsmessung. Gustav Fischer, Jena 1893 (Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum) "Review of Léon Walras, Éléments d'économie politique pure, 2e édit.", 1890, Revue d'économie politique Das Gesetz der kleinen Zahlen, 1898 "Wertrechnung und Preisrechnung im Marxschen System", 1907, Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik. "On the Correction of Marx's Fundamental Theoretical Construction in the Third Volume of Capital." Die Iterationen, spanish version 1917 Value and Price in the Marxian System, 1952, IEP. "Die Rodbertus'sche Grundrententheorie und die Marx'sche Lehre von der absoluten Grundrente", from: "Archiv für die Geschichte des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung", 1910–11   == See also == Mihajlo D. Mesarovic   == Notes ==   == References == Joseph Schumpeter: Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, Economic Journal, Vol. 42 (1932), pp. 338–340, reprinted in: Ten great economists from Marx to Keynes (New York, 1960), pp. 302–305 Emil Julius Gumbel: Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences 2 (New York, 1968), pp. 128–131. Freely available online at StatProb Paul A. Samuelson. Resolving a Historical Confusion in Population Analysis. Human Biology, 48, 1976: S. 559–580.   == External links == Biographical sketch on the web site of the University of St. Andrews (in Scotland) Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz from encyclopedia.com New School: Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz

Lancelot Thomas Hogben FRS (9 December 1895 – 22 August 1975) was a British experimental zoologist and medical statistician. He developed the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis) as a model organism for biological research in his early career, attacked the eugenics movement in the middle of his career, and popularised books on science, mathematics and language in his later career.   == Early life == Hogben was born in Portsmouth and brought up in Southsea, Hampshire. His parents were Plymouth Brethren; he broke young from the family religion. He attended Tottenham County School in London, his family having moved to his mother's home town of Stoke Newington in 1907, and then as a medical student studied physiology at Trinity College, Cambridge. He took his degree in 1915. He had acquired socialist convictions, changing the name of the university's Fabian Society to Socialist Society and went to become an active member of the Independent Labour Party. Later in life he preferred to describe himself as 'a scientific humanist'.   == First World War == In the First World War he was a pacifist and was imprisoned as a conscientious objector in 1916 at Wormwood Scrubs; this was after six months working with the Red Cross in France, and his deliberate return to Cambridge. His health collapsed and he was released in 1917. Hogben married in 1918 the mathematician, statistician, and feminist Enid Charles, with whom he had two sons and two daughters.   == Academic == After a year's convalescence he took lecturing positions in London universities, moving in 1922 to the University of Edinburgh and its Animal Breeding Research Department. He then went to McGill University, and in 1927 to a zoology chair at the University of Cape Town. He worked on endocrinology and used the Xenopus frog. While using Xenopus to investigate the endocrine system, he serendipitously discovered that female Xenopus frogs, when injected with urine from a pregnant woman, ovulated within hours. Thus, the Hogben Pregnancy Test was created and remained the major, international pregnancy test for decades. He found the job in South Africa attractive, but his antipathy to the country's racial policies drove him to leave. In 1930 Hogben moved to the London School of Economics, in a chair for social biology. He became a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1936. The citation read  Distinguished for his work in Experimental Zoology, especially in respect of the mechanism of colour change in Amphibia and Reptilia. He has published a series of important papers on the effect of hormones on the pigmentary effector system and on the reproductive cycle of vertebrates, and has worked on many branches of comparative physiology. More recently he has made substantial contributions to genetics, especially with regard to man.  The social biology position at the London School of Economics was funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, and when it withdrew funding Hogben moved to Aberdeen, becoming Regius Professor of Natural history at the University of Aberdeen in 1937. Hogben was granted both the Neill Prize, as well as a gold medal, for his work in mathematical genetics.   == Political views == While Chair for Social Biology at the LSE, Hogben unleashed a relentless attack on the British eugenics movement, which was at its apex in the 1920s and 1930s. In contrast to eugenicists, who commonly drew a strict line between heredity (or nature) and environment (or nurture), Hogben highlighted the 'interdependence of nature and nurture'. Hogben's appeal to this interdependence of nature and nurture marked the first time gene-environment interaction (or 'gene-environment interplay') was used to undermine statistical attempts to partition the contributions of nature and nurture, as well as the eugenic implications drawn from those statistics. Hogben's foil throughout this period was R.A. Fisher, the leading scientist-eugenicist of the day (Tabery 2008). In an interview for the book Twentieth Century Authors, Hogben stated:  "I like Scandinavians, skiing, swimming and socialists who realize it is our business to promote social progress by peaceful methods. I dislike football, economists, eugenicists, Fascists, Stalinists, and Scottish conservatives. I think that sex is necessary and bankers are not".   == Society for Experimental Biology == In 1923, Hogben was a founder of the Society for Experimental Biology and its organ the British Journal of Experimental Biology (renamed Journal of Experimental Biology in 1930), along with Julian Huxley and geneticist Francis Albert Eley Crew (1886–1973). According to Gary Werskey, Hogben was the only one of the founders not holding any eugenic ideas.   == Writer == Hogben produced two best-selling works of popular science, Mathematics for the Million (1936) and Science for the Citizen (1938). While at Aberdeen, Hogben developed an interest in language. Besides editing The Loom of Language by his friend Frederick Bodmer, he created an international language, Interglossa, as 'a draft of an auxiliary for a democratic world order'. George Orwell in his essay Politics and the English Language used a sentence of Hogben's as an example of how not to write, particularly in relation to the use of metaphors.  Above all, we cannot play ducks and drakes with a native battery of idioms which prescribes egregious collocations of vocables (...)  Professor Hogben plays ducks and drakes with a battery which is able to write prescriptions (...)   == Later life == During World War II Hogben had responsibility for the British Army's medical statistics. He was Mason Professor of Zoology at the University of Birmingham 1941–1947 and professor of medical statistics there 1947–1961, when he retired. In 1963, he became the first Vice-Chancellor of the University of Guyana, a post he abandoned in April 1964, resigning in 1965. In the 1950s Hogben settled at Glyn Ceiriog in north Wales, where he bought a cottage. That decade his marriage to Enid broke down, the couple separated in 1953 and divorced in 1957, with Hogben remarrying later that year to local widowed retired school headmistress, (Mary) Jane Roberts (nee Evans), who was seven years younger. Widowed by the death of Jane in 1974, he died at the War Memorial Hospital, Wrexham. in 1975 aged 79 and was cremated at nearby Pentre Bychan.   == Hogben's legacy == Hogben's research has left a lasting impression on the history of biology. The African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis), which Hogben first developed as a model organism, is now one of the most widely used model organisms in biological research. Likewise, his emphasis on the interdependence of nature and nurture has had and continues to have an impact on scientific practice and scientific debate. In terms of scientific practice, modern research on phenotypic plasticity, gene-environment interaction, and developmental systems theory all owes much to the legacy of Hogben's initial emphasis on understanding nature and nurture interdependently rather than in dichotomy. In terms of scientific debate, the dispute between Hogben and R.A. Fisher over gene-environment interaction was the first of many subsequent disputes over the extent to which the primacy of the gene can be understood independently of its developmental relationship with the environment (Tabery 2007). The debate on nature and nurture, the race and intelligence controversy, the heritability wars, concerns over the geneticisation of complex human traits, and arguments over the promises and perils of the human genome project all incorporate some element of disagreement over the primacy of the gene. Hogben's attack on that primacy by appeal to the interdependence of nature and nurture has been echoed in each successive dispute.   == The Hogben Archive == The Lancelot Thomas Hogben papers are held in Special Collections, University of Birmingham. Archive highlights include a draft of his autobiography (later edited and published by his son Adrian Hogben and his wife), correspondence, hand drawn diagrams for his books, and reflections on his life and works. (For a review of the Hogben Archive, see Tabery 2006).   == Works == A short life of Alfred Russel Wallace (1823-1913), p. 64 (London, Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1918) Exiles of the Snow, and Other Poems (1918) An Introduction to Recent Advances in Comparative Physiology (1924) with Frank R. Winton The Pigmentary Effector System. A review of the physiology of colour response (1924) Comparative Physiology (1926) Comparative Physiology of Internal Secretion (1927) The Nature of Living Matter (1930) Genetic Principles in Medical and Social Science (1931) Mathematics for the Million (1936), illustrated by Frank Horrabin The Retreat from Reason (1936) Conway Memorial Lecture 20 May 1936, chaired by Julian Huxley. Science for the Citizen: A Self-Educator Based on the Social Background of Scientific Discovery (1938), illustrated by Frank Horrabin Political Arithmetic: A Symposium of Population Studies (1938) editor Dangerous Thoughts (1939) Author in Transit (1940) Principles of Animal Biology (1940) Interglossa: A Draft of an Auxiliary for a Democratic world order, Being an Attempt to Apply Semantic Principles to Language Design (1943) The Loom of Language by Frederick Bodmer (1944) editor An Introduction to Mathematical Genetics (1946) History of the Homeland The Story of the British Background by Henry Hamilton (1947), No. 4 of Primers for the Age of Plenty, edited by Hogben The New Authoritarianism (1949) Conway Memorial Lecture 1949 From Cave Painting To Comic Strip: A Kaleidoscope of Human Communication (1949) Chance and Choice by Cardpack and Chessboard (1950) Man Must Measure: The Wonderful World of Mathematics (1955) Statistical theory. The relationship of probability, credibility and error. An examination of the contemporary crisis in statistical theory from a behaviorist viewpoint (1957) The Wonderful World Of Energy (1957) The Signs of Civilisation (1959) The Wonderful World of Communication (1959) Mathematics in the Making (1960) Essential World English (1963) with Jane Hogben and Maureen Cartwright Science in Authority: Essays (1963) The Mother Tongue (1965) Wales for the Welsh — A Tale of War and Peace with Notes for those who Teach or Preach (1967) Beginnings and Blunders or Before Science Began (1970) The Vocabulary Of Science (1970) with Maureen Cartwright Astronomer Priest and Ancient Mariner (1972) Maps, Mirrors and Mechanics (1973) Columbus, the Cannon Ball and the Common Pump (1974) How The World Was Explored, editor, with Marie Neurath and Joseph Albert Lauwerys Hogben, Anne; Hogben, Lancelot Thomas; Hogben, Adrian. Lancelot Hogben: scientific humanist: an unauthorised autobiography (1998)   == Further reading == Erlingsson, Steindór J., "The Early History of the SEB and the BJEB." Society For Experimental Biology Bulletin, March, pp. 10–11, 2006. The article can be accessed here Tabery, James, "Looking Back on Lancelot's Laughter", The Mendel Newsletter 15: 10–17, 2006. Werskey, Gary (1978). The Visible College. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 0-7139-0826-2.    == References ==   == External links == Lancelot Hogben biography at the Galton Institute Scientific Humanism in Time Magazine (11 March 1940) Max Perutz on Lancelot Hogben and his autobiography in Times Higher Education (31 July 1998) Details of research on Xenopus Royal Society certificate of election Royal Society photograph First part of Interglossa (there is a photograph of the author on p. 2.) Brief excerpts from Interglossa Full text and diagrams from Interglossa For a tribute to Mathematics for the Million from Fields Medallist David Mumford Interview with David Mumford Some of the correspondence between Hogben and R. A. Fisher is available online Correspondence of Sir R.A. Fisher: Calendar of Correspondence with Lancelot Hogben

Leland Wilkinson (born c. 1945) is a statistician and computer scientist at Tableau Software and Adjunct Professor of Computer Science at University of Illinois at Chicago. Dr. Wilkinson developed the SYSTAT statistical package in the early 1980s, sold it to SPSS in 1995, and worked at SPSS for 10 years recruiting and managing the visualization team. He left SPSS in 2008 and became Executive VP of SYSTAT Software Inc. in Chicago. He then served as the VP of Data Visualization at Skytree, Inc, and joined Tableau in October 2014. His research focuses on scientific visualization and statistical graphics.   == Family life == He is the son of Mr. and Mrs Kirk C. Wilkinson. He is brother of Alec Wilkinson, a writer for New Yorker. He was married to Reverend Ruth VanDemark, who died in 2012, and is the father of Amie Wilkinson, a professor of mathematics at University of Chicago, and Caroline Wilkinson, a writer. He married Marilyn Vogel, an attorney, in 2013.   == Education and academic work == Wilkinson received an A.B. from Harvard University in 1966, an S.T.B. from Harvard Divinity School in 1969, and a Ph.D. in Psychology from Yale University in 1975. In the 1970s and 1980s, he was a full-time faculty member at University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC). After serving 10 years as Adjunct Professor of Statistics at Northwestern University, he rejoined UIC as Adjunct Professor of Computer Science. Dr. Wilkinson is recognized as the primary author of the 1999 American Psychological Association's Guidelines for Statistical Methods in Psychology Journals.   == Professional career == Wilkinson wrote SYSTAT, a statistical software package, in the early 1980s. This program was noted for its comprehensive graphics, including the first software implementation of the heatmap display now widely used among biologists. After his company grew to 50 employees, he sold it to SPSS in 1995. At SPSS, he assembled a team of graphics programmers who developed the nViZn platform  that produces the visualizations in SPSS, Clementine, and other analytics products. The nViZn platform was modeled after Wilkinson's 1999 book on statistical graphics, The Grammar of Graphics. This book also served as the foundation for the R package ggplot2, the Python Bokeh package, the R package ggbio, and helped shape the Polaris project at Stanford. Wilkinson now serves as VP of Statistics at Tableau Software.   == Awards == Wilkinson is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and an elected member of the International Statistical Institute.   == External links == Leland Wilkinson's academic home page   == References ==

Leon Isserlis (1881–1966) was a Russian-born British statistician known for his work on the exact distribution of sample moments, including Isserlis’ theorem. He also brought to the attention of British statisticians the work of Russian mathematicians and statisticians, including Chebyshev and Chuprov. He was born in Boguslav near Kiev in June 1881 and was a direct descendant of the eminent rabbi Moses Isserles. He moved to Britain when he was ten years old with his widowed mother, an elder brother and two sisters. He attended the City of London School and won an open scholarship to study mathematics at Christ's College, Cambridge. Upon leaving Cambridge in 1904 he was appointed head of mathematics at the West Ham Municipal Technical Institute (one of the forerunners of the University of East London). He also registered as a research student at University College London, where he studied under Karl Pearson, and was awarded a D.Sc. in 1916. In March 1920 he moved to become statistician to the Chamber of Shipping and remained there until his retirement in 1942, when his position as statistician was taken by Maurice Kendall. In 1926 He wrote a review for the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society of R. A. Fisher's seminal book Statistical Methods for Research Workers. The review was rather critical, particularly of Fisher's lack of references to earlier work by others such as Chebyshev. He was a friend of Major Greenwood and worked with him on statistical issues for the Medical Research Council, although most of this work was anonymous and unpublished. He was also chairman of the Jewish Health Organization from 1931 to 1939. He served as secretary of the Royal Statistical Society in 1934–35 and again in 1944–45, and was awarded its Guy Medal in Silver in 1939.   == References == Irwin, J. O. (1966). "Leon Isserlis, M.A., D.Sc. (1881–1966)". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 129 (4): 612–616. JSTOR 2982284.  John Aldrich (August 2005 – October 2008). "Leon Isserlis and the JRSS review of the 1st edition of R. A. Fisher’s Statistical Methods for Research Workers". Retrieved 2010-06-22.  L. I. [Leon Isserlis]. "Review of Statistical Methods for Research Workers". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 89 (1): 45–146. JSTOR 2341488.

Leonard Henry Courtney, 1st Baron Courtney of Penwith PC (6 July 1832 – 11 May 1918) was a British politician, academic and man of letters. He was a member of William Ewart Gladstone's second administration from 1880 to 1883 and served as Chairman of Ways and Means (Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons) between 1886 and 1893.   == Background and education == Courtney was born at Penzance, Cornwall, the eldest son of John Sampson Courtney, a banker, and Sarah, daughter of John Mortimer. Two of his brothers, John Mortimer Courtney (1838–1920), and William Prideaux Courtney (1845–1913), also attained public distinction, the former in the government service in Canada (from 1869, retiring in 1906), rising to be deputy-minister of finance, and the latter in the British civil service (1865–1892), and as a prominent man of letters and bibliographer. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he was Second Wrangler and first Smith's prizeman, and elected a fellow of his college. He was called to the Bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1858. From 1872 to 1875 he was professor of political economy at University College, London.   == Political career ==  In December 1876, after a previous unsuccessful attempt, Courtney was elected to parliament for Liskeard as a Liberal. He continued to represent the borough, and Bodmin into which it was merged by the Reform Act of 1885, until 1900, when his attitude towards the South African War (he and his wife Catherine were one of the foremost of the so-called Pro-Boer Party) compelled his retirement. Until 1885, he was a devoted adherent of William Ewart Gladstone, particularly in finance and foreign affairs. In 1880 he was appointed Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department, in 1881 Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies and in 1882 Financial Secretary to the Treasury. He was known as a stubborn fighter for principle, and after finding that the government's Reform Bill in 1884 contained no recognition of the scheme for proportional representation, to which he was deeply committed, he resigned office. He refused to support Gladstone's Home Rule Bill in 1886 and was one of those who chiefly contributed to its rejection, whose reputation for unbending integrity and intellectual eminence gave solidity to the Liberal Unionist party. In 1886, Courtney was elected Chairman of Ways and Means (Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons) and was sworn of the Privy Council in 1889. His efficiency in this office seemed to mark him out for the speakership after the 1895 general election. A Liberal Unionist, however, could be elected only by Conservative votes, and he had made himself objectionable to a large section of the Conservative Party by his independent attitude on various questions, on which his liberalism outweighed his party loyalty. He, would in any case, have been incapacitated by an affection of the eyesight, which for a while threatened to withdraw him from public life altogether. After 1895, Courtney's divergences from the Unionist party on questions other than Irish politics became gradually more marked. He became known in the House of Commons principally for his candid criticism of the measures introduced by his nominal leaders, and he was rather to be ranked among the Opposition than as a Ministerialist. When the crisis with the Transvaal came in 1899, Courtney's views, which remained substantially what they were when he supported the settlement after Majuba in 1881, had plainly become incompatible with his position even as a nominal follower of Lord Salisbury and Joseph Chamberlain.  He led the work of the South African Conciliation Committee which brought the sufferings of the Boers to the attention of British people. He gradually reverted to formal membership of the Liberal party and, in January 1906, unsuccessfully contested Edinburgh West as a supporter of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman at the general election. Among the birthday honours of 1906 he was elevated to the peerage as Baron Courtney of Penwith, in the County of Cornwall. Courtney was a prominent supporter of the women's movement through the influence of his wife and sister-in-law. In his earlier years, he was a regular contributor to The Times, and he wrote numerous essays in the principal reviews on political and economic subjects. In 1901 he published a book on The Working Constitution of the United Kingdom. He was President of the Royal Statistical Society, 1897-9. He was a great friend of the artist Norman Garstin.   == Personal life ==  Courtney married Catherine Potter, daughter of Richard Potter and an elder sister of Beatrice Webb, in 1883. They had no children. In May 1918, aged 85, he was living at 15 Cheyne Walk at the time of his death. He left effects totalling £56,672 2s 6d. The peerage became extinct.   == References ==  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Courtney, Leonard Henry Courtney". Encyclopædia Britannica 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Leonard Courtney Archival material relating to Leonard Courtney, 1st Baron Courtney of Penwith listed at the UK National Archives Catalogue of the Courtney papers at the Archives Division of the London School of Economics. Portrait Leigh Rayment's Peerage Pages  Leigh Rayment's Historical List of MPs

Leslie Kish (born Laszlo Kiss, July 27, 1910 – October 7, 2000) was a Hungarian-American statistician and survey methodologist.   == Life and career == Kish emigrated with his family to the USA in 1925. His father soon died, and Kish helped support the family by working while continuing his studies in the evenings. In 1937 he volunteered for the International Brigade to fight against Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War. He saw action in a Hungarian battalion, was wounded, and returned to the United States in 1939. when 1939, he finished his baccalaureate in mathematics at the City College of New York. He worked at the U.S. Bureau of the Census from 1940 until 1941, when he moved to the Division of Program Surveys of the Department of Agriculture. For the remainder of World War II he served as a meteorologist in the U.S. Army Air Corps. After the war he returned to the Department of Agriculture, but in 1947 he joined the University of Michigan faculty. He moved to the University of Michigan "as a member of the newly created Survey Research Center, which later became the Institute for Social Research (ISR). While working full time, Kish received an M.A. in mathematical statistics in 1948 and a Ph.D. in sociology in 1952. He became a lecturer at the University of Michigan in 1951, an Associate Professor in 1956, a professor in 1960 and professor emeritus in 1981".   == Awards and honors == In 1997, the American Statistical Association gave Kish their Wilks Memorial Award. The award citation read: "For being a truly outstanding statistician, who has had a profound influence on sample survey practice throughout the world. His originality and ability to provide practical solutions to real-world statistical problems illuminate his extensive writings; a notable example is his classic text Survey Sampling, which is widely consulted and referenced by practitioners of statistics everywhere. His wisdom and guidance have benefited countless colleagues and students from America and abroad. For his remarkable work as an applied statistician in consistently using his knowledge and insight for the benefit of society. At the Survey Research center of the Institute of Social Research at the University of Michigan, he has been a leader in many areas — administration, intellectual creativity, research, training, and mentorship. His influential role in the World Fertility Survey further illustrates his impact as an international ambassador of statistics and a tireless advocate for scientific statistical methods. For being a humanitarian and true citizen of the world. His unmatched concern for those living in less fortunate circumstances and his use of the statistical profession to help is an inspiration for all statisticians".   == Selected publications == Kish, Leslie. Statistical Design for Research. New York: Wiley. 1987. ISBN 978-0471083597. Kish, Leslie (1965), Survey Sampling, New York: Wiley . ISBN 978-0471109495. Kish, L. (1949), "A Procedure for Objective Respondent Selection within the Household", Journal of the American Statistical Association 44: 380–387, doi:10.2307/2280236, JSTOR 2280236 . On the basis of this paper, Kish's name is associated with the Kish grid.   == See also == Kish grid   == References ==   == External links == A conversation with Leslie Kish "Leslie Kish Papers: 1952-2001," in Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan: "The papers date from 1952 to 2001 and are divided into six series: Biographical Information, University of Michigan Administrative and Course Materials, Papers and Presentations, Institute of Social Research, Organizations and Activities, and Personal and Professional Correspondence".

Lester Greenspan Telser (born January 3, 1931 in Chicago) is an American economist and Professor Emeritus in Economics at the University of Chicago.   == Education and career == He is a native of the Hyde Park neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago and a graduate of the Chicago Public Schools (Charles Kozminski elementary school and Hyde Park High School (now Hyde Park Academy High School)) and Roosevelt University, where he studied under Abba Lerner. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1956. He taught briefly at Iowa State University and was conscripted into the United States Army in which he served from 1956-1958. He has been a member of the University of Chicago faculty since 1958 (now emeritus). He was a visitor at the Cowles Foundation (which had formerly been at the University of Chicago) at Yale University in 1964-1965 and at the Center for Operations Research in Econometrics (CORE) at the Catholic University of Louvain (Université catholique de Louvain) in Louvain (Leuven, Belgium) in 1969-1970.   == Contributions == His works include research on the theory of the core, Federal Reserve policy, and integer programming. Unusually for the Chicago school of economics, he also wrote about game theory as early as 1972. A brief, personal history by Lester Telser of the University of Chicago Economics Department including the importance of the Cowles Foundation is available as part of a symposium on "Living the Legacy: Chicago Economics through the Years."   == Awards and honors == He has been a Fellow of the Econometric Society and of the American Statistical Association since 1968.   == Books == Functional Analysis in Mathematical Economics: Optimization Over Infinite Horizons (with Robert L. Graves, 1972). Competition, Collusion, and Game Theory (1972). Economic Theory and the Core (1978). A Theory of Efficient Cooperation and Competition (1987). Theories of Competition (1988). Joint Ventures of Labor and Capital (1997). Classic Futures: Lessons from the Past for the Electronic Age. The Core Theory in Economics: Problems and Solutions (2007).   == References ==

Lloyd Stowell Shapley (born June 2, 1923) is a distinguished American mathematician and Nobel Prize–winning economist. He is a Professor Emeritus at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), affiliated with departments of Mathematics and Economics. He has contributed to the fields of mathematical economics and especially game theory. Since the work of von Neumann and Morgenstern in 1940s, Shapley has been regarded by many experts as the very personification of game theory. With Alvin E. Roth, Shapley won the 2012 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences "for the theory of stable allocations and the practice of market design."   == Life and career == Lloyd Shapley was born on June 2, 1923, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, one of the sons of Martha (Betz) and the distinguished astronomer Harlow Shapley, both from Missouri. He attended Phillips Exeter Academy and was a student at Harvard when he was drafted in 1943. He served in the Army Air Corps in Chengdu, China and received the Bronze Star decoration for breaking the Soviet weather code. After the war, he returned to Harvard and graduated with an A.B. in mathematics in 1948. After working for one year at the RAND Corporation, he went to Princeton University where he received a Ph.D. in 1953. His thesis and post-doctoral work introduced the Shapley value and the core solution in game theory. After graduating, he remained at Princeton for a short time before going back to the RAND corporation from 1954 to 1981. Since 1981 he has been a professor at UCLA.   == Contribution == Along with the Shapley value, stochastic games, the Bondareva–Shapley theorem (which implies that convex games have non-empty cores), the Shapley–Shubik power index (for weighted or block voting power), the Gale–Shapley algorithm (for the stable marriage problem), the concept of a potential game (with Dov Monderer), the Aumann–Shapley pricing, the Harsanyi–Shapley solution, the Snow–Shapley theorem for matrix games, and the Shapley–Folkman lemma & theorem bear his name. Besides, his early work with R.N.Snow and Samuel Karlin on matrix games was so complete that little has been added since. He has been instrumental in the development of utility theory, and it was he who laid much of the groundwork for the solution of the problem of the existence of Von Neumann–Morgenstern stable sets. His work with M.Maschler and B.Peleg on the kernel and the nucleolus, and his work with Robert Aumann on non-atomic games and on long-term competition have all appeared in economic theory. In his 80s, Shapley continued publishing in the areas of specialization he created or advanced, such as multi-person utility (with Manel Baucells) and authority distribution (a generalization to the Shapley–Shubik power index and useful in ranking, planning and group decision-making).   == Awards and honors == Bronze Star, U.S. Army Air Corps, 1944 Procter Fellow, Princeton University, 1951–52 Fellow, Econometric Society, 1967 Fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1974 Member, National Academy of Sciences, 1979 John von Neumann Theory Prize, 1981 Honorary Ph.D., Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 1986 Fellow, INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences), 2002 Distinguished Fellow, American Economic Association, 2007 Fellow, American Mathematical Society, 2012 Sveriges Riksbank Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, 2012 Golden Goose Award, 2013   == Selected publications == A Value for n-person Games [1953], In Contributions to the Theory of Games volume II, H.W. Kuhn and A.W. Tucker (eds.). Stochastic Games [1953], Proceedings of National Academy of Science Vol. 39, pp. 1095–1100. A Method for Evaluating the Distribution of Power in a Committee System [1954] (with Martin Shubik), American Political Science Review Vol. 48, pp. 787–792. College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage [1962] (with David Gale), The American Mathematical Monthly Vol. 69, pp. 9–15. Simple Games : An Outline of the Descriptive Theory [1962], Behavioral Science Vol. 7, pp. 59–66. On Balanced Sets and Cores [1967], Naval Research Logistics Quarterly Vol. 14, pp. 453–460. On Market Games [1969] (with Martin Shubik), Journal of Economic Theory Vol. 1, pp. 9–25. Utility Comparison and the Theory of Games [1969], La Decision, pp. 251–263. Cores of Convex Games [1971] International Journal of Game Theory Vol. 1, pp. 11–26. The Assignment Game I: The Core [1971] (with Martin Shubik), International Journal of Game Theory Vol. 1, pp. 111–130. Values of Non-Atomic Games [1974] (with Robert Aumann), Princeton University Press. Mathematical Properties of the Banzhaf Power Index [1979] (with Pradeep Dubey), Mathematics of Operations Research Vol. 4, pp. 99–132. Long-Term Competition – A Game-Theoretic Analysis [1994] (with Robert Aumann), In Essays in Game Theory: In Honor of Michael Maschler Nimrod Megiddo (ed.), Springer-Verlag. Potential Games [1996] (with Dov Monderer), Games and Economic Behavior Vol. 14, pp. 124–143. On Authority Distributions in Organizations [2003] (with X. Hu), Games and Economic Behavior Vol. 45, pp. 132–152, 153–170. Multiperson Utility [2008] (with Manel Baucells). Games and Economic Behavior Vol. 62, pp. 329–347.   == Trivia == In 1950, Shapley invented the board game So Long Sucker, along with Mel Hausner, John Forbes Nash, and Martin Shubik.   == References ==   == External links == Home Page Lloyd Shapley at the Mathematics Genealogy Project The Shapley Value Citation of von Neumann Theory Prize on L.S.Shapley's work: "Lloyd Shapley has dominated game theory for the thirty-seven years since von Neumann and Morgenstern published their path-breaking book, The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior." Albert Tucker's comment on L.S.Shapley's work. In 1995, Albert W. Tucker mentioned in his passing that Shapley was second only to Von Neumann as the most important researcher in theory of games so far. Robert Aumann's Nobel lecture, also see here.

Louis Chen Hsiao Yun is Emeritus Professor at the National University of Singapore. Chen earned his BSc (Honours) from University of Singapore in 1964 and completed his MSc as well as PhD at Stanford University in 1969 and 1971 respectively. In 1972, he joined the Mathematics Department of the then University of Singapore as a Lecturer. He was promoted to Senior Lecturer in 1977, Associate Professor in 1981 and Professor in 1989.   == Academic career == Chen held several administrative appointments at the National University of Singapore (NUS). At NUS's Faculty of Science, he was Head of the Department of Mathematics from July 1996 to June 2000 and Head of the Department of Statistics and Applied Probability from July 2002 to June 2004. He was also Director of NUS's Institute for Mathematical Sciences from July 2000 to December 2012. For his achievements in his field of study, he was appointed Tan Chin Tuan Centennial Professor from July 2006 to December 2012 and Distinguished Professor from January 2013 to June 2015.   == Research, honours and awards == Chen's research interests include the Stein-Chen method of Poisson approximation which deals with the probability of rare events. This method and technique is widely applied in many areas ranging from molecular biology to computer science. He was the first Asian to be elected President of the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and Probability from August 1997 to July 1999, and was the first East Asian to be elected President of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics from August 2004 to July 2005. He was also elected Vice-President of the International Statistical Institute from August 2009 to July 2011. Among his numerous local and international awards and honours are his election as Fellow of TWAS, The World Academy of Sciences in 2000 and Fellow of the Singapore National Academy of Science in 2011; a Public Administration Medal (Silver) in 2002; and the conferment by the French Government of the title of Chevalier dans l'Ordre des Palmes Académiques in 2005 for his service to education.   == References == Leong, Y. K.; Lee, S. L.; Sun, Y. (2005). "Louis Hsiao-Yun Chen: Epitome of Rare Events". COSMOS 01: 1. doi:10.1142/S0219607705000127.  "Distinguished Science Alumni Awards 2004: CHEN Hsiao Yun Louis". National University of Singapore. Retrieved 28 March 2013.    == External links == Louis H. Y. CHEN, Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore  Louis Chen Hsiao Yun at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Louis (Eliyahu) Guttman (February 10, 1916 – October 25, 1987; Hebrew: לואיס (אליהו) גוטמן‎) was an Israeli mathematician and Professor of Social and Psychological Assessment at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He founded and was the scientific director of the Israel Institute of Applied Social Research, later renamed the Guttman Institute before finally becoming the Guttman Center (part of the Israel Democracy Institute).   == Biography == Guttman was born in New York City on February 10, 1916 and grew up in the Jewish community of Minneapolis, Minnesota. Guttman received both his BA in 1936 and MA in 1939 at the University of Minnesota, and his PhD in Social and Psychological Measurement in 1942. From 1941 to 1947 Guttman was professor of sociology at Cornell University, while as part of the World War II effort, he also served as an Expert Consultant to the US Army’s Research Branch. In 1947 Guttman and his wife Ruth emigrated to Palestine. He was member of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, and foreign Honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and President of the Psychometric Society. In 1956 he was elected Stanford University: Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. In 1962 he received the Rothschild Prize and in 1971 Science included Guttman in a list of the 62 most important contributors to scientific research in the social sciences since the beginning of the 20th century. Other awards were: 1974 Regents of the University of Minnesota - Outstanding Achievement Award 1978 Israel Prize in the social sciences 1984 Educational Testing Service Measurement Award from Princeton University. Guttman died on October 25, 1987, while on sabbatical in Minneapolis, Minnesota, in the United States.   == Work == Guttman research interests were in the fields of scale analysis, facet theory. His work left a legacy of major developments in the theory and practice of scale and factor analysis, multidimensional scaling and facet theory. His mathematical and philosophical treatments of Factor analysis are among the important parts of his scientific legacy. His earlier work in scaling analysis produced what has become to be known as the Guttman scale. Notably, Guttman first proved several fundamental theorems in matrix algebra, as discussed in papers by Hubert, Meulman and Heiser (2000) and Takane and Yanai (2005). Several of Guttman’s contributions have been incorporated into computer packages, among them Smallest Space Analysis (SSA) and Partial Order Scalogram Analysis (POSAC). Guttman was described as a brilliant innovator who "saw theory in method and method in theory", was "informed by high sophistication in mathematics, statistics, sociology and psychology", and one who "made a major contribution to democratic policy-making in the new state" and “was concerned with the 'well-being' of individuals, groups and society"    == Publications == Guttman published in numerous journals and books, including over 300 pages in Psychometrika. Many of his papers are still quoted in the scientific literature as being relevant and important to current statistical and mathematical advances. His innovative methodological work on attitudes was published in the 4th volume of Studies in Social Psychology in World War II (more popularly called The American Soldier series, after the title of the first two volumes).   == References ==   == External links == Guttman Center

Louis Israel Dublin (November 1, 1882 – March 7, 1969) was a Jewish American statistician. As vice president and statistician of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, he promoted progressive and socially useful insurance underwriting policies. As a scholar, Dublin was an important figure in the establishment of demography as a social-scientific discipline in the United States during the 1920s and 1930s. Dublin was interested in eugenics but as a Jew of recent immigrant extraction criticized eugenicists for equating biological superiority with Nordic origins. Dublin was born in Kovno (Kaunas is the Lithuanian name for Kovno), Lithuania. He came to the U.S. in 1886 with his parents Max and Sarah (Rosensweig). Dublin obtained his bachelor's in 1901 at City College of New York. He earned his Ph.D. at Columbia University in 1904. He married Augusta Salik on April 5, 1908. Dublin taught at Yale as a lecturer in vital statistics, and in 1924 served as president of the American Statistical Association. He died in Winter Park, Orange County, Florida at the age of 86   == Body Mass Index == While serving as a vice president at Met Life Insurance and as a statistician Dublin developed a height for weight table based on longevity of life insurance holders in the early 1940s. These tables would later develop into the Body Mass Index developed by University of Minnesota's pioneering cholesterol and heart disease physiology researcher Ancel Keys in 1972. Keys intended the BMI to be used only for the study of groups and not to be applied to individuals. The index is statistically very limited in usefulness as covered a very limited demographic of people who were able to afford life insurance and who were mostly white.   == Major works == Louis Israel Dublin, Alfred J. Lotka: The Money Value of a Man (Public Health in America Series). New York : Arno Press, 1977 (Repr. of the 1930 ed. by the Ronald Press Co., New York). ISBN 978-0-405-09814-7 with Lee K. Frankel and Miles M. Dawson, Workingmen's Insurance in Europe, 1910 with Lee K. Frankel, Principles of Life Insurance, 1911 Mortality Statistics of Insured Wage Earners and Their Families, 1919 Louis I. Dublin, To Be or Not to Be: a Study of Suicide, 1933. Harrison Smith and Robert Hass, New York. Louis I. Dublin, A Family of Thirty Million: The Story of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 1943. Louis I. Dublin,The Facts of Life: From Birth to Death, New York: The Macmillan Company, 1951. A 40 Year Campaign Against Tuberculosis, 1952 Louis I. Dublin, Suicide: a Sociological and Statistical Study,1963. Ronald Press Company, New York.   == Other works == Louis I. Dublin, After Eighty Years (autobiography) University of Florida Press, Gainesville 1966, pp. 243 Louis I. Dublin, "Home-Making and Careers," Atlantic Monthly, 138: 335-43, September 1926. Collected papers at the Archives, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland    == References ==   === Inline ===   === General === "Louis I. Dublin 1882-1969". Statistical bulletin (Metropolitan Life Insurance Company) (UNITED STATES) 50: 2. March 1969. ISSN 0026-1513. PMID 4897172.  Lilienfeld, David E (June 2009). "Louis I. Dublin and the development of the observational study: the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company natural history (cohort) studies of typhoid fever and scarlet fever". Ann Epidemiol (United States) 19 (6): 410–5. doi:10.1016/j.annepidem.2009.01.014. PMID 19460671.  Falk, I S (July 1969). "Louis I. Dublin. November 1, 1882-March 7, 1969". American journal of public health and the nation's health (UNITED STATES) 59 (7): 1083–5. doi:10.2105/ajph.59.7.1083. ISSN 0002-9572. PMC 1226577. PMID 4893562.  Marquis, Albert Nelson, ed. Who’s Who in America, a Biographical Dictionary of Notable Living Men and Women of the United States, 1926–1927, vol. 14, Chicago: The A.N. Marquis Company, 1926, 624.   == External links == American Statistical Association's biography (PDF file) Finding Aid to the Louis I. Dublin Papers Library of Congress listing of Louis I. Dublin publications

Luc Anselin (born December 1, 1953) is one of the principal developers of the field of spatial econometrics.   == Life and contributions == Luc Anselin is currently Regents' Professor, Walter Isard Chair and Director of the School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning (ASU) where he attracted some of the leading spatial econometrics scholars. He also founded and directs the GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis and Computation at ASU to develop, implement, apply, and disseminate spatial analysis methods. He held prior appointments at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, University of Texas at Dallas, West Virginia University, the University of California, Santa Barbara and the Ohio State University. His (joint) appointments included a range of disciplines, including Geography, Urban and Regional Planning, Economics, Agricultural and Consumer Economics, Political Economy and Political Science. In recent years, several national and international awards recognized Luc Anselin's lifetime achievements, including his development of new spatial methodologies (e.g., local indicators of statistical association) and his widely adopted spatial software tools. The Regional Science Association International elected him as Fellow in 2004, and awarded him their Walter Isard Prize in 2005 and their William Alonso Memorial Prize in 2006. In 2008, Luc Anselin was awarded one of the nation's highest academic honors by being elected to the National Academy of Sciences as well as to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2012, Luc Anselin was elected as a University Consortium for Geographic Information Science (UCGIS) Fellow. 2008 marked the 20th anniversary of the book "Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models" that Luc Anselin is best known for and that has been cited over 6,000 times. One of the principal academic achievements of Dr. Anselin has been his contributions to moving the discipline of spatial econometrics from the margins in 1988 to current acceptance in mainstream econometrics, thereby advancing the econometric foundations of Geographic Information Science. His publications include several hundred articles and seminal edited books (including New Directions in Spatial Econometrics in 1995 and Advances in Spatial Econometrics in 2004) in the fields of Quantitative Geography, Regional Science, GIScience, Econometrics, Economics and Computer Science. His development of spatial software further facilitated the establishment of spatial econometrics. Prominent software tools include SpaceStat (spatial econometrics), GeoDa (exploratory spatial data analysis and spatial regression modeling), and collaborative efforts such as PySAL, an open source library of spatial analytic functions based on the Python programming language. The increased popularity of spatial analysis methods is illustrated by GeoDa's worldwide adoption by over 56,000 users within six years of its creation. A native of Belgium, Luc Anselin graduated magna cum laude with a B.S. in economics in 1975 and summa cum laude with an M.S. in Statistics, Econometrics and Operations in 1976, both from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Around this time, the origins of spatial econometrics began to take shape in economics departments in the Netherlands and geography/regional science departments in the UK. In 1977, he moved from Belgium to the U.S. to enroll in Cornell University's interdisciplinary doctoral program in regional science. This provided the opportunity to work with Walter Isard, one of the founders of regional science in the US, and William Greene, author of the standard textbook in econometrics. He earned his doctorate in regional science in 1980.   == Selected works ==   === Books === L. Anselin, R. Florax and S. Rey (eds.), Advances in Spatial Econometrics. Methodology, Tools and Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2004. L. Anselin and S. Rey (eds.), New Tools for Spatial Data Analysis: Proceedings of a Workshop. Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2002 (CDROM). S. Messner, L. Anselin, D. Hawkins, G. Deane, S. Tolnay, R. Baller, An Atlas of the Spatial Patterning of County-Level Homicide, 1960-1990. Pittsburgh: NCOVR, 2000. L. Anselin and R. Florax (eds.), New Directions in Spatial Econometrics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,1995. L. Anselin and M. Madden (eds.), New Directions in Regional Analysis: Integrated and Multiregional Approaches. London: Belhaven Press, 1990 (paperback edition, 1993). L. Anselin, Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.   === Articles and book chapters === L. Anselin, J. Le Gallo and H. Jayet. “Spatial Panel Econometrics,” In L. Matyas and P. Sevestre (Eds.), The Econometrics of Panel Data, Fundamentals and Recent Developments in Theory and Practice (3rd Edition). Dordrecht, Kluwer (2008). L. Anselin, S. Sridharan and S. Gholston. “Using Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis to Leverage Social Indicator Databases: The Discovery of Interesting Patterns,” Social Indicators Research (2007). L. Anselin and J. Le Gallo. “Interpolation of Air Quality Measures in Hedonic House Price Models: Spatial Aspects,” Spatial Economic Analysis 1(1), 2006: 31-52. L. Anselin. “Spatial Econometrics,” In T.C. Mills and K. Patterson (Eds.), Palgrave Handbook of Econometrics: Volume 1, Econometric Theory. Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006: 901-969. L Anselin, I. Syabri and Y. Kho. “GeoDa: An Introduction to Spatial Data Analysis,” Geographical Analysis 38 (1), 2006: 5-22. S. Rey and L. Anselin. “Recent Advances in Software for Spatial Analysis in the Social Sciences,” Geographical Analysis 38 (1), 2006: 1-4. L. Anselin. “How (not) to Lie with Spatial Statistics,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 30 (2), 2006: S3-S6. L. Mobley, E. Root, L. Anselin, N. Lozano, J. Koschinsky. “Spatial Analysis of Elderly Access to Primary Care Services,” International Journal of Health Geographics 5 (19), 2006. L. Anselin. “Spatial Dependence,” In B. Warff (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Human Geography. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 2006: 451-452. L. Anselin. “Spatial Heterogeneity,” In B. Warff (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Human Geography. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 2006: 452-453. S. Messner, G. Deane, L. Anselin and B. Pearson-Nelson. “Locating the Vanguard in Rising and Falling Homicide Rates among U.S. Cities,” Criminology 43 (3), 2005: 661-696. L. Anselin. “Spatial Statistical Modeling in a GIS Environment,” In D. Maguire, M. Goodchild and M. Batty (Eds.), GIS, Spatial Analysis and Modeling. Redlands, CA, ESRI Press, 2005: 93-111. A. Varga, L. Anselin and Z. Acs. “Regional Innovation in the U.S. over Space and Time,” In G. Maier and S. Sedlacek (Eds.), Spillovers and Innovation: Space, Environment and the Economy. Vienna, Springer-Verlag, 2005: 93-104.   == References ==   == External links == Luc Anselin Faculty Profile School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning Arizona State University News National Academy of Sciences Elects Luc Anselin Anselin Named First ASU Walter Isard Chair Luc Anselin Receives Three RSA Awards GeoDa Article Most Cited and Read in Geographical Analysis

Luigi Bodio (born 12 October 1840 in Milan–2 November 1920 in Rome) was an Italian economist and statistician, among the founders of Italian Statistics. He was the first General Secretary of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) and among the first Presidents of ISI.   == Biography == Bodio graduated in 1861 at University of Pisa as a doctor of law, and afterward traveled abroad with government scholarship to complete his postgraduate education in economics and statistics. In 1864 he became Professor in National Economics in Livorno, and in 1867 also in Milan. From 1868 to 1872 Bodio was Professor in Economics and Economic Geography at University of Venice. In 1872, after the death of Pietro Maestri, he was President of the Italian Royal Statistical Office (founded by Maestri) in Rome. Since 1876 Bodio was editor, together with Cesare Correnti and Paolo Boselli, of the "Archivio di statistica". In the same year he conducted the first official surveys on Italian migration. In 1882 Bodio became a member of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. In 1885 was a founding member and General Secretary of the International Statistical Institute up to 1905. In 1909 he was elected President of the International Statistical Institute and remained in charge until his death in 1920. In 1900 Bodio was elected National Senator, and he was General Commissioner of Migration (1901–04), an Inter-ministerial Body created to address and protect the Italian migration abroad. In 1996, the International Cooperation Centre for Statistics (ICstat) was dedicated to Luigi Bodio in recognition of his dedication and promotion of the statistical cooperation.   == Writings == "Statistique internationale des caisses d'épargne", 1876 "Saggio sul commercio esterno terrestre e marittimo del regno d'Italia", 1865 "Dei documenti statistici del regno d'Italia", 1867 "Dei rapporti della statistica coll' economia politica e colle altre scienze affini", 1869 "Del patrimonio delle entrate e delle spese della pubblica beneficenza in Italia", 1889   == References ==   == External links == Works by or about Luigi Bodio at Internet Archive http://www.icstat.org - ICstat - International Cooperation Center for Statistics "Luigi Bodio" http://isi.cbs.nl/ - International Statistical Institute

Maurice Stevenson Bartlett FRS (18 June 1910 – 8 January 2002) was an English statistician who made particular contributions to the analysis of data with spatial and temporal patterns. He is also known for his work in the theory of statistical inference and in multivariate analysis.   == Biography == Born in London, Bartlett was raised in a poor family but won a scholarship to Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith, where he was inspired to the study of statistics by a chapter in Hall and Knight's Algebra. In 1929, he won a scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge where he read mathematics, graduating with the rank of wrangler. He attended lectures on statistics by John Wishart, on relativity by Arthur Eddington and on quantum mechanics by Paul Dirac. In one of his lectures Wishart described his geometric derivation of the Wishart distribution. Overnight Bartlett worked out a proof using characteristic functions. Bartlett was Wishart's first post-graduate student and they wrote two papers together. This was the beginning of Bartlett's involvement with multivariate analysis. During his Queens years, he rowed for the college. In 1933, Bartlett was recruited by Egon Pearson to the new statistics department at University College, London. Pearson was already working with Jerzy Neyman. Also in the college were Ronald A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane. Bartlett was stimulated by all of them, most of all by the work of Fisher, criticising some of it (for example, fiducial inference) while developing other parts (for example conditional inference). Relations between the two men fluctuated; sometimes Bartlett was in Fisher's good books, but often not. In 1934, Bartlett became statistician at the ICI agricultural research station at Jealott's Hill. Not only did he deal with practical problems but he worked on statistical theory, as well as on problems in genetics but he became interested in the characterisation of intelligence. He remembered Jealott's Hill as the best working environment of his career. Bartlett left ICI for the University of Cambridge in 1938 but at the outset of World War II was mobilised into the Ministry of Supply, conducting rocket research alongside Frank Anscombe, David Kendall and Pat Moran. After the war Bartlett's renewed Cambridge work focused on time-series analysis and stochastic process. With Jo Moyal he planned a large book on probability, but the collaboration did not work out and Bartlett went ahead and published his own book on stochastic processes. He made a number of visits to the USA. In 1947 he became professor of mathematical statistics at the University of Manchester where he not only developed his interests in epidemiology but also served as an able and active administrator. In 1960, he took up the chair of statistics at University College, London before serving the last eight years of his academic life as professor of biomathematics at the University of Oxford. He retired in 1975. After his retirement Bartlett remained active in statistics, visiting the Institute of Advanced Studies at the Australian National University several times. He had married Sheila, daughter of C. E. Chapman, in 1957, the couple parenting a daughter. Bartlett died in Exmouth, Devon. Bartlett is known for Bartlett's method for estimating power spectra and Bartlett's test for homoscedasticity.   == Honours == Rayleigh Prize, (1933); Guy Medals in Silver (1952) and Gold (1969) of the Royal Statistical Society; President of the Manchester Statistical Society, (1959–1960); Fellow of the Royal Society, (1961); President of the Royal Statistical Society (1966) Honorary Member of the International Statistical Institute, (1980); Foreign Associate of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, (1993); D.Sc.s from the University of Chicago (1966) and the University of Hull (1976).   == References ==   == Works ==   === Some papers === (1933) with John Wishart, The distribution of second order moment statistics in a normal system. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 28, 455–459. (1933) On the theory of statistical regression. Proc. Royal Soc. Edinburgh, 53, 260–283. (1933) Probability and chance in the theory of statistics. Proc. Royal Soc. London Ser. A 141 518–534. (1934) The vector representation of a sample. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 30, 327–340. (1936) Statistical information and properties of sufficiency. Proc. Royal Soc. London Ser., A 154, 124–137. (1937) Properties of sufficiency and statistical tests. Proc. Royal Soc. London Ser. A, 160, 268–282. (reprinted with an introduction by D. A. S. Fraser S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson (eds) Breakthroughs in Statistics, volume 1. Springer, New York. 1992.) (1938) Methods of estimating mental factors. Nature, 141, 609–610. (1939) A note on tests of significance in multivariate analysis, in Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (1941) The statistical significance of canonical correlation. Biometrika. (1947) The use of transformations. Biometrics. (1948) Internal and external factor analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry. (1949) Fitting a straight line when both variables are subjects to error. Biometrics. (1949) The statistical significance of "dispersed hits" in card-guessing experiments. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 48, 336–338. (1950) Tests of significance in multivariate analysis. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology. (1950) Tests of significance in factor analysis. British Journal of Psychology, 3, 77–85.   === Books === An Introduction to Stochastic Processes, (1955) ISBN 0-521-04116-3 Stochastic Population Models in Ecology and Epidemiology, (1960) ISBN 0-416-52330-7 Essays in Probability and Statistics, (1962) ISBN 0-416-64880-0 Probability, Statistics and Time, (1975) ISBN 0-412-14150-7 The Statistical Analysis of Spatial Pattern, (1976) ISBN 0-412-14290-2 Selected Papers of M. S. Bartlett 3 vols. edited by R.G. Stanton, E.D. Johnson, D.S. Meek. Winnipeg : Charles Babbage Research Centre (1989).   == Autobiography == Ingram Olkin (1989) A Conversation with Maurice Bartlett, Statistical Science, 4, 151–163. "Chance and Change" in J. Gani (ed) (1982) The Making of Statisticians, New York: Springer-Verlag. Several statisticians, including Bartlett, give their life stories.   == External links == ISI Newsletter Note by D. R. Cox IMS Bulletin Obituary by Besag & Clifford p. 14 at the Wayback Machine (archived May 17, 2005) Royal Society citation For Bartlett's correspondence with Fisher see Statistical Inference and Analysis, Selected Correspondence of R.A. Fisher Edited by J.H. Bennett Correspondence of Sir R.A. Fisher: Calendar of Correspondence with M.S. Bartlett There are photographs at Maurice Stevenson Bartlett on the Portraits of Statisticians page. Royal Society

Major Greenwood FRS (9 August 1880 – 5 October 1949) was an English epidemiologist and statistician. Major Greenwood junior was born in Shoreditch in London's East End, the only child of a doctor in general practice there. ("Major" was his forename, not a military rank.) He was educated on the classical side at Merchant Taylors' School and went on to study medicine at University College London and the London Hospital. On qualifying in 1904 he worked for a time as assistant to his father but after a few months he gave up clinical practice for good. He went to work as a demonstrator for the physiologist Leonard Hill (father of the future statistician Austin Bradford Hill) at the London Hospital Medical College. Leonard Hill recalled, "By recognising the ability of a student with nothing behind him to show his worth and by appointing him my assistant I may claim to have started Greenwood on his career." While Greenwood made a good start in physiological research he was already drawn to statistics; his first paper in Biometrika appeared in 1904. After a period of study with Karl Pearson he was appointed statistician to the Lister Institute in 1910. There he worked on a wide range of problems, including a study of the effectiveness of inoculation with the statistician Udny Yule. In the First World War Greenwood first served in the Royal Army Medical Corps but then was put in charge of a medical research unit at the Ministry of Munitions. There he investigated the health problems associated with factory work, one result of which was an influential study of accidents which he produced with Yule. In 1919 Greenwood joined the newly created Ministry of Health with responsibility for medical statistics. In 1928 he became the first professor of Epidemiology and Vital Statistics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine where he stayed until he retired in 1945. He established a group of researchers, of whom the most important was Austin Bradford Hill. Greenwood played the same role in A. B. Hill’s career as Hill’s father had played in his. The Royal Society awarded the Buchanan Medal to Greenwood in 1927, and elected him a Fellow in 1928. The election certificate stated  Engaged in medical research. Has applied the statistical method to the elucidation of many problems of physiology, pathology, hygiene and epidemiology. Is the author, or joint author, of more than sixty papers dealing with these applications, including important contributions to the experimental study of epidemiology (Journ Hyg, 24, 1925, Greenwood and Topley; ibid, 25, 1926, Greenwood, Newbold, Topley and Wilson). Has done much to encourage and develop the use of modern statistical methods by medical laboratory investigators, and, as Chairman of the Medical Research Council's Statistical Committee, to secure the adequate planning and execution of field investigations.  He was elected President of the Royal Statistical Society in 1934 and awarded its Guy Medal in Gold in 1945. Greenwood produced a large body of research, was the first holder of important positions in modern medical statistics and wrote extensively on the history of his subject, but as Austin Bradford Hill wrote in his obituary, "in the future, it may well indeed seem that one of his greatest contributions, if not the greatest, lay merely in his outlook, in his statistical approach to medicine, then a new approach and one long regarded with suspicion. And he fought this fight continuously and honestly—for logic for accuracy, for ‘little sums.’" His name is attached to the Greenwood formula for the variance or standard error (SE) of the Kaplan–Meier estimator of survival. A statistical method invented by Major Greenwood in a statistical study of infectious diseases is still used in present day research. The Greenwood statistic was used to discover that there is some kind of order in the placement of genes on the chromosomes of living things and this inspired a new look at epigenetics, which is now considered to be as important as genetics in how living organisms develop and evolve. Greenwood lived at Loughton, where among his neighbours were Sir Frank Baines, Millais Culpin, and Leonard Erskine Hill.   == Publications == Greenwood, M. (1904). "A First Study of the Weight, Variability, and Correlation of the Human Viscera, with Special Reference to the Healthy and Diseased Heart". Biometrika 3: 63. doi:10.1093/biomet/3.1.63.  Greenwood, M; Yule, G. U. (1915). "The Statistics of Anti-typhoid and Anti-cholera Inoculations, and the Interpretation of such Statistics in general". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine 8 (Sect Epidemiol State Med): 113–94. PMC 2004181. PMID 19978918.  Greenwood, Major and Udny Yule, G. (1920). "An Inquiry into the Nature of Frequency Distributions Representative of Multiple Happenings with Particular Reference to the Occurrence of Multiple Attacks of Disease or of Repeated Accidents". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 83: 255–279. JSTOR 2341080.  Edgar L. Collis and Major Greenwood The health of the industrial worker. 1921 Major Greenwood The natural duration of cancer. London, England: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, Reports on Public Health and Medical Subjects, No. 33. 1926 Major Greenwood Epidemics and crowd-diseases: an introduction to the study of epidemiology. 1935 Major Greenwood Medical statistics from Graunt to Farr: the Fitzpatrick lectures for the years 1941 and 1943. 1948   == References ==   == Further reading == Royal Society Certificate of Election and Candidature A. B. H.; William Butler (1949) "Obituary: Major Greenwood", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), 112, 487–489. McKinlay, P. L. (1951). "Major Greenwood, 1880-1949". Biometrika 38 (1–2): 1–3. doi:10.1093/biomet/38.1-2.1. PMID 14848107.  Anne Hardy; Eileen Magnello (2002) "Statistical methods in epidemiology: Karl Pearson, Ronald Ross, Major Greenwood and Austin Bradford Hill", 1900–1945 Soz Praventiv Med; 47(2): 80–89. Farewell, V.; Johnson, T.; Armitage, P. (2006). "'A memorandum on the Present Position and Prospects of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology' by Major Greenwood". Statistics in Medicine 25 (13): 2161–77. doi:10.1002/sim.2608. PMID 16755605.  J. Rosser Matthews (1995) Quantification and the Quest for Medical Certainty, Princeton, Princeton University Press. "Greenwood, Major". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/51797.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)

Mark Kac (/kɑːts/ KAHTS; Polish: Marek Kac; 3 August 1914 – 26 October 1984) was a Polish American mathematician. He was born to a Polish-Jewish family; their town, Kremenets (Polish: "Krzemieniec"), changed hands from the Russian Empire to Poland when Kac was a child. His main interest was probability theory. His question, "Can one hear the shape of a drum?" set off research into spectral theory, with the idea of understanding the extent to which the spectrum allows one to read back the geometry. (In the end, the answer was "no", in general.) Kac completed his Ph.D. in mathematics at the Polish University of Lwów in 1937 under the direction of Hugo Steinhaus. While there, he was a member of the Lwów School of Mathematics. After receiving his degree he began to look for a position abroad, and in 1938 was granted a scholarship from the Parnas Foundation which enabled him to go work in the United States. He arrived in New York City in November, 1938. With the onset of World War II, Kac was able to stay in America, while his parents and brother who remained in Western Ukraine were murdered by the Germans in the mass executions of the Jews of Krzemieniec (August 1942). From 1939 until 1961 he was at Cornell University, first as an instructor, then from 1943 as assistant professor and from 1947 as full professor. While there, he became a naturalized US citizen in 1943. In the academic year 1951–1952 Kac was on sabbatical at the Institute for Advanced Study. In 1952 Kac, with Theodore H. Berlin, introduced the spherical model of a ferromagnet (a variant of the Ising model) and, with J. C. Ward, found an exact solution of the Ising model using a combinatorial method. In 1961 he left Cornell and went to Rockefeller University in New York City. In the early 1960s he worked with George Uhlenbeck and P. C. Hemmer on the mathematics of a van der Waals gas. After twenty years at Rockefeller University, he moved to the University of Southern California where he spent the rest of his career.   == Work == In his 1966 article with the title "Can one hear the shape of the drum" Kac asked the question whether two resonators ("drums") of different geometrical shapes can have exactly the same set of frequencies ("sound tones"). The answer was positive, meaning that the eigenfrequency set does not uniquely characterize the shape of a resonator.   == Reminiscences == His definition of a profound truth. "A truth is a statement whose negation is false. A profound truth is a truth whose negation is also a profound truth." (Also attributed to Niels Bohr) He preferred to work on results that were robust, meaning that they were true under many different assumptions and not the accidental consequence of a set of axioms. Often Kac's "proofs" consisted of a series of worked examples that illustrated the important cases. When Kac and Richard Feynman were both on the Cornell faculty he went to a lecture of Feynman's and saw that the two of them were working on the same thing from different directions. The Feynman-Kac formula resulted, which proves rigorously the real case of Feynman's path integrals. The complex case, which occurs when a particle's spin is included, is still unproven. Kac had learned Wiener processes by reading Norbert Wiener's original papers, which were "the most difficult papers I have ever read." Brownian motion is a Wiener process. Feynman's path integrals are another example. Kac's distinction between an "ordinary genius" like Hans Bethe and a "magician" like Richard Feynman has been widely quoted. (Bethe was also at Cornell University.) Kac became interested in the occurrence of statistical independence without randomness. As an example of this, he gave a lecture on the average number of factors that a random integer has. This wasn't really random in the strictest sense of the word, because it refers to the average number of prime divisors of the integers up to N as N goes to infinity, which is predetermined. He could see that the answer was c log log N, if you assumed that the number of prime divisors of two numbers x and y were independent, but he was unable to provide a complete proof of independence. Paul Erdős was in the audience and soon finished the proof using Sieve theory, and the result became known as the Erdős–Kac theorem. They continued working together and more or less created the subject of Probabilistic number theory. Kac sent Erdős a list of his publications, and one of his papers contained the word Capacitor in the title. Erdős wrote back to him "I pray for your soul." Kac got a typed manuscript back from his secretary and it contained the following sentence "This result can be verified by connecting 300 volts across a negro gentleman." He looked at his handwritten draft to see what could possibly have produced this, and it said "This result can be verified by connecting 300 volts across a rigger," which was a Breadboard.   == Awards and honors == 1950 — Chauvenet Prize for 1947 expository article 1959 — member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 1965 — member of the National Academy of Sciences 1968 — Chauvenet Prize (and 1967 Lester R. Ford Award) for 1966 expository article 1971 — Solvay Lecturer at Brussels 1980 — Fermi Lecturer at the Scuola Normale, Pisa   == Books == Mark Kac and Stanislaw Ulam: Mathematics and Logic: Retrospect and Prospects, Praeger, New York (1968) Dover paperback reprint. Mark Kac, Statistical Independence in Probability, Analysis and Number Theory, Carus Mathematical Monographs, Mathematical Association of America, 1959. Mark Kac, Probability and related topics in the physical sciences. 1959 (with contributions by Uhlenbeck on the Boltzmann equation, Hibbs on quantum mechanics, and van der Pol on finite difference analogues of the wave and potential equations, Boulder Seminar 1957). Mark Kac, Enigmas of Chance: An Autobiography, Harper and Row, New York, 1985. Sloan Foundation Series. Published posthumously with a memoriam note by Gian-Carlo Rota.   == See also == Feynman–Kac formula Erdős–Kac theorem   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Mark Kac", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Mark Kac at the Mathematics Genealogy Project National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

Sir Maurice George Kendall, FBA (6 September 1907 – 29 March 1983) was a British statistician, widely known for his contribution to statistics. The Kendall tau rank correlation is named after him.   == Education and early life == Maurice Kendall was born in Kettering, Northamptonshire as the only child of John Roughton Kendall and Georgina Brewer. As a young child he survived a case of cerebral meningitis, which was frequently fatal at that time. After growing up in Derby, England, he studied mathematics at St John's College, Cambridge, where he played cricket and chess (with future champions Conel Hugh O'Donel Alexander and Jacob Bronowski). After graduation as a Mathematics Wrangler in 1929, he joined the British Civil Service in the Ministry of Agriculture. In this position he became increasingly interested in using statistics towards agricultural questions, and one of his first published papers to the Royal Statistical Society involved studying crop productivity using factor analysis. He was elected a Fellow of the Society in 1934.   == Work in statistics == In 1938 and 1939 he began work, along with Bernard Babington-Smith, on the question of random number generation, developing both one of the first early mechanical devices to produce random digits, and formulated a series of tests for statistical randomness in a given set of digits which, with some small modifications, became fairly widely used. He produced one of the second large collections of random digits (100,000 in total, over twice as many as those published by L. H. C. Tippett in 1927), which was a commonly used tract until the publication of RAND Corporation's A Million Random Digits with 100,000 Normal Deviates in 1955 (which was developed with a roulette wheel-like machine very similar to Kendall's and verified as "random" using his statistical tests). In 1937, he aided the ageing statistician G. Udny Yule in the revision of his standard statistical textbook, Introduction to the Theory of Statistics, commonly known for many years as "Yule and Kendall". The two had met by chance in 1935, and were on close terms until Yule's death in 1951 (Yule was godfather to Kendall's second son). During this period he also began work on the rank correlation coefficient which currently bears his name (Kendall's tau), which eventually led to a monograph on Rank Correlation in 1948. In the late 1930s, he was additionally part of a group of five other statisticians who endeavoured to produce a reference work summarising recent developments in statistical theory, but it was cancelled on account of onset of World War II.   == War-time efforts == Kendall became Assistant general manager to the British Chamber of Shipping by day and had air-raid warden duties by night. Despite these constraints on his time, he managed to produce volume one of The Advanced Theory of Statistics in 1943 and a second volume in 1946. During the war he also produced a series of papers extending to work of R.A. Fisher on the theory of k-statistics, and developed a number of extensions to this work through the 1950s. After the war, he worked on the theory and practice of time series analysis, and conclusively demonstrated (with the meager computing resources available at the time) that unsmoothed sample periodograms were unreliable estimators for the population spectrum.   == London School of Economics == In 1949 he accepted the second chair of statistics at the London School of Economics, University of London. Here he worked part-time as the director of the new Research Techniques Division. From 1952 to 1957 he edited a two-volume work on Statistical Sources in the United Kingdom, which was a standard reference until the mid-1970s. In the fifities he also worked on multivariate analysis, and developed the text Multivariate Analysis in 1957. In the same year he also developed, along with W. R. Buckland, a Dictionary of Statistical Terms, aimed at helping making the tools of statistics more available to potential users in industry and government. In 1953 he published " The Analytics of Economic Time Series, Part 1: Prices" in which he suggested that the movement of shares on the stock market was random i.e. they were as likely to go up on a certain day as they were to go down. These results were disturbing to some financial economists and further debate and research then followed. This ultimately led to the creation of the Random Walk Hypothesis, and the closely related efficient-market hypothesis which states that random price movements indicate a well-functioning or efficient market.   == CEIR and WFS == In 1961 he left the University of London and took a position as the managing director (later chairman) of a consulting company, CEIR (later known as Scientific Control Systems), and in the same year began a two-year term as president of the Royal Statistical Society. In the 1960s he published and co-edited a number of volumes and monographs in statistical theory. In 1972, he became director of the World Fertility Survey, a project sponsored by the International Statistical Institute and the United Nations which aimed to study fertility in developed and developing nations. He continued this work until 1980, when illness forced him to retire.   == Honours == He was knighted by the British government in 1974 for his services to the theory of statistics, and received a medal from the United Nations in 1980 in recognition for his work on the World Fertility Survey. He was also elected a fellow of the British Academy and received the highest honour of the Royal Statistical Society, the Guy Medal in Gold. He additionally had served as president of the Operational Research Society, the Institute of Statisticians, and was elected a fellow of the American Statistical Association, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the Econometric Society, and the British Computer Society. At the time of his death in 1983, he was honorary president of the International Statistical Institute.   == Notes ==   == Family == Kendall's first wife, Sheila (née Lester), predeceased him. He was survived by their daughter and two sons, and by his second wife, Ruth (née Whitfield) and their son.   == References == Ord, Keith (1984). "In Memoriam: Maurice George Kendall, 1907–1983". The American Statistician 38 (1): 36–37. doi:10.1080/00031305.1984.10482870. JSTOR 2683557.  Stuart, Alan (1984). "Sir Maurice Kendall, 1907–1983". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 147 (1): 120–122. JSTOR 2981762.  Bartholomew, D. J. (1983). "Obituary: Sir Maurice Kendall FBA". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series D 32 (4): 445–446. JSTOR 2987557.  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Maurice George Kendall", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Alan Stuart and Keith Ord, Kendall's Advanced Theory of Statistics Volume 1 – Distribution Theory (Sixth Ed.), 1994

Maurice Princet (1875 – October 23, 1973) was a French mathematician and actuary who played a role in the birth of cubism. He was an associate of Pablo Picasso, Guillaume Apollinaire, Max Jacob, Jean Metzinger, and Marcel Duchamp. He is known as "le mathématicien du cubisme" ("the mathematician of cubism").  Princet is credited with introducing the work of Henri Poincaré and the concept of the "fourth dimension" to the cubists at the Bateau-Lavoir. Princet brought to Picasso's attention a book by Esprit Jouffret, Traité élémentaire de géométrie à quatre dimensions (Elementary Treatise on the Geometry of Four Dimensions, 1903), a popularization of Poincaré's Science and Hypothesis in which Jouffret described hypercubes and other complex polyhedra in four dimensions and projected them onto the two-dimensional page. Picasso's sketchbooks for Les Demoiselles d'Avignon illustrate Jouffret's influence on the artist's work. In 1907, Princet's wife left him for André Derain, and he drifted away from the circle of artists at the Bateau-Lavoir. But Princet remained close to Metzinger and participated in meetings of the Section d'Or in Puteaux. He gave informal lectures to the group, many of whom were passionate about mathematical order. Princet's influence on the cubists was attested to by his contemporaries. Maurice de Vlaminck wrote, "I witnessed the birth of cubism, its growth, its decline. Picasso was the obstetrician, Guillaume Apollinaire the midwife, Princet the godfather." In 1910, Metzinger said of him, "[Picasso] lays out a free, mobile perspective, from which that ingenious mathematician Maurice Princet has deduced a whole geometry". Later, Metzinger wrote in his memoirs that:  Maurice Princet joined us often. Although quite young, thanks to his knowledge of mathematics he had an important job in an insurance company. But, beyond his profession, it was as an artist that he conceptualized mathematics, as an aesthetician that he invoked n-dimensional continuums. He loved to get the artists interested in the new views on space that had been opened up by Schlegel and some others. He succeeded at that.  Louis Vauxcelles sarcastically dubbed Princet "the father of cubism":  M. Princet has studied at length non-Euclidean geometry and the theorems of Riemann, of which Gleizes and Metzinger speak rather carelessly. Now then, M. Princet one day met M. Max Jacob and confided him one or two of his discoveries relating to the fourth dimension. M. Jacob informed the ingenious M. Picasso of it, and M. Picasso saw there a possibility of new ornamental schemes. M. Picasso explained his intentions to M. Apollinaire, who hastened to write them up in formularies and codify them. The thing spread and propagated. Cubism, the child of M. Princet, was born.  Duchamp told Pierre Cabanne, "We weren't mathematicians at all, but we really did believe in Princet".   == See also == Mathematics and art Actuary   == Notes ==   == Further reading ==

Michael S. Teitelbaum (born January 21, 1944) is a demographer and the former Vice President of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation in New York City. He is Senior Research Associate at the Labor and Worklife Program, Harvard Law School. He publishes in both the popular and academic press on demographic trends, especially fertility and international migration and their causes and consequences. In the 1970s he was Staff Director of the Select Committee on Population in the U.S. House of Representatives, and in the 1980s he served as Commissioner to the U.S. Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development. From 1990-1997 he was Vice Chair and Acting Chair of the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform often known as the Jordan Commission after its late Chair Barbara Jordan. Teitelbaum was an undergraduate student at Reed College and later a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, where he earned his DPhil in demography in 1970. Between 1969 and 1973, he was an assistant professor and research associate in the Office of Population Research at Princeton University. From 1974 to 1978, he served as University Lecturer in Demography and Faculty Fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford University. Teitelbaum also worked as a program officer for the Ford Foundation in 1973-1974 and 1980-1981. He joined the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation as a program director and became Vice President of this institution in 2007. In 2013, ScienceCareers from the journal Science named him Person of the Year for his “dedicated, imaginative, and surpassingly effective work on behalf of early-career scientists.”   == Ideas and scholarship == Teitelbaum has produced an array of works on global and national demographic developments, focused on both fertility behavior and on international migration. His work also tackles the history of ideas about population, including insights into the political uses and repercussions of shifts in demography. In The Fear of Population Decline (1985), Teitelbaum and his co-author Jay M. Winter provide a cross-national discussion of political and cultural anxieties about low fertility, highlighted by France’s military defeats and the tendency of political leaders to regard sagging population growth as an obstacle to national renewal. Great Britain's Royal Commission on Population in 1949 asserted that “the failure of a society to reproduce itself indicates something wrong in its attitude to life, which is likely to involve other forms of decadence.” Teitelbaum and Winter have been critical of works such as Philip Longman’s The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten World Prosperity and What to Do About It (New York: Basic Books, 2004) that express alarms about the prospects for world civilization if procreation does not have an upsurge in the twenty-first century. In the New York Times (April 6, 2014), Teitelbaum and Winter warned against the “dark prophecies” about population decline, noting that such concerns have a long history of exaggeration that persist to this day. A century ago Theodore Roosevelt thundered against Anglo-Saxon “race suicide,” while Depression-era fertility declines led to books such as The Twilight of Parenthood: A Biological Study of the Decline of Population Growth (1934) by the socialist feminist Enid Charles. After the low fertility rates of the Great Depression were supplanted by the baby boom of the postwar period, environmentalists and left-leaning observers began to forecast mass starvation on the assumption that food production could not keep pace with high population growth rates in the developing world [works such as Paul Erlich’s The Population Bomb (1968)]. In making his case for pro-natalist policies in the prestigious journal Foreign Affairs (September/October 2004), Longman has criticized Teitelbaum for focusing a historical lens on the problem of population decline: “The matter cannot be settled by pointing to history, because no previous society has experienced aging on the scale and at the speed of that now occurring throughout the world…. Countries such as China are now aging as much in one generation as France did over the course of centuries.” As a foundation executive, Teitelbaum played a significant role in nurturing a network of scholars and policy experts on the economics of science and engineering. He observed that passionate debates about feared “shortages” of US scientists and engineers were being conducted without rigorous data and information. Thus, he helped support the formation of the Science and Engineering Workforce Project based at the National Bureau of Economic Research and led by Harvard labor economist Richard B. Freeman. Teitelbaum also realized that universities and scientific research institutes were vastly expanding the hiring of postdocs often for long periods but with little likelihood of a career path in research. He initiated a Sloan Foundation grants program to improve data collection and analysis about postdocs, and provided start-up support for the National Postdoctoral Association (NPA), founded in 2003 and now based in Washington, D.C. Teitelbaum has brought historical approaches to the understanding of labor market conditions for scientists and engineers in the United States. In Falling Behind? Boom, Bust & the Global Race for Scientific Talent (Princeton University Press, 2014), he identifies five periods since World War II in which alarms were sounded that the United States was in danger of a catastrophic shortage of scientific talent. He suggests that the panics that ensued frequently lead to boom and bust cycles that are not healthy for scientific research, nor for the economic well-being of scientists and their research institutions. Nonetheless, claims of “shortages” of scientists and engineers continue to be strongly promoted by industry lobbyists and others. Teitelbaum’s demonstration of the flimsy evidence underlying many such claims seems likely to be contested or ignored by well-financed advocates of shortage claims.   == Selected bibliography == Falling Behind? Boom, Bust & the Global Race for Scientific Talent (Princeton University Press, 2014) The Global Spread of Fertility Decline: Population, Fear, and Uncertainty (Yale University Press, 2013, co-authored with Jay Winter) Political Demography, Demographic Engineering (Berghahn Books, 2001, co-authored with Myron Weiner) A Question of Numbers: High Migration, Low Fertility, and the Politics of National Identity (Hill and Wang, 1998, co-authored with Jay Winter) Threatened Peoples, Threatened Borders (W.W. Norton, 1995, co-editor); Population and Resources in Western Intellectual Traditions (Cambridge University Press, 1989, co-editor); The Fear of Population Decline (Academic Books, 1985, co-authored with Jay M. Winter); Latin Migration North: The Problem for U.S. Foreign Policy (Council on Foreign Relations, 1985); The British Fertility Decline: Demographic Transition in the Crucible of the Industrial Revolution (Princeton University Press, 1984).   == Notes ==

Milton Friedman (July 31, 1912 – November 16, 2006) was an American economist who received the 1976 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his research on consumption analysis, monetary history and theory and the complexity of stabilization policy. With George Stigler and others, Friedman was among the intellectual leaders of the second generation of Chicago price theory, a methodological movement at the University of Chicago's Department of Economics, Law School, and Graduate School of Business from the 1940s onward. Several students and young professors that were recruited or mentored by Friedman at Chicago went on to become leading economists; they include Gary Becker, Robert Fogel, Ronald Coase, and Robert Lucas, Jr.. Friedman's challenges to what he later called "naive Keynesian" theory began with his 1950s reinterpretation of the consumption function. In the 1960s, he became the main advocate opposing Keynesian government policies, and described his approach (along with mainstream economics) as using "Keynesian language and apparatus" yet rejecting its "initial" conclusions. He theorized that there existed a "natural" rate of unemployment, and argued that employment above this rate would cause inflation to accelerate. He argued that the Phillips curve was, in the long run, vertical at the "natural rate" and predicted what would come to be known as stagflation. Friedman promoted an alternative macroeconomic viewpoint known as "monetarism", and argued that a steady, small expansion of the money supply was the preferred policy. His ideas concerning monetary policy, taxation, privatization and deregulation influenced government policies, especially during the 1980s. His monetary theory influenced the Federal Reserve's response to the global financial crisis of 2007–08. Friedman was an advisor to Republican U.S. President Ronald Reagan and Conservative British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. His political philosophy extolled the virtues of a free market economic system with minimal intervention. He once stated that his role in eliminating U.S. conscription was his proudest accomplishment. In his 1962 book Capitalism and Freedom, Friedman advocated policies such as a volunteer military, freely floating exchange rates, abolition of medical licenses, a negative income tax, and school vouchers. His support for school choice led him to found the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice. Milton Friedman's works include many monographs, books, scholarly articles, papers, magazine columns, television programs, and lectures, and cover a broad range of economic topics and public policy issues. His books and essays have had an international influence, including in former Communist states. A survey of economists ranked Friedman as the second most popular economist of the twentieth century after John Maynard Keynes, and The Economist described him as "the most influential economist of the second half of the 20th century ... possibly of all of it."   == Early lifeEdit == Friedman was born in Brooklyn, New York on July 31, 1912, to recent Jewish immigrants Sára Ethel (née Landau) and Jenő Saul Friedman, from Beregszász in Carpathian Ruthenia, Kingdom of Hungary (now Berehove in Ukraine), both of whom worked as dry goods merchants. Shortly after Milton's birth, the family relocated to Rahway, New Jersey. In his early teens, Friedman was injured in a car accident, which scarred his upper lip. A talented student, Friedman graduated from Rahway High School in 1928, just before his 16th birthday. In 1932, Friedman graduated from Rutgers University, where he specialized in Mathematics and Economics and initially intended to become an actuary. During his time at Rutgers, Friedman became influenced by two economics professors, Arthur F. Burns and Homer Jones, who convinced him that modern economics could help end the Great Depression. After graduating from Rutgers, Friedman was offered two scholarships to do graduate work — one in mathematics at Brown University and the other in economics at the University of Chicago. Friedman chose the latter, thus earning a Master of Arts degree in 1933. He was strongly influenced by Jacob Viner, Frank Knight, and Henry Simons. It was at Chicago that Friedman met his future wife, economist Rose Director. During the 1933–1934 academic year he had a fellowship at Columbia University, where he studied statistics with renowned statistician and economist Harold Hotelling. He was back in Chicago for the 1934–1935 academic year, working as a research assistant for Henry Schultz, who was then working on Theory and Measurement of Demand. That year, Friedman formed what would prove to be lifelong friendships with George Stigler and W. Allen Wallis.   == Public serviceEdit == Friedman was initially unable to find academic employment, so in 1935 he followed his friend W. Allen Wallis to Washington, where Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal was "a lifesaver" for many young economists. At this stage, Friedman said that he and his wife "regarded the job-creation programs such as the WPA, CCC, and PWA appropriate responses to the critical situation," but not "the price- and wage-fixing measures of the National Recovery Administration and the Agricultural Adjustment Administration." Foreshadowing his later ideas, he believed price controls interfered with an essential signaling mechanism to help resources be used where they were most valued. Indeed, Friedman later concluded that all government intervention associated with the New Deal was "the wrong cure for the wrong disease," arguing that the money supply should simply have been expanded, instead of contracted. Later, Friedman and his colleague Anna Schwartz wrote A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960, which argued that the Great Depression was caused by a severe monetary contraction due to banking crises and poor policy on the part of the Federal Reserve. During 1935, he began work for the National Resources Committee, which was then working on a large consumer budget survey. Ideas from this project later became a part of his Theory of the Consumption Function. Friedman began employment with the National Bureau of Economic Research during autumn 1937 to assist Simon Kuznets in his work on professional income. This work resulted in their jointly authored publication Incomes from Independent Professional Practice, which introduced the concepts of permanent and transitory income, a major component of the Permanent Income Hypothesis that Friedman worked out in greater detail in the 1950s. The book hypothesizes that professional licensing artificially restricts the supply of services and raises prices. During 1940, Friedman was appointed an assistant professor teaching Economics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, but encountered antisemitism in the Economics department and decided to return to government service. From 1941 to 1943 Friedman worked on wartime tax policy for the Federal Government, as an advisor to senior officials of the United States Department of the Treasury. As a Treasury spokesman during 1942 he advocated a Keynesian policy of taxation. He helped to invent the payroll withholding tax system, since the federal government badly needed money in order to fight the war. He later said, "I have no apologies for it, but I really wish we hadn't found it necessary and I wish there were some way of abolishing withholding now."   == Academic careerEdit ==   === Early yearsEdit === In 1940, Friedman accepted a position at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, but left because of differences with faculty regarding United States involvement in World War II. Friedman believed the United States should enter the war. In 1943, Friedman joined the Division of War Research at Columbia University (headed by W. Allen Wallis and Harold Hotelling), where he spent the rest of World War II working as a mathematical statistician, focusing on problems of weapons design, military tactics, and metallurgical experiments. In 1945, Friedman submitted Incomes from Independent Professional Practice (co-authored with Kuznets and completed during 1940) to Columbia as his doctoral dissertation. The university awarded him a PhD in 1946. Friedman spent the 1945–1946 academic year teaching at the University of Minnesota (where his friend George Stigler was employed). On February 12, 1945, his son, David D. Friedman was born.   === University of ChicagoEdit ===  In 1946, Friedman accepted an offer to teach economic theory at the University of Chicago (a position opened by departure of his former professor Jacob Viner to Princeton University). Friedman would work for the University of Chicago for the next 30 years. There he contributed to the establishment of an intellectual community that produced a number of Nobel Prize winners, known collectively as the Chicago school of economics. At that time, Arthur F. Burns, who was then the head of the National Bureau of Economic Research, asked Friedman to rejoin the Bureau's staff. He accepted the invitation, and assumed responsibility for the Bureau's inquiry into the role of money in the business cycle. As a result, he initiated the "Workshop in Money and Banking" (the "Chicago Workshop"), which promoted a revival of monetary studies. During the latter half of the 1940s, Friedman began a collaboration with Anna Schwartz, an economic historian at the Bureau, that would ultimately result in the 1963 publication of a book co-authored by Friedman and Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960. Friedman spent the 1954–1955 academic year as a Fulbright Visiting Fellow at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. At the time, the Cambridge economics faculty was divided into a Keynesian majority (including Joan Robinson and Richard Kahn) and an anti-Keynesian minority (headed by Dennis Robertson). Friedman speculated that he was invited to the fellowship, because his views were unacceptable to both of the Cambridge factions. Later his weekly columns for Newsweek magazine (1966–84) were well read and increasingly influential among political and business people. From 1968 to 1978, he and Paul Samuelson participated in the Economics Cassette Series, a biweekly subscription series where the economist would discuss the days' issues for about a half-hour at a time. Friedman was an economic adviser to Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater during 1964.   === Nobel Prize in Economic SciencesEdit === Friedman won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, the sole recipient for 1976, "for his achievements in the fields of consumption analysis, monetary history and theory and for his demonstration of the complexity of stabilization policy."   == RetirementEdit == In 1977, at the age of 65, Friedman retired from the University of Chicago after teaching there for 30 years. He and his wife moved to San Francisco where he became a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. From 1977 on, he was affiliated with the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. During the same year, Friedman was approached by the Free To Choose Network and asked to create a television program presenting his economic and social philosophy. The Friedmans worked on this project for the next three years, and during 1980, the ten-part series, titled Free to Choose, was broadcast by the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). The companion book to the series (co-authored by Milton and his wife, Rose Friedman), also titled Free To Choose, was the bestselling nonfiction book of 1980 and has since been translated into 14 foreign languages. Friedman served as an unofficial adviser to Ronald Reagan during his 1980 presidential campaign, and then served on the President's Economic Policy Advisory Board for the rest of the Reagan Administration. Ebenstein says Friedman was "the 'guru' of the Reagan administration." In 1988 he received the National Medal of Science and Reagan honored him with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Milton Friedman is known now as one of the most influential economists of the 20th century. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Friedman continued to write editorials and appear on television. He made several visits to Eastern Europe and to China, where he also advised governments. He was also for many years a Trustee of the Philadelphia Society.   == Scholarly contributionsEdit ==   === EconomicsEdit === Friedman was best known for reviving interest in the money supply as a determinant of the nominal value of output, that is, the quantity theory of money. Monetarism is the set of views associated with modern quantity theory. Its origins can be traced back to the 16th-century School of Salamanca or even further; however, Friedman's contribution is largely responsible for its modern popularization. He co-authored, with Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960 (1963), which was an examination of the role of the money supply and economic activity in the U.S. history. A striking conclusion of their research regarded the way in which money supply fluctuations contribute to economic fluctuations. Several regression studies with David Meiselman during the 1960s suggested the primacy of the money supply over investment and government spending in determining consumption and output. These challenged a prevailing, but largely untested, view on their relative importance. Friedman's empirical research and some theory supported the conclusion that the short-run effect of a change of the money supply was primarily on output but that the longer-run effect was primarily on the price level. Friedman was the main proponent of the monetarist school of economics. He maintained that there is a close and stable association between inflation and the money supply, mainly that inflation could be avoided with proper regulation of the monetary base's growth rate. He famously used the analogy of "dropping money out of a helicopter.", in order to avoid dealing with money injection mechanisms and other factors that would overcomplicate his models. Friedman's arguments were designed to counter the popular concept of Cost-push inflation, that the increased General Price Level at the time was the result of increases in the price of oil, or increases in wages; as he wrote,  Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.  Friedman rejected the use of fiscal policy as a tool of demand management; and he held that the government's role in the guidance of the economy should be restricted severely. Friedman wrote extensively on the Great Depression, which he termed the Great Contraction, arguing that it had been caused by an ordinary financial shock whose duration and seriousness were greatly increased by the subsequent contraction of the money supply caused by the misguided policies of the directors of the Federal Reserve.  The Fed was largely responsible for converting what might have been a garden-variety recession, although perhaps a fairly severe one, into a major catastrophe. Instead of using its powers to offset the depression, it presided over a decline in the quantity of money by one-third from 1929 to 1933 ... Far from the depression being a failure of the free-enterprise system, it was a tragic failure of government.  Friedman also argued for the cessation of government intervention in currency markets, thereby spawning an enormous literature on the subject, as well as promoting the practice of freely floating exchange rates. His close friend George Stigler explained, "As is customary in science, he did not win a full victory, in part because research was directed along different lines by the theory of rational expectations, a newer approach developed by Robert Lucas, also at the University of Chicago." Friedman was also known for his work on the consumption function, the permanent income hypothesis (1957), which Friedman himself referred to as his best scientific work. This work contended that rational consumers would spend a proportional amount of what they perceived to be their permanent income. Windfall gains would mostly be saved. Tax reductions likewise, as rational consumers would predict that taxes would have to increase later to balance public finances. Other important contributions include his critique of the Phillips curve and the concept of the natural rate of unemployment (1968). This critique associated his name, together with that of Edmund Phelps, with the insight that a government that brings about greater inflation cannot permanently reduce unemployment by doing so. Unemployment may be temporarily lower, if the inflation is a surprise, but in the long run unemployment will be determined by the frictions and imperfections of the labor market. Friedman's essay "The Methodology of Positive Economics" (1953) provided the epistemological pattern for his own subsequent research and to a degree that of the Chicago School. There he argued that economics as science should be free of value judgments for it to be objective. Moreover, a useful economic theory should be judged not by its descriptive realism but by its simplicity and fruitfulness as an engine of prediction. That is, students should measure the accuracy of its predictions, rather than the 'soundness of its assumptions'. His argument was part of an ongoing debate among such statisticians as Jerzy Neyman, Leonard Savage, and Ronald Fisher.   === StatisticsEdit === One of his most famous contributions to statistics is sequential sampling. Friedman did statistical work at the Division of War Research at Columbia, where he and his colleagues came up with the technique. It later became, in the words of The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, "the standard analysis of quality control inspection". The dictionary adds, "Like many of Friedman’s contributions, in retrospect it seems remarkably simple and obvious to apply basic economic ideas to quality control; that however is a measure of his genius."   == Public policy positionsEdit ==   === Federal ReserveEdit === Due to its poor performance, Friedman believed that the Federal Reserve Board should be abolished. He further believed that if the money supply was to be centrally controlled (as by the Federal Reserve System) that the preferable way to do it would be with a mechanical system that would keep the quantity of money increasing at a steady rate.   === Exchange ratesEdit === Friedman was a strong advocate for floating exchange rates throughout the entire Bretton-Woods period. He argued that a flexible exchange rate would make external adjustment possible and allow countries to avoid Balance of Payments crisis. He saw fixed exchange rates as an undesirable form of government intervention. The case was articulated in an influential 1953 paper, "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates", at a time, when most commentators regarded the possibility of floating exchange rates as a fantasy.   === School choiceEdit === In his 1955 article "The Role of Government in Education" Friedman proposed supplementing publicly operated schools with privately run but publicly funded schools through a system of school vouchers. Reforms similar to those proposed in the article were implemented in, for example, Chile in 1981 and Sweden in 1992. In 1996, Friedman, together with his wife, founded The Foundation for Educational Choice to advocate school choice and vouchers.   === ConscriptionEdit === While Walter Oi is credited with establishing the economic basis for a volunteer military, Milton Friedman was a proponent, stating that the draft was "inconsistent with a free society." In Capitalism and Freedom, he argued that conscription is inequitable and arbitrary, preventing young men from shaping their lives as they see fit. During the Nixon administration he headed the committee to research a conversion to paid/volunteer armed force. He would later state that his role in eliminating the conscription in the United States was his proudest accomplishment. Friedman did, however, believe a nation could compel military training as a reserve in case of war time.   === Foreign policyEdit === Biographer Lanny Ebenstein noted a drift over time in Friedman's views from an interventionist to a more cautious foreign policy. He supported US involvement in the Second World War and initially supported a hard line against Communism, but moderated over time. He opposed the Gulf War and the Iraq War. In a spring 2006 interview, Friedman said that the USA's stature in the world had been eroded by the Iraq War, but that it might be improved if Iraq were to become a peaceful independent country.   === Libertarianism and the Republican PartyEdit === He served as a member of President Reagan's Economic Policy Advisory Board starting at 1981. In 1988, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the National Medal of Science. He said that he was a libertarian philosophically, but a member of the U.S. Republican Party for the sake of "expediency" ("I am a libertarian with a small 'l' and a Republican with a capital 'R.' And I am a Republican with a capital 'R' on grounds of expediency, not on principle.") But, he said, "I think the term classical liberal is also equally applicable. I don't really care very much what I'm called. I'm much more interested in having people thinking about the ideas, rather than the person."   === Public goods and monopolyEdit === Friedman was supportive of the state provision of some public goods that private businesses are not considered as being able to provide. However, he argued that many of the services performed by government could be performed better by the private sector. Above all, if some public goods are provided by the state, he believed that they should not be a legal monopoly where private competition is prohibited; for example, he wrote:  There is no way to justify our present public monopoly of the post office. It may be argued that the carrying of mail is a technical monopoly and that a government monopoly is the least of evils. Along these lines, one could perhaps justify a government post office, but not the present law, which makes it illegal for anybody else to carry the mail. If the delivery of mail is a technical monopoly, no one else will be able to succeed in competition with the government. If it is not, there is no reason why the government should be engaged in it. The only way to find out is to leave other people free to enter.   === Social security, welfare programs, and negative income taxEdit === After 1960 Friedman attacked Social Security from a free market view stating that it had created welfare dependency. Friedman proposed that if there had to be a welfare system of any kind, he would replace the existing U.S. welfare system with a negative income tax, a progressive tax system in which the poor receive a basic living income from the government. According to the New York Times, Friedman's views in this regard were grounded in a belief that while "market forces ... accomplish wonderful things", they "cannot ensure a distribution of income that enables all citizens to meet basic economic needs".   === Drug policyEdit === Friedman also supported libertarian policies such as legalization of drugs and prostitution. During 2005, Friedman and more than 500 other economists advocated discussions regarding the economic benefits of the legalization of marijuana.   === LGBT rightsEdit === Friedman was also a supporter of gay rights. He specifically supported same-sex marriage, saying on the issue, "I do not believe there should be any discrimination against gays."   === Economic freedomEdit === Michael Walker of the Fraser Institute and Friedman hosted a series of conferences from 1986 to 1994. The goal was to create a clear definition of economic freedom and a method for measuring it. Eventually this resulted in the first report on worldwide economic freedom, Economic Freedom in the World[3]. This annual report has since provided data for numerous peer-reviewed studies and has influenced policy in several nations. Along with sixteen other distinguished economists he opposed the Copyright Term Extension Act and filed an amicus brief in Eldred v. Ashcroft. He supported the inclusion of the word "no-brainer" in the brief. Friedman argued for stronger basic legal (constitutional) protection of economic rights and freedoms to further promote industrial-commercial growth and prosperity and buttress democracy and freedom and the rule of law generally in society.   == Honors, recognition, and influenceEdit == George H. Nash, a leading historian of American conservatism, says that by, "the end of the 1960s he was probably the most highly regarded and influential conservative scholar in the country, and one of the few with an international reputation." Friedman allowed the libertarian Cato Institute to use his name for its biannual Milton Friedman Prize for Advancing Liberty beginning in 2001. A Friedman Prize was given to the late British economist Peter Bauer in 2002, Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto in 2004, Mart Laar, former Estonian Prime Minister in 2006 and a young Venezuelan student Yon Goicoechea in 2008. His wife Rose, sister of Aaron Director, with whom he initiated the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice, served on the international selection committee. Friedman was also a recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economics. Upon Friedman's death, Harvard President Lawrence Summers called him "The Great Liberator" saying "... any honest Democrat will admit that we are now all Friedmanites." He said Friedman's great popular contribution was "in convincing people of the importance of allowing free markets to operate." In 2013 Stephen Moore, a member of the editorial forward of the Wall Street Journal said, "Quoting the most-revered champion of free-market economics since Adam Smith has become a little like quoting the Bible." He adds, "There are sometimes multiple and conflicting interpretations."   === Hong KongEdit === Friedman once said, "If you want to see capitalism in action, go to Hong Kong." He wrote in 1990 that the Hong Kong economy was perhaps the best example of a free market economy. One month before his death, he wrote the article "Hong Kong Wrong – What would Cowperthwaite say?" in the Wall Street Journal, criticizing Donald Tsang, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, for abandoning "positive noninterventionism." Tsang later said he was merely changing the slogan to "big market, small government," where small government is defined as less than 20% of GDP. In a debate between Tsang and his rival, Alan Leong, before the 2007 Chief Executive election, Leong introduced the topic and jokingly accused Tsang of angering Friedman to death.   === ChileEdit ===  During 1975, two years after the military coup that brought military dictator President Augusto Pinochet to power and ended the government of Salvador Allende, the economy of Chile experienced a severe crisis. Friedman and Arnold Harberger accepted an invitation of a private Chilean foundation to visit Chile and speak on principles of economic freedom. He spent seven days in Chile giving a series of lectures at the Universidad Católica de Chile. and the (National) University of Chile. One of the lectures was entitled "The Fragility of Freedom" and according to Friedman, "dealt with precisely the threat to freedom from a centralized military government." In an April 21, 1975, letter to Pinochet, Friedman considered the "key economic problems of Chile are clearly ... inflation and the promotion of a healthy social market economy". He stated that "There is only one way to end inflation: by drastically reducing the rate of increase of the quantity of money ..." and that "... cutting government spending is by far and away the most desirable way to reduce the fiscal deficit, because it ... strengthens the private sector thereby laying the foundations for healthy economic growth". As to how rapidly inflation should be ended, Friedman felt that "for Chile where inflation is raging at 10–20% a month ... gradualism is not feasible. It would involve so painful an operation over so long a period that the patient would not survive." Choosing "a brief period of higher unemployment..." was the lesser evil.. and that "the experience of Germany, ... of Brazil ..., of the post-war adjustment in the U.S. ... all argue for shock treatment". In the letter Friedman recommended to deliver what the shock approach with "... a package to eliminate the surprise and to relieve acute distress" and "... for definiteness let me sketch the contents of a package proposal ... to be taken as illustrative" although his knowledge of Chile was "too limited to enable [him] to be precise or comprehensive". He listed a "sample proposal" of 8 monetary and fiscal measures including "the removal of as many as obstacles as possible that now hinder the private market. For example, suspend ... the present law against discharging employees". He closed, stating "Such a shock program could end inflation in months". His letter suggested that cutting spending to reduce the fiscal deficit would result in less transitional unemployment than raising taxes. Sergio de Castro, a Chilean Chicago School graduate, became the nation's Minister of Finance in 1975. During his six-year tenure, foreign investment increased, restrictions were placed on striking and labor unions, and GDP rose yearly. A foreign exchange program was created between the Catholic University of Chile and the University of Chicago. Many other Chicago School alumni were appointed government posts during and after the Pinochet years; others taught its economic doctrine at Chilean universities. They became known as the Chicago Boys. Friedman did not criticize Pinochet's dictatorship at the time, nor the assassinations, illegal imprisonments, torture, or other atrocities that were well known by then. In 1976 Friedman defended his unofficial adviser position with: "I do not consider it as evil for an economist to render technical economic advice to the Chilean Government, any more than I would regard it as evil for a physician to give technical medical advice to the Chilean Government to help end a medical plague." Friedman defended his activity in Chile on the grounds that, in his opinion, the adoption of free market policies not only improved the economic situation of Chile but also contributed to the amelioration of Pinochet's rule and to the eventual transition to a democratic government during 1990. That idea is included in Capitalism and Freedom, in which he declared that economic freedom is not only desirable in itself but is also a necessary condition for political freedom. In his 1980 documentary Free to Choose, he said the following: "Chile is not a politically free system, and I do not condone the system. But the people there are freer than the people in Communist societies because government plays a smaller role. ... The conditions of the people in the past few years has been getting better and not worse. They would be still better to get rid of the junta and to be able to have a free democratic system." In 1984, Friedman stated that he has "never refrained from criticizing the political system in Chile." In 1991 he said: "I have nothing good to say about the political regime that Pinochet imposed. It was a terrible political regime. The real miracle of Chile is not how well it has done economically; the real miracle of Chile is that a military junta was willing to go against its principles and support a free market regime designed by principled believers in a free market. [...] In Chile, the drive for political freedom, that was generated by economic freedom and the resulting economic success, ultimately resulted in a referendum that introduced political democracy. Now, at long last, Chile has all three things: political freedom, human freedom and economic freedom. Chile will continue to be an interesting experiment to watch to see whether it can keep all three or whether, now that it has political freedom,that political freedom will tend to be used to destroy or reduce economic freedom." He stressed that the lectures he gave in Chile were the same lectures he later gave in China and other socialist states. During the 2000 PBS documentary The Commanding Heights (based on the book), Friedman continued to argue that "free markets would undermine [Pinochet's] political centralization and political control.", and that criticism over his role in Chile missed his main contention that freer markets resulted in freer people, and that Chile's unfree economy had caused the military government. Friedman advocated for free markets which undermined "political centralization and political control".   === IcelandEdit === Friedman visited Iceland during the autumn of 1984, met with important Icelanders and gave a lecture at the University of Iceland on the "tyranny of the status quo." He participated in a lively television debate on August 31, 1984 with socialist intellectuals, including Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson, who later became the president of Iceland. When they complained that a fee was charged for attending his lecture at the University and that, hitherto, lectures by visiting scholars had been free-of-charge, Friedman replied that previous lectures had not been free-of-charge in a meaningful sense: lectures always have related costs. What mattered was whether attendees or non-attendees covered those costs. Friedman thought that it was fairer that only those who attended paid. In this discussion Friedman also stated that he did not receive any money for delivering that lecture.   === EstoniaEdit === Although Friedman never visited Estonia, his book Free to Choose exercised a great influence on that nation's then 32-year-old prime minister, Mart Laar, who has claimed that it was the only book on economics he had read before taking office. Laar's reforms are often credited with responsibility for transforming Estonia from an impoverished Soviet Republic to the "Baltic Tiger." A prime element of Laar's program was introduction of the flat tax. Laar won the 2006 Milton Friedman Prize for Advancing Liberty, awarded by the Cato Institute.   === United KingdomEdit === After 1950 Friedman was frequently invited to lecture in Britain, and by the 1970s his ideas had gained widespread attention in conservative circles. For example, he was a regular speaker at the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA), a libertarian think tank. Conservative politician Margaret Thatcher closely followed IEA programs and ideas, and met Friedman there in 1978. He also strongly influenced Keith Joseph, who became Thatcher's senior advisor on economic affairs, as well as Alan Walters and Patrick Minford, two other key advisers. Major newspapers, including the Daily Telegraph, The Times, and The Financial Times all promulgated Friedman's monetarist ideas to British decision-makers. Friedman's ideas strongly influenced Thatcher and her allies when she became Prime Minister in 1979.   == CritiquesEdit == Econometrician David Hendry criticized part of Friedman's and Anna Schwartz's 1982 Monetary Trends. When asked about it during an interview with Icelandic TV in 1984, Friedman said that the critique applied to a different problem than that which he and Schwartz had tackled, and was thus not relevant, and also pointed to the (as of 1984) lack of consequential peer review amongst econometricians on Hendry's work. In 2006, Hendry stated that Friedman was guilty of "serious errors" of misunderstanding that meant "the t-ratios he reported for UK money demand were overstated by nearly 100 per cent", and said that, in a paper published in 1991 with Neil Ericsson, he had refuted "almost every empirical claim […] made about UK money demand" by Friedman and Schwartz. A 2004 paper updated and confirmed the validity of the Hendry–Ericsson findings through 2000. After Friedman's death in 2006, Keynesian Nobel laureate Paul Krugman praised Friedman as a "great economist and a great man," and acknowledged his many, widely accepted contributions to empirical economics. Nonetheless, Krugman criticized Friedman, writing that "he slipped all too easily into claiming both that markets always work and that only markets work. It's extremely hard to find cases in which Friedman acknowledged the possibility that markets could go wrong, or that government intervention could serve a useful purpose." In her book The Shock Doctrine, author and social activist Naomi Klein criticized Friedman's economic liberalism, identifying it with the principles that guided the economic restructuring that followed the military coups in countries such as Chile and Indonesia. Based on their assessments of the extent to which what she describes as neoliberal policies contributed to income disparities and inequality, both Klein and Noam Chomsky have suggested that the primary role of what they describe as neoliberalism was as an ideological cover for capital accumulation by multinational corporations. Because of his involvement with the Pinochet government, there were international protests when Friedman was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1976 . Friedman was accused of supporting the military dictatorship in Chile because of the relation of economists of the University of Chicago to Pinochet, and a controversial six-day trip he took to Chile during March 1975 (less than two years after the coup that deposed President Salvador Allende). Friedman answered that he never was an adviser to the dictatorship, but only gave some lectures and seminars on inflation, and met with officials, including Augusto Pinochet, while in Chile. Chilean economist Orlando Letelier asserted that Pinochet's dictatorship resorted to oppression because of popular opposition to Chicago School policies in Chile. After a 1991 speech on drug legalisation, Friedman answered a question on his involvement with the Pinochet regime, saying that he was never an advisor to Pinochet (also mentioned in his 1984 Iceland interview), but that a group of his students at the University of Chicago were involved in Chile's economic reforms. Friedman credited these reforms with high levels of economic growth and with the establishment of democracy that has subsequently occurred in Chile.   == Personal lifeEdit == According to a 2007 article in Commentary magazine, his "parents were moderately observant [Jews], but Friedman, after an intense burst of childhood piety, rejected religion altogether." He described himself as an agnostic. Friedman wrote extensively of his life and experiences, especially in 1998 in his memoirs with his wife Rose, titled Two Lucky People.   === DeathEdit === Friedman died of heart failure at the age of 94 years in San Francisco on November 16, 2006. He was still a working economist performing original economic research; his last column was published in the The Wall Street Journal the day after his death. He was survived by his wife (who died on August 18, 2009) and their two children, David, known for the anarcho-capitalist book The Machinery of Freedom, and Janet. David's son, Patri Friedman, was the executive director of the The Seasteading Institute from 2008–2011.   == Selected bibliographyEdit ==  A Theory of the Consumption Function (1957) A Program for Monetary Stability (Fordham University Press, 1960) 110 pp. online version Capitalism and Freedom (1962), highly influential series of essays that established Friedman's position on major issues of public policy excerpts A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960, with Anna J. Schwartz, 1963; part 3 reprinted as The Great Contraction "The Role of Monetary Policy." American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 1 (Mar., 1968), pp. 1–17 JSTOR presidential address to American Economics Association "Inflation and Unemployment: Nobel lecture", 1977, Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 85, pp. 451–72. JSTOR Free to Choose: A personal statement, with Rose Friedman, (1980), highly influential restatement of policy views The Essence of Friedman, essays edited by Kurt R. Leube, (1987) (ISBN 0-8179-8662-6) Two Lucky People: Memoirs (with Rose Friedman) ISBN 0-226-26414-9 (1998) excerpt and text search Milton Friedman on Economics: Selected Papers by Milton Friedman, edited by Gary S. Becker (2008)   == See alsoEdit ==  Friedman–Savage utility function Friedman rule Friedman's k-percent rule Friedman test List of economists List of Jewish Nobel laureates List of notable Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients History of economic thought   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Bernanke, Ben (2004). Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11820-5  Butler, Eamonn (2011). Milton Friedman. Harriman Economic Essentials.  Ebenstein, Alan O. (2007). Milton Friedman: a biography.  Friedman, Milton (1999). Two Lucky People: Memoirs. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-26415-7.  Wood, John Cunningham, and Ronald N. Wood, ed. (1990), Milton Friedman: Critical Assessments, v. 3. Scroll to chapter-preview links. Routledge. Ebenstein, Lanny (January 2014). "The Increasingly Libertarian Milton Friedman: An Ideological Profile" (PDF). Econ Journal Watch 11 (1): 81–96.    == Further readingEdit == "Symposium: Why Is There No Milton Friedman Today?". Econ Journal Watch 10 (2). May 2013.    == External linksEdit == Milton and Rose Friedman: An Uncommon Couple (Multiple Text, audio, video) The Milton Friedman papers at the Hoover Institution Archives Selected Bibliography for Milton Friedman at the University of Chicago Library Profile and Papers at Research Papers in Economics/RePEc Milton Friedman collected news and commentary at The New York Times Milton Friedman at the Internet Movie Database Becker Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago The Foundation for Educational Choice Milton Fridman at Scarlett Inflation and Unemployment 1976 lecture at NobelPrize.org Nobel Prize acceptance speech Milton Friedman (1912–2006). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  Milton Friedman:Why Not a Volunteer Army?, New Individualist Review, Spring 1967 The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits, Milton Friedman, The New York Times Magazine, September 13, 1970 Interview with Milton Friedman, Dominic Streatfeild, May 25, 2000, source material for Cocaine: An Unauthorised Biography Milton Friedman vs. The Fed Bailout by Michael Hirsh, Newsweek, July 17, 2009 Four Deformations of the Apocalypse, David Stockman, The New York Times, July 31, 2010 The Case for Free Trade by Milton and Rose Friedman Roberts, Russ. "Milton Friedman Podcasts". EconTalk. Library of Economics and Liberty.  McCloskey, Deirdre (Winter 2003). "Other Things Equal: Milton". Eastern Economic Journal (Palgrave Macmillan) 29 (1): 143–146. JSTOR 40326463.  Videos Appearances on C-SPAN Booknotes interview with Friedman on the 50th Anniversary Edition of F.A. Hayek's Road to Serfdom, November 20, 1994. In Depth interview with Friedman, September 3, 2000  A film clip "The Open Mind – Living Within Our Means (1975)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive A film clip "The Open Mind – A Nobel Laureate on the American Economy (1977)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive  Milton Friedman, Commanding Heights, PBS, October 1, 2000, interview, profile and video "Free To Choose" (1980) a PBS TV Series by Milton Friedman Milton Friedman at the Cato Institute Free to Choose Network How to Cure Inflation : Milton Friedman

Mir Masoom Ali (born February 1, 1937), is a Bangladeshi American statistician, Distinguished Professor, educator, researcher and author. He migrated to the United States in 1969 and became a naturalized citizen in 1981. Ali founded the graduate and undergraduate programs in Statistics at Ball State University. He co-founded the Midwest Biopharmaceutical Statistics Workshop (MBSW-History), held at Ball State University annually since 1978, and co-sponsored by the American Statistical Association. He served as editor and associate editor of several international statistical journals. He is the founding president of the North America Bangladesh Statistical Association (NABSA) and a member of advisory board at Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. In 2002 Ali received the Sagamore of the Wabash Award, the highest award given in the state of Indiana, USA by the Governor of Indiana Frank O'Bannon, for his contributions to Ball State University, to higher education in the State of Indiana, and specifically to the Statistics profession.   == Early life and career == Ali was born in Patuakhali, British India (presently Bangladesh) on February 1, 1937. His parents were Mir Muazzam Ali, a Patuakhali lawyer, and Azifa Ali, an advocate for women's education. He spent his childhood in Patuakhali until graduating from Patuakhali Jubilee High English School in 1951. In 1953, Ali received his I. Sc. degree from Dhaka College. In 1956, he obtained his B. Sc. (Honors) degree and in 1957 his M. Sc. degree, both in Statistics from University of Dhaka. After graduation, Ali was employed by the erstwhile government of Pakistan from 1958 until 1966. He held a wide array of statistical positions in various ministries of the government. In 1966, Ali, on leave of absence from his government position, completed his second master's degree in 1967 and a Ph.D. degree in 1969, both in Mathematical Statistics from the University of Toronto in Canada.   == Career in academe == In 1969, Ali began his academic career at Ball State University in Muncie, Indiana, USA as an assistant professor of Statistics, then became an associate professor in 1974 and a full professor in 1978. In 2000, he was named the George and Frances Ball Distinguished Professor of Statistics. Upon Ali's retirement in 2007, he was appointed as the George and Frances Ball Distinguished Professor of Statistics Emeritus and Professor Emeritus of Mathematical Sciences. During Ali's tenure at Ball State University, he published roughly 200 articles and presented over 120 papers at various professional meetings and universities worldwide. His earlier publications were on h-statistics, l-statistics, k-statistics and related finite sampling methods. Later his research focused on order statistics and statistical inference based on optimal spacing and goodness-of-fit procedures. He has also published in diverse areas such as ranking and selection, multivariate distributions, characterization, and mixtures of distributions. Most recently he has published in the areas of Bayesian inference and reliability theory. He is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Fellow of the Institute of Statisticians, a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, and an Expatriate Fellow of the Bangladesh Academy of Sciences. Dr. Ali has been a visiting professor at several universities and statistical institutes in the USA, Canada, Bangladesh, India, Korea, Japan and Saudi Arabia.   == Honors bestowed == Fellow of the American Statistical Association Fellow of the Institute of Statisticians Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society Expatriate Fellow of Bangladesh Academy of Sciences Elected Member, International Statistical Institute Member of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics   == Awards received == Sagamore of the Wabash Award – awarded by Former Governor of Indiana Frank O'Bannon, 2002. Gold Medal of the Islamic Society of Statistical Sciences, 2005. First recipient of the Qazi Motahar Hossain Gold Medal, 1990. Outstanding Faculty Award, Ball State University, 1993. Outstanding Researcher Award, Ball State University, 1985. “Our Pride” Award, Bangladeshi-American Federation Incorporated (BAFI), 2005.   == Special volumes published == Special Volume of the Journal of Statistics in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali, 2014. Statistics in the Twenty-first Century: A Special Volume of the Pakistan Journal of Statistics and Operation Research in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his 75th Birthday Anniversary, 2012. Festschrift in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his retirement, 2007 by Ball State University. Special Volume of the International Journal of Statistical Sciences in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his 70th Birthday Anniversary, 2007. Special Volume of the Pakistan Journal of Statistics in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali, 2004. Special Volume of the Journal of Statistical Studies in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his 65th Birthday Anniversary, 2002.   == Notes and references ==   == External links == Dr. Mir Masoom Ali Homepage Department of Mathematical Sciences at Ball State University Ball State University Information about George and Frances Ball Distinguished Professor Midwest Biopharmaceutical Statistics Workshop (MBSW) 30th Annual MBSW American Statistics Association Royal Statistical Society Webcite Bangladesh Academy of Sciences International Statistical Institute Institute of Mathematical Statistics

Mollie Orshansky (January 9, 1915 – December 18, 2006) was an American economist and statistician who, in 1963–65, developed the Orshansky Poverty Thresholds, which are used in the United States as a measure of the income that a household must not exceed to be counted as poor.   == Life and career == Miss Orshansky was born January 9, 1915, the third of six daughters of Samuel and Fannie Orshansky, Jewish immigrants who settled in the Bronx after leaving Ukraine. She attended Hunter College High School, and received an A.B. in mathematics and statistics from Hunter College in 1935. She continued graduate studies in economics and statistics at the Department of Agriculture Graduate School and American University. In 1939 she became a research clerk with the Children's Bureau, working on biometric studies of child health, growth, and nutrition. In January 1942, as a statistician in the New York City Department of Health, she worked on a survey of the incidence of, and therapies for, pneumonia. In 1945, Orshansky moved to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, where she spent the next thirteen years a family economist, director of the Program Statistics Division, and a food economist. In 1958, Orshansky joined the Social Security Administration as a social science research analyst in the Office of Research and Statistics. In this capacity she was responsible for analytical studies to measure income adequacy, family welfare and patterns of family income. In 1963 she developed the official measure of poverty used by the U.S. government (see Poverty in the United States). She used the cost of a nutritionally adequate diet as the basis for a cost-of-living estimate and to calculate a cost of living for families of different sizes and composition. In 1976, Orshansky received the Distinguished Service Award in recognition for her leadership in creating the first nationally accepted measures of income adequacy and applying them to public policy. She retired in 1982. She was hospitalized in the autumn of 2001 and a legal battle ensued over her care. Orshansky was taken to New York according to her wishes, but a judge who had appointed a guardian tried to compel her return to Washington DC. The judge was overruled on appeal, and Orshansky died in Manhattan several years later.   == Popular culture == Orshansky's development of the Poverty Thresholds was a plot element in an episode of the United States television program The West Wing. In the episode "The Indians in the Lobby," the federal government was considering a reclassification of poverty forty years later that would have made use of a new formula to add four million additional citizens to the category. Orshansky, a native-born U.S. citizen, was characterized incorrectly in the show as an Eastern European immigrant who created a United States "cost of living formula ... based on life in Poland during the Cold War."   == References ==   == External links == A Chronological Bibliography of Mollie Orshansky’s Publications (Including Congressional Testimony). Compiled and annotated by Gordon M. Fisher, at hhs.gov

Morris Herman DeGroot (June 8, 1931 – November 2, 1989) was an American statistician.   == Biography == Born in Scranton, Pennsylvania, DeGroot graduated from Roosevelt University and earned master's and doctor's degrees from the University of Chicago. DeGroot joined Carnegie Mellon in 1957 and became a University Professor, the school's highest faculty position. He was the founding editor of the review journal Statistical Science.   == Academic works == He wrote six books, edited four volumes and authored over one hundred papers. Most of his research was on the theory of rational decision-making under uncertainty. His Optimal Statistical Decisions, published in 1970, is still recognized as one of the great books in the field. His undergraduate text, Probability and Statistics, published in 1975, is widely recognized as a classic textbook.   === Books === DeGroot, M.H. & M.J. Schervish (2011), Probability and Statistics, 4th Ed, Pearson, ISBN 978-0-3215-0046-5 DeGroot, M.H. & M.J. Schervish (2011), Student Solutions Manual for Probability and Statistics, Pearson, ISBN 978-0-3217-1598-2 DeGroot, M.H. and M.J. Schervish (2002). Probability and Statistics (third ed.). Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-201-52488-8.  DeGroot, M.H. & M.J. Schervish (1989), Probability and Statistics, 2nd Ed, Wiley, ISBN 978-0-2011-1366-2 DeGroot, Morris H., Optimal Statistical Decisions. Wiley Classics Library. 2004. (Originally published (1970) by McGraw-Hill.) ISBN 0-471-68029-X. DeGroot, M.H., S.E. Fienberg & J.B. Kadane (1994), Statistics and the Law (1994), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-4710-5538-9 DeGroot, M.H. and R.M. Cyert (1987). Bayesian Analysis and Uncertainty in Economic Theory. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-7471-8.    == Awards and honors == DeGroot was elected fellow of the American Statistical Association, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the International Statistical Institute, the Econometric Society and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. ISBA's DeGroot Prize is named for him.   == See also == Becker–DeGroot–Marschak method   == References ==   == Further reading == "Biography of Morris H. DeGroot", Statistical Science, Vol. 6, No. 1. (Feb., 1991), pp. 3–14. "Morris DeGroot, 58, A Statistics Professor", Obituary, New York Times, November 3, 1989.   == External links == Morris H. DeGroot at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Nathaniel Read "Nate" Silver (born January 13, 1978) is an American statistician and writer who analyzes baseball (see sabermetrics) and elections (see psephology). He is currently the editor-in-chief of ESPN's FiveThirtyEight blog and a Special Correspondent for ABC News. Silver first gained public recognition for developing PECOTA, a system for forecasting the performance and career development of Major League Baseball players, which he sold to and then managed for Baseball Prospectus from 2003 to 2009. After Silver successfully called the outcomes in 49 of the 50 states in the 2008 U.S. Presidential election, in 2009 Silver was named one of The World's 100 Most Influential People by Time. In 2010, the FiveThirtyEight blog was licensed for publication by The New York Times. In 2012 and 2013, FiveThirtyEight won Webby Awards as the "Best Political Blog" from the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. In the 2012 United States presidential election between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney, Silver correctly predicted the winner of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In July 2013, FiveThirtyEight was sold to ESPN, and Silver became its Editor in Chief. The ESPN-owned FiveThirtyEight launched on March 17, 2014. The site focused on a broad range of subjects under the rubric of "data journalism". Silver's book, The Signal and the Noise, was published in September 2012. It subsequently reached The New York Times best seller list for nonfiction, and was named by Amazon.com as the #1 best nonfiction book of 2012. The Signal and the Noise won the 2013 Phi Beta Kappa Award in Science. The book has been published in nine foreign languages: Chinese (separate editions in traditional and simplified characters), Czech, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Spanish, and Romanian. Having earned a bachelor's degree from The University of Chicago in 2000, Silver has since been awarded four honorary doctoral degrees: from Ripon College (2013), The New School (2013), The University of Leuven (2013), and Amherst College (2014).   == Early life == Silver was born in East Lansing, Michigan, the son of Sally (née Thrun), a community activist, and Brian David Silver, a former chair of the political science department at Michigan State University. Silver's mother's family, of English and German descent, includes several distinguished men and women, including his maternal great-grandfather, Harmon Lewis, who was president of the Alcoa Steamship Company, Inc. Silver has been known to describe himself as "half-Jewish" (Silver's father is Jewish). Silver showed a proficiency in math from a young age. According to journalist William Hageman, "Silver caught the baseball bug when he was 6.... It was 1984, the year the Detroit Tigers won the World Series. The Tigers became his team and baseball his sport. And if there's anything that goes hand in glove with baseball, it's numbers, another of Silver's childhood interests ("It's always more interesting to apply it to batting averages than algebra class"). As a student at East Lansing High School, in 1996 Silver won first place in the State of Michigan in the 49th annual John S. Knight Scholarship Contest for senior high school debaters. Silver first showed his journalism skills as a writer and opinion page editor for The Portrait, East Lansing High School's student newspaper, from 1993–1996. In 2000, Silver graduated with Honors with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics from the University of Chicago. He also wrote for the Chicago Weekly News and the Chicago Maroon. He spent his third year at the London School of Economics.   == Career ==   === Economic consultant: 2000–2003 === After college graduation in 2000, Silver worked for three and a half years as an economic consultant with KPMG in Chicago. When asked in 2009, "What is your biggest regret in life?" Silver responded, "Spending four years of my life at a job I didn't like". While employed at KPMG, however, Silver continued to nurture his lifelong interest in baseball and statistics, and on the side he began to work on his PECOTA system for projecting player performance and careers. He quit his job at KPMG in April 2004 and for a time earned his living mainly by playing online poker.   === Baseball analyst: 2003–2008 === In 2003, Silver became a writer for Baseball Prospectus (BP), after having sold PECOTA to BP in return for a partnership interest. After resigning from KPMG in 2004, he took the position of Executive Vice-President, later renamed Managing Partner of BP. Silver further developed PECOTA and wrote a weekly column under the heading "Lies, Damned Lies". He applied sabermetric techniques to a broad range of topics including forecasting the performance of individual players, the economics of baseball, metrics for the valuation of players, and developing an Elo rating system for Major League baseball. Between 2003 and 2009, Silver co-authored the Baseball Prospectus annual book of Major League Baseball forecasts, as well as other books, including Mind Game: How the Boston Red Sox Got Smart, Won a World Series, and Created a New Blueprint for Winning, Baseball Between the Numbers, and It Ain't Over 'til It's Over: The Baseball Prospectus Pennant Race Book. He contributed articles about baseball to ESPN.com, Sports Illustrated, Slate, the New York Sun, and The New York Times. Silver authored more than 200 articles for Baseball Prospectus.   ==== PECOTA ====  PECOTA (Player Empirical Comparison and Optimization Test Algorithm) is a statistical system that projects the future performance of hitters and pitchers. It is designed primarily for two uses: fans interested in fantasy baseball, and professionals in the baseball business trying to predict the performance and valuation of major league players. Unlike most other baseball projection systems, PECOTA relies on matching a given current player to a set of "comparable" players whose past performance can serve as a guide to how the given current player is likely to perform in the future. Unlike most other such systems, PECOTA also calculates a range of probable performance levels rather than a single predicted value on a given measure such as earned run average or batting average. PECOTA projections were first published by Baseball Prospectus in the 2003 edition of its annual book as well as online by BaseballProspectus.com. Silver produced the PECOTA forecasts for each Major League Baseball season from 2003 through 2009.   === Political analyst and blogger: 2008–present ===   ==== FiveThirtyEight blog ====   ===== Creation and motivation ===== On November 1, 2007, while still employed by Baseball Prospectus, Silver began publishing a diary under the pseudonym "Poblano" on the progressive political blog Daily Kos. Silver set out to analyze quantitative aspects of the political game to enlighten a broader audience. Silver reports that "he was stranded in a New Orleans airport when the idea of FiveThirtyEight.com came to him. 'I was just frustrated with the analysis. ... I saw a lot of discussion about strategy that was not all that sophisticated, especially when it came to quantitative things like polls and demographics'". His forecasts of the 2008 United States presidential primary elections drew a lot of attention, including being cited by The New York Times Op-Ed columnist William Kristol. On March 7, 2008, while still writing as "Poblano," Silver established his own blog, FiveThirtyEight.com. Often colloquially referred to as just 538, the website takes its name from the number of electors in the United States electoral college. Silver described his partisan orientation as follows in the FAQ on his website: "My state [Illinois] has non-partisan registration, so I am not registered as anything. I vote for Democratic candidates the majority of the time (though by no means always). This year, I have been a supporter of Barack Obama". With respect to the impartiality of his electoral projections, Silver stated, "Are [my] results biased toward [my] preferred candidates? I hope not, but that is for you to decide. I have tried to disclose as much about my methodology as possible". On May 30, 2008, Poblano revealed his identity to FiveThirtyEight.com readers. On June 1, 2008, Silver published a two-page Op-Ed article in the New York Post outlining the rationale underlying his focus on the statistical aspects of politics. He first appeared on national television on CNN's American Morning on June 13, 2008.   ===== 2008 election and aftermath ===== Shortly after the November 4 election, ESPN writer Jim Caple observed, "Forget Cole Hamels and the Phillies. No one in baseball had a more impressive fall than Nate Silver.... [R]ight now Silver is exhausted. He barely slept the last couple weeks of the campaign—'By the end, it was full-time plus'—and for that matter, he says he couldn't have kept it up had the campaign lasted two days longer. Plus, he has his Baseball Prospectus duties. 'We write our [Baseball Prospectus 2009] book from now through the first of the year,' [Silver] said. 'I have a week to relax and then it gets just as busy again. In February 2009 I will just have to find an island in the Caribbean and throw my BlackBerry in the ocean'". Later in November 2008, Silver signed a contract with Penguin Group USA to write two books, reportedly for a $700,000 advance. Silver was invited to be a speaker at TED 2009 in February 2009, and keynote speaker at the 2009 South by Southwest (SXSW) Interactive conference (March 2009). While maintaining his FiveThirtyEight.com website, in January 2009 Silver began a monthly feature column, "The Data", in Esquire as well as contributed occasional articles to other media such as The New York Times and the Wall Street Journal. He also tried his luck in the 2009 World Series of Poker. The success of his FiveThirtyEight.com blog marked the effective end of Silver's career as baseball analyst, though he continued to devote some attention to sports statistics and sports economics in his blog. In March 2009, he stepped down as Managing Partner of Baseball Prospectus and handed over responsibility for producing future PECOTA projections to other Baseball Prospectus staff members. In April 2009, he appeared as an analyst on ESPN's Baseball Tonight. After March 2009, he published only two "Lies, Damned Lies" columns on BaseballProspectus.com. In November 2009, ESPN introduced a new Soccer Power Index (SPi), designed by Nate Silver, for predicting the outcome of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. He published a post-mortem after the tournament, comparing his predictions to those of alternative rating systems. In April 2010, in an assignment for New York Magazine, Silver created a quantitative index of "The Most Livable Neighborhoods in New York".   ===== Transition to The New York Times ===== On June 3, 2010, Silver announced on FiveThirtyEight.com,  In the near future, the blog will "re-launch" under a NYTimes.com domain. It will retain its own identity (akin to other Times blogs like DealBook), but will be organized under the News:Politics section. Once this occurs, content will no longer be posted at FiveThirtyEight.com on an ongoing basis, and the blog will re-direct to the new URL. In addition, I will be contributing content to the print edition of The New York Times, and to the Sunday Magazine. The partnership agreement, which is structured as a license, has a term of three years.  The New York Times "FiveThirtyEight: Nate Silver's Political Calculus" commenced on August 25, 2010, with the publication of "New Forecast Shows Democrats Losing 6 to 7 Senate Seats". From that date the blog focused almost exclusively on forecasting the outcomes of the 2010 U.S. Senate and U.S. House of Representatives elections as well as state gubernatorial contests. Silver's Times Sunday Magazine feature first appeared on November 19, 2010, under the heading "Go Figure". It was later titled "Acts of Mild Subversion". While blogging for The Times, Silver also worked on his book about prediction, which was published in September 2012. At that time, Silver began to drop hints that after 2012 he would turn his attention to matters other than detailed statistical forecasting of elections. As reported in New York magazine: " 'I view my role now as providing more of a macro-level skepticism, rather than saying this poll is good or this poll is evil,' he says. And in four [years], he might be even more macro, as he turns his forecasting talents to other fields. 'I’m 97 percent sure that the FiveThirtyEight model will exist in 2016,' he says, 'but it could be someone else who’s running it or licensing it.'" During the last year of FiveThirtyEight's license to The Times, it drew a very large volume of online traffic to the paper:  The Times does not release traffic figures, but a spokesperson said yesterday that Silver’s blog provided a significant—and significantly growing, over the past year—percentage of Times pageviews. This fall, visits to the Times’ political coverage (including FiveThirtyEight) have increased, both absolutely and as a percentage of site visits. But FiveThirtyEight’s growth is staggering: where earlier this year, somewhere between 10 and 20 percent of politics visits included a stop at FiveThirtyEight, last week that figure was 71 percent.  But Silver’s blog has buoyed more than just the politics coverage, becoming a significant traffic-driver for the site as a whole. Earlier this year, approximately 1 percent of visits to the New York Times included FiveThirtyEight. Last week, that number was 13 percent. Yesterday, it was 20 percent. That is, one in five visitors to the sixth-most-trafficked U.S. news site took a look at Silver’s blog.   ===== Departure from The Times ===== In an online chat session a week after the 2012 election Silver commented: "As tempting as it might be to pull a Jim Brown/Sandy Koufax and just mic-drop/retire from elections forecasting, I expect that we'll be making forecasts in 2014 and 2016. Midterm elections can be dreadfully boring, unfortunately. But the 2016 G.O.P. primary seems almost certain to be epic". In late November 2012, Times executive editor Jill Abramson declared her wish to keep Silver and his blog: "We would love to have Nate continue to be part of the New York Times family, and to expand on what he does," she said. "We know he began in sports anyway, so it is not an exclusively political product. I am excited to talk to Nate when he finishes his book tour about ways to expand that kind of reporting". On July 22, 2013, ESPN announced that it had acquired ownership of the FiveThirtyEight website and brand, and that "Silver will serve as editor-in-chief of the site and will build a team of journalists, editors, analysts and contributors in the coming months". The New York Times public editor Margaret Sullivan wrote upon Silver's decision to leave for ESPN:  I don’t think Nate Silver ever really fit into the Times culture and I think he was aware of that. He was, in a word, disruptive. Much like the Brad Pitt character in the movie “Moneyball” disrupted the old model of how to scout baseball players, Nate disrupted the traditional model of how to cover politics.  She added, "A number of traditional and well-respected Times journalists disliked his work". Later, Sullivan wrote in The Times that "I don’t feel so good about not being able to investigate every complaint from every individual reader fully, or about making some misjudgments in individual posts — my Nate Silver commentary, among others, has probably been off-base...". New York magazine reported that executive editor Jill Abramson "put on a full-court press" to keep Silver at The Times and that "for Abramson, Silver was a tentpole attraction for her favorite subject, national politics, and brought the kind of buzz she thought valuable," but the company's CEO and President Mark Thompson "confirmed that keeping Silver was not at the top of his agenda". The article stated that "the major reason Silver left was because he felt it was Thompson who had not committed to building his franchise. The mixed signals from Thompson and Abramson—his lack of enthusiasm for committing resources to Silver, her desire to keep a major star—frustrated Silver and his lawyer".   ===== FiveThirtyEight under ESPN ownership ===== When FiveThirtyEight was relaunched under ESPN's ownership on March 17, 2014, Silver outlined the scope of topics that would be covered under the rubric of "data journalism":  We’ve expanded our staff from two full-time journalists to 20 and counting. Few of them will focus on politics exclusively; instead, our coverage will span five major subject areas — politics, economics, science, life and sports.  Our team also has a broad set of skills and experience in methods that fall under the rubric of data journalism. These include statistical analysis, but also data visualization, computer programming and data-literate reporting. So in addition to written stories, we’ll have interactive graphics and features. Within a couple of months we’ll launch a podcast, and we’ll be collaborating with ESPN Films and Grantland to produce original documentary films.   ==== FiveThirtyEight's election forecasts ====   ===== 2008 U.S. elections =====  In March 2008, Silver established his blog FiveThirtyEight.com, in which he developed a system for tracking polls and forecasting the outcome of the 2008 general election. At the same time, he continued making forecasts of the 2008 Democratic primary elections. That several of his forecasts based on demographic analysis proved to be substantially more accurate than those of the professional pollsters gained visibility and professional credibility for "Poblano," the pseudonym that Silver was then using. After the North Carolina and Indiana primaries on May 6 the popularity of FiveThirtyEight.com "really exploded. Silver recalls the scenario: 'I know the polls show it's really tight in NC, but we think Obama is going to win by thirteen, fourteen points, and he did. ... Any time you make a prediction like that people give you probably too much credit for it.... But after that [Silver's and the website's popularity] started to really take off. It's pretty nonlinear, once you get one mention in the mainstream media, other people [quickly follow suit]'". As a CNET reporter wrote on election eve, "Even though Silver launched the site as recently as March, its straightforward approach, daring predictions, and short but impressive track record has put it on the map of political sites to follow. The Washington Post featured Silver in its 14th annual election prediction contest this year, and he'll be reporting on Tuesday night's results with Dan Rather on HDNet". Silver's final 2008 presidential election forecast accurately predicted the winner of 49 of the 50 states as well as the District of Columbia (missing only the prediction for Indiana). As his model predicted, the races in Missouri and North Carolina were particularly close. He also correctly predicted the winners of every U.S. Senate race. The accuracy of his predictions won him further acclaim, including abroad, and added to his reputation as a leading political prognosticator. Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign signed off on a proposal to share all of its private polling with Silver. After signing a confidentiality agreement, Silver was granted access to hundreds of polls the campaign had conducted.   ===== 2010 U.S. elections =====  Shortly after FiveThirtyEight relocated to The New York Times, Silver introduced his prediction models for the 2010 elections to the U.S. Senate, the U.S. House of Representatives, and state Governorships. Each of these models relied initially on a combination of electoral history, demographics, and polling. Silver eventually published detailed forecasts and analyses of the results for all three sets of elections. He correctly predicted the winner in 34 of the 37 contested Senate races. His 2010 congressional mid-term predictions were not as accurate as those made in 2008, but were still within the reported confidence interval. Silver predicted a Republican pickup of 54 seats in the House of Representatives; the GOP won 63 seats. Of the 37 gubernatorial races, FiveThirtyEight correctly predicted the winner of 36.   ===== 2012 U.S. elections =====  Although throughout 2011 Silver devoted a lot of attention on his blog to the 2012 Republican party primaries, his first effort to handicap the 2012 Presidential general election appeared as the cover story in The New York Times Magazine a year prior to the election: "Is Obama Toast? Handicapping the 2012 Election". Accompanying the online release of this article, Silver also published "Choose Obama's Re-Election Adventure", an interactive toy that allowed readers to predict the outcome of the election based on their assumptions about three variables: President Obama's favorability ratings, the rate of GDP growth, and how conservative the Republican opponent would be. This analysis stimulated a lot of critical discussion. While publishing numerous stories on the Republican primary elections, in mid-February 2012 Silver reprised and updated his previous Magazine story with another one, "What Obama Should Do Next". This story painted a more optimistic picture of President Obama's re-election chances. A companion article on his FiveThirtyEight blog, "The Fundamentals Now Favor Obama", explained how the model and the facts on the ground had changed between November and February. Silver published the first iteration of his 2012 general election forecasts on June 7, 2012. According to the model, at that time Barack Obama was projected to win 291 electoral votes—21 more than the 270 required for a majority. Obama then had an estimated 61.8% chance of winning a majority. On the morning of the November 6, 2012, presidential election, the final update of Silver's model at 10:10 A.M. gave President Barack Obama a 90.9% chance of winning a majority of the 538 electoral votes. Both in summary tables and in an electoral map, Silver forecast the winner of each state. At the conclusion of that day, when Mitt Romney had conceded to Barack Obama, Silver's model had correctly predicted the winner of every one of the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Silver, along with at least three academic-based analysts—Drew Linzer, Simon Jackman, and Josh Putnam—who also aggregated polls from multiple pollsters—thus was not only broadly correct about the election outcome, but also specifically predicted the outcomes for the 9 swing states. In contrast, individual pollsters were less successful. For example, Rasmussen Reports "missed on six of its nine swing-state polls".   == Book ==  The Signal and The Noise was published in the United States on September 27, 2012. It reached the New York Times Best Sellers list as #12 for non-fiction hardback books after its first week in print. It dropped to #20 in the second week, before rising to #13 in the third, and remaining on the non-fiction hardback top 15 list for the following 13 weeks, with a highest weekly ranking of #4. Sales increased after the election on November 6, jumping 800% and becoming the second best seller on Amazon. The book describes methods of mathematical model building using probability and statistics. Silver takes a big-picture approach to using statistical tools, combining sources of unique data (e.g., timing a minor league ball player's fastball using a radar gun), with historical data and principles of sound statistical analysis; Silver argues that many of these are violated by many pollsters and pundits who nonetheless have important media roles. Case studies in the book include baseball, elections, climate change, the financial crash, poker, and weather forecasting. These different topics illustrate different statistical principles. As a reviewer in The New York Times notes: "It’s largely about evaluating predictions in a variety of fields, from finance to weather to epidemiology. We learn about a handful of successes: when, for instance, meteorologists predict a hurricane’s landfall 72 hours in advance.... But mostly we learn about failures. It turns out we’re not even close to predicting the next catastrophic earthquake or the spread of the next killer bird flu, despite the enormous amounts of brainpower trained on these questions in the past few decades".   == Blogs and other publications == Blogs FiveThirtyEight blog, now owned by ESPN Nate Silver's Baseball Prospectus article archive (2003–2009) Nate Silver's The Burrito Bracket (2007) Nate Silver's diaries as "Poblano" on Daily Kos (2007–2009) FiveThirtyEight.com from pre-NYT period (2008–2010) and from ESPN period (2013–) FiveThirtyEight/NYT (2010–2013) Other publications  Nate Silver, "The Most Livable Neighborhoods in New York: A Quantitative Index of the 50 Most Satisfying Places to Live," New York, April 11, 2010. Nate Silver, "The Influence Index," Time, April 29, 2010. Nate Silver and Walter Hickey, "Best Picture Math," Vanity Fair, March 2014. Gareth Cook (Editor), Nate Silver (Introduction). The Best American Infographics 2014, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0547974514. Review of two children's books, with an autobiographical comment: "Beautiful Minds: The Boy Who Loved Math and On a Beam of Light," The New York Times, July 12, 2013. Andrew Gelman, Nate Silver, Aaron S. Edlin, "What Is the Probability Your Vote Will Make a Difference," Economic Inquiry, 2012, 50(2): 321-326. As Silver pointed out in his review of the two children's books listed above, this publication gives him an Erdős number of 4. In addition to chapters in several issues of the Baseball Prospectus annual, Silver contributed chapters to one-off monographs edited by Baseball Prospectus, including: Mind Game: How the Boston Red Sox Got Smart, Won a World Series, and Created a New Blueprint for Winning. Steven Goldman, Ed. New York: Workman Publishing Co., 2005. ISBN 0-7611-4018-2. Baseball Between the Numbers: Why Everything You Know about the Game Is Wrong. Jonah Keri, Ed. New York: Basic Books, 2006. ISBN 0-465-00596-9 (hardback) and ISBN 0-465-00547-0 (paperback). It Ain't over 'til It's over: The Baseball Prospectus Pennant Race Book. Steven Goldman, Ed. New York: Basic Books. Hardback 2007. ISBN 0-465-00284-6; paperback 2008. ISBN 0-465-00285-4.   == Media == Silver's self-unmasking at the end of May 2008 brought him a lot of publicity focused on his combined skill as both baseball statistician-forecaster and political statistician-forecaster, including articles about him in the Wall Street Journal, Newsweek, Science News, and his hometown Lansing State Journal. In early June he began to cross-post his daily "Today's Polls" updates on "The Plank" in The New Republic. Also, Rasmussen Reports began to use the FiveThirtyEight.com poll averages for its own tracking of the 2008 state-by-state races. He appeared on CNN's American Morning and D.L. Hughley Breaks the News, MSNBC's Countdown with Keith Olbermann and Hardball with Chris Matthews, CNBC's Fast Money, Comedy Central's The Colbert Report, WNYC's The Brian Lehrer Show, HDNet's Dan Rather Reports, Amy Goodman's Democracy Now!, PBS's The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, The Charlie Rose Show, and The Rachel Maddow Shows on both Air America Radio and MSNBC, and published articles in The New Republic, the New York Post, the Los Angeles Times, and Newsweek. In 2009 through 2012, Silver appeared as a political analyst on MSNBC, CNN and Bloomberg Television, PBS, NPR, Democracy Now!, The Charlie Rose Show, ABC News, and Current TV. Silver also appeared on the The Colbert Report (October 7, 2008 and November 5, 2012), The Daily Show (October 17, 2012 and November 7, 2012), and Real Time with Bill Maher (October 26, 2012). His forecasts and book were featured on CBS News Sunday Morning (November 4, 2012). That Silver accurately predicted the outcome of the 2012 presidential race, in the face of numerous public attacks on his forecasts by critics, inspired many articles in the press, ranging from Gizmodo, to online and mainstream newspapers, news and commentary magazines, business media, trade journals, media about media, and Scientific American, as well as a feature interview on The Today Show, a return appearance on The Daily Show, and an appearance on Morning Joe. Silver's first appearance on ABC News as Editor-in-Chief of the new FiveThirtyEight.com was on George Stephanopoulos's This Week on November 3, 2013.   == Recognition and awards == In September 2008, FiveThirtyEight became the first blog ever selected as a Notable Narrative by the Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University. November 2008: Crain's Chicago Business profiled Silver as one of Chicago's "40 under 40" notable young entrepreneurs. November 9, 2008: the New York Times called Silver "perhaps the most unlikely media star to emerge" out of "an election season of unlikely outcomes" and described FiveThirtyEight with its almost five million page views on Election Day as "one of the breakout online stars of the year". December 2008: Newsweek.com identified Silver's November 3, 2008 article "What to Watch For – An hour-by-hour guide to election night" as the 4th most viewed story on Newsweek.com in 2008. December 2008: named by The Daily Beast as one of the "Breakout Stars of 2008". February 2009: named by James Wolcott in Vanity Fair as one of the "Winners of 2008": "No shiny arrow shot swifter and loftier from obscurity to quotable authority than Nate Silver, whose FiveThirtyEight.com site became the expert sensation of the election season ... January 2009: Silver was named by Forbes.com to its third annual "Web Celeb 25", which "track[s] the biggest and brightest stars on the Web, the people who have turned their passions into new-media empires". April 2009: Silver was named as one of the "Rolling Stone 100: Agents of Change". April 27, 2009: named "Blogger of the Year" by The Week in its 6th annual Opinion Awards. April 30, 2009: Silver was named one of "The World's 100 Most Influential People" by TIME magazine. December 2009: Silver was recognized by The New York Times Magazine in its "Ninth Annual Year in Ideas" article for his "Forensic Polling Analysis" of the possible falsification of data by a polling firm. 2009: named "Speaker of the Year" by the intercollegiate Cross Examination Debate Association (CEDA). November 2010: John F. Harris, Editor-in-Chief of Politico writing in Forbes magazine, listed Nate Silver as one of seven bloggers among "The Most Powerful People on Earth". In December 2010: Out magazine included Silver on its list of the top 100 LGBT people of the year. May 2011: Presented the Henry Pringle Lecture at the Columbia Journalism School. March 2012: Crain's New York Business featured Silver as one of New York City's "Forty Under Forty" notable young entrepreneurs. May 2012: FiveThirtyEight won a Webby Award for "Best Political Blog" from the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences in the 16th annual Webby Awards. December 2012: Rolling Stone named Silver one of its Game Changers in 2012. December 2012: Out named Silver as Person of the Year. December 2012: Named by Washington Post columnist Chris Cillizza as having the "Best Year in Washington in 2012" among the "winners and losers of 2012". April 2013: Out ranked Silver No. 6 on its "Power List 50," the "7th annual ranked list of the gay men and women whose power and prestige is instrumental in influencing the way Americans think about, and engage with, the world". April 2013: FiveThirtyEight won a Webby Award for "Best Political Blog" from the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences in the 17th annual Webby Awards. May 2013: Silver was named by Fast Company as No. 1 of its "100 Most Creative People in Business 2013". May 12, 2013: Silver received an honorary Doctor of Science degree (Scientiæ Doctor honoris causa – D.Sc. h.c.) and gave the commencement address at Ripon College. May 24, 2013: Silver received an honorary Doctor of Literature degree (Doctor of Literature honoris causa) and presented a commencement address at The New School. June 2013: The University of Chicago granted Silver a "Professional Achievement Award" at its 72nd annual Alumni Awards Ceremony. June 2013: The S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University gave Silver the "i3 award for impact, innovation and influence" at its 13th annual Mirror Awards ceremony. August 2013: Presented the President's Invited Address at the Joint Statistical Meetings in Montreal, Canada. October 2013: Silver's The Signal and the Noise won the 2013 Phi Beta Kappa Award in Science, which recognizes "outstanding contributions by scientists to the literature of science". December 2013: The University of Leuven (KU Leuven) (Belgium) and the Leuven Statistics Research Centre awarded Silver an honorary doctoral degree "for his prominent role in the development, application, and dissemination of proper prediction methods in sports and in political sciences". January 2014: Silver was named to Advertising Age's "40 Under 40" list of "the Bright Young Stars of Marketing". May 25, 2014: Silver received a Doctorate of Humane Letters, honoris causa, from Amherst College. May 2015: Silver won the Warren J. Mitofsky Innovators Award from the American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) "for Contributions to the General Public and Mass Media in the Realm of Statistical Literacy and Thinking".   == Criticism == Silver has been criticized for inaccurate predictions. In January 2010, journalist and blogger Colby Cosh criticized Silver's performance during the Massachusetts special Senate election, saying he was "still arguing as late as Thursday afternoon that Coakley was the clear favourite; he changed his mind at midnight that evening and acknowledged that Scott Brown had a puncher’s chance." (Brown won the election.) Silver's quantitative focus on polling data, without insight from experience in political organizing or journalism, has been a recurring critique from experienced commentators. Huffington Post columnist Geoffrey Dunn described Silver as someone who "has never organized a precinct in his life, much less walked one, pontificating about the dynamics in the electoral processes as if he actually understood them." Considerable criticism during the 2012 elections came from political conservatives, who argued that Silver's election projections were politically biased against Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate for President. For example, Silver was accused of applying a double standard to his treatment of Rasmussen Reports polls, such as a 2010 analysis asserting a statistical bias in its methodology. Mendy Finkel of Daily Caller wrote that "Silver rigged his entire pollster ratings for the sole purpose of lowering Rasmussen's rank". Josh Jordan wrote in National Review that Silver clearly favored Obama and adjusted the weight he gave polls "based on what [he] think[s] of the pollster and the results and not based on what is actually inside the poll". On MSNBC's Morning Joe, host Joe Scarborough stated that Silver's prediction that day of a 73.6% chance of a win for Obama greatly exceeded the confidence of the Obama campaign itself, which Scarborough equated to that of the Romney campaign, both believing "they have a 50.1 percent chance of winning", and calling Silver an "ideologue" and a "joke". Silver responded with the offer of a $1,000 wager (for charity) over the outcome of the election. The New York Times public editor Margaret Sullivan, while defending Silver's analysis, characterized the wager as "a bad idea" as it gave the appearance of a partisan motive for Silver, and "inappropriate" for someone perceived as a Times journalist (although Silver was not a member of the newspaper's staff). After a post-election appearance by Silver on Joe Scarborough's Morning Joe, Scarborough published what he called a "(semi) apology," in which he concluded:  I won’t apologize to Mr. Silver for predicting an outcome that I had also been predicting for a year. But I do need to tell Nate I’m sorry for leaning in too hard and lumping him with pollsters whose methodology is as rigorous as the Simpsons’ strip mall physician, Dr. Nick. For those sins (and a multitude of others that I’m sure I don’t even know about), I am sorry. Politics is a messy sport. And just as ball players who drink beer and eat fried chicken in dugouts across America can screw up the smartest sabermatrician’s forecast, Nate Silver’s formula is sure to let his fervent admirers down from time to time. But judging from what I saw of him this morning, Nate is a grounded guy who admits as much in his book. I was too tough on him and there’s a 84.398264% chance I will be less dismissive of his good work in the future".  Silver's nondisclosure of the details of his analytical model has resulted in some skepticism. Washington Post journalist Ezra Klein wrote: "There are good criticisms to make of Silver's model, not the least of which is that, while Silver is almost tediously detailed about what's going on in the model, he won’t give out the code, and without the code, we can't say with certainty how the model works." Colby Cosh wrote that the model "is proprietary and irreproducible. That last feature makes it unwise to use Silver's model as a straw stand-in for "science", as if the model had been fully specified in a peer-reviewed journal". On August 13, 2014, Silver was criticized for comparing his own experience of being arrested with those of journalists and members of the public during protests and riots in response to the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri  In a series of eight consecutive postings to Twitter, Silver recounted a story of being arrested but later placating officers with the words "sorry guys, was just stressed out and having a rough day ... my bad!", after which he was given back his burrito to eat in his cell and received a ride home from officers. Silver later publicly apologized, describing his posts as being "misguided and naive".   == Personal life == Political orientation In a 2012 interview with Charlie Rose he stated, "I'd say I am somewhere in-between being a libertarian and a liberal. So if I were to vote it would be kind of a Gary Johnson versus Mitt Romney decision, I suppose." Family links Silver is a grandnephew of geologists Caswell Silver and Leon Silver. Personal Silver is openly gay. "I've always felt like something of an outsider. I've always had friends, but I've always come from an outside point of view. I think that's important. If you grow up gay, or in a household that's agnostic, when most people are religious, then from the get-go, you are saying that there are things that the majority of society believes that I don't believe," he told an interviewer in 2012. "When asked what made you feel more of a misfit, being gay or being a geek, he replied, 'Probably the numbers stuff since I had that from when I was six.'" When asked in 2008 if he had noticed people looking at him as a "gay icon," he responded, "I've started to notice it a little bit, although so far it seems like I'm more a subject of geek affection than gay affection". Silver discussed his sexuality in the context of growing up in East Lansing, in an article about the SCOTUS ruling in favor of recognizing same-sex marriage on the date of its announcement. He analysed the speed of the change of public sentiment, pointing out that the change over only several decades has been palpable to the current generations. Silver has long been interested in fantasy baseball, especially Scoresheet Baseball. While in college he served as an expert on Scoresheet Baseball for BaseballHQ. When he took up political writing, Silver abandoned his blog, The Burrito Bracket, in which he ran a one-and-done competition among the taquerias in his Wicker Park neighborhood in Chicago. Silver plays poker semi-professionally.   == Notes ==   == External links ==  Appearances on C-SPAN Appearances in the Internet Movie Database Interviews, appearances, presentations available on YouTube. Silver discussing his methodology for polling aggregation on Bloggingheads.tv (August 21, 2008) [video] TED 2009 talk about race and the 2008 U.S. presidential election (February 2009) [video] Archive of Esquire "The Data" series of articles, 2008-9 The Signal and the Noise "Authors at Google" talk (November 26, 2012) [video] "Serious Jibber-Jabber with Conan O'Brien" (December 7, 2012) [video] "A Conversation with Nate Silver" at MIT Communications Forum, (Seth Mnookin, interviewer) (February 28, 2013) [video] Video interview about his career in statistics at Joint Statistical Meeting, August 5, 2013 interview on Baseball Prospectus podcast "Effectively Wild (August 17, 2014) [audio]

Nils Lid Hjort (born 12 January 1953) is a Norwegian statistician, and has been a professor of mathematical statistics at the University of Oslo since 1991. Hjort's research themes are varied, with particularly noteworthy contributions in the fields of Bayesian probability (Beta processes for use in non- and semi-parametric models, particularly within survival analysis and event history analysis, but also with links to Indian buffet processes in machine learning), density estimation and nonparametric regression (local likelihood methodology), and model selection (focused information criteria and model averaging). An article on frequentist model averaging, with co-author Gerda Claeskens, was selected as Fast Breaking Paper in the field of mathematics by the Essential Science Indicators in 2005. He has also worked with spatial statistics, statistics of remote sensing, pattern recognition, etc. Hjort is a core member of the Centre of Excellence Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, on the scientific advisory board of the Centre for Innovation Statistics for Innovation, and also involved with the Centre for Biostatistical Modelling in the Medical Sciences, all within the University of Oslo. Hjort is an elected member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters since 1999, and was the third recipient of the Sverdrup Prize, awarded by the Norwegian Statistical Association in 2013. Hjort has also served on the editorial boards on various journals dedicated to the methodology and application of statistical research, including the Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, and the Annals of Statistics, and has been on the programme committees of numerous international conferences. He is leading the 2014–2018 Research Council of Norway funded project FocuStat: Focus Driven Statistical Inference With Complex Data at the University of Oslo. On the applied side, Hjort demonstrated in 1994 that there is a small but Olympically significant difference between inner-lane and outer-lane starts for 500 m speedskating races, after a systematic analysis of world sprint championships data, implying that the Olympic 500 m event has been unfair since 1924. As a result of Hjort's work and initiative, the International Skating Union and the International Olympic Committee changed the rules; since Nagano 1998 onwards, the sprint skaters race the 500 m twice, with one start in inner lane and one start in the outer lane. He is also a regular contributor to the Speedskating World magazine. Other applied work has involved analysis of literary texts. In the famous case of potential plagiarism where Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and others accused Mikhail Sholokhov of not being the rightful author of And Quiet Flows the Don, Hjort's analysis gives full support to Sholokhov. Hjort's other interests include Disney comics (where he has given public lectures and written scholarly articles for various publishers), chamber music and choir singing (taking part in more than ten CD recordings with Grex Vocalis), gøbbing (exchanging ideas with members of a think tank) and cross-country skiing. He has edited two books with the works of notable Disney comics artist Don Rosa. Nils Lid Hjort is one of five sons of Supreme Court lawyer Johan Hjort and Helga Lid, and his grandfathers were Supreme Court lawyer Johan Bernhard Hjort and ethnologist Nils Lid. Among his brothers is typographer, designer and rock music historian Christopher Hjort, and his cousins include writer and publisher Anders Heger, mayor of Tromsø Jens Johan Hjort, violinist and conductor Gottfried von der Goltz, and cellist Kristin von der Goltz.   == External links == List of Hjort's publications via Google Scholar Hjort's page with the University of Oslo The FocuStat website: Focus Driven Statistical Inference With Complex Data Interview on frequentist model averaging Essential Science Indicators interview regarding "this month's fast breaking paper in the field of Mathematics", August 2005 Mangfoldig talltrollmann Interview in forskning.no The physics of Santa Claus Hjort and other scholars argue for the existence of Santa Claus The annual World Cup Speedskating Contest Each year participants from a dozen countries compete for the Nils Lid Hjort trophy The Annual Ludwig von Drake Award Hjort was its first recipient The two Don Rosa books These feature Lancelot Pertwillaby and Captain Kentucky Speedskating Race of the Burg of Ducks With Disney comics artist Don Rosa The Olympic 500-m The Statistical Research Report that contributed to changing the Olympic Rules The Olympic 500-m, Appendix Part two of the Research Report The Olympic 1000-m Research implying an Olympically significant unfairness also for the 1000-m And Quiet Does not Flow the Don: Statistical Analysis of a Quarrel between Nobel Laureates Solzhenitsyn vs. Sholokhov, 2007 Bayesian Nonparametrics at the Isaac Newton Institute The research programme and conference on Bayesian Nonparametrics, 2007 Highly Structured Stochastic Systems Oxford University Press book, 2003 Model Selection and Model Averaging Cambridge University Press book, 2008 Bayesian Nonparametrics Cambridge University Press book, 2010

Octav Onicescu (Romanian pronunciation: [okˈtav oniˈt͡ʃesku]; August 20, 1892 – August 19, 1983) was a Romanian mathematician, member of the Romanian Academy, and founder of the Romanian school of probability theory and statistics.   == Biography == He was born in Botoşani, the son of Vlad Onicescu, from Ștefănești, Botoșani, and Ana, from Oniceni, Neamţ County. He graduated from the Botoşani A. T. Laurian High School in 1911 with a perfect average grade of 10. That same year, he entered the University of Bucharest, from where he graduated with degrees in mathematics and philosophy in 1913. From 1914 to 1916 he was a mathematics teacher at the military gymnasium of Dealu Monastery, near Târgovişte. From 1916 to 1918 he fought in World War I. In 1919, Onicescu went to study geometry at the University of Rome, under the guidance of Tullio Levi-Civita. He earned his Ph.D. in June, 1920 for a thesis titled Sopra gli spazi einsteiniani a gruppi continui di transformazione ("On Einstein manifolds and groups of continuous transformations"). The thesis, which dealt with problems in differential geometry related to Albert Einstein's theory of relativity, was defended in front of a jury of 11 mathematicians, including Levi-Civita, Vito Volterra, and Guido Castelnuovo. In the Fall of 1920 he went to Paris, where he gave talks in Jacques Hadamard's seminar at the Collège de France. While in Paris, he organized a seminar with other Romanian mathematicians, including Petre Sergescu, Şerban Gheorghiu, Alexandru Pantazi, and Şerban Coculescu. In 1922, he returned to Bucharest, where he embarked on a 40-year-long university career. In 1924, he started teaching the first college-level probability theory course in Romania. From 1928 on, he was professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Bucharest, and was appointed full professor in 1931. In 1930, he organized the School of Statistics and established an Institute of Calculus, serving as its director for many years. In 1936 he entered the Legionary Movement. The Romanian poet and mathematician Ion Barbu (Dan Barbilian) was a close friend of his. He was elected corresponding member of the Romanian Academy in 1933, and became full member on February 4, 1965. He was in charge of the Probability Theory section of the Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy. He died in Bucharest on the eve of his 91st birthday, after a short illness.   == Legacy == Onicescu was one of the founders of the Balkan Union of Mathematicians (in 1934) and of the International Centre for Mechanical Sciences in Udine (in 1968). The "Octav Onicescu" museum, founded in Botoşani in October 1995, houses furniture and memorabilia that belonged to him, including manuscripts, letters, diplomas, books, photographs, and military decorations. The memorial house doesn't exist anymore.   == References == (Romanian) Biography, at the Octav Onicescu National College, in Bucharest Marius Iosifescu, "Octav Onicescu, 1892-1983", International Statistical Review, vol. 54, no. 1 (1986), pp. 97–108 Christopher Charles Heyde and Eugene Seneta, "Statisticians of the Centuries", Springer, New York, 2006. ISBN 0-387-95329-9   == External links == Octav Onicescu at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Oskar Johann Viktor Anderson (Belarusian: Оскар Віктар Андэрсан; 2 August 1887, Minsk, Russian Empire – 12 February 1960, Munich, Germany) was a German-Russian mathematician. He was most famously known for his work on mathematical statistics.   == Life == Anderson was born from a German family in Minsk (now in Belarus), but soon moved to Kazan (Russia). His father, Nikolai Anderson, was professor in Finno-Ugric languages at the University of Kazan. His older brothers were the folklorist Walter Anderson and the astrophysicist Wilhelm Anderson. Oskar Anderson graduated from Kazan Gymnasium with a gold medal in 1906. After studying mathematics for one year at the University of Kazan, he moved to St. Petersburg to study economics at the Polytechnic Institute. From 1907 to 1915, he was Aleksandr Chuprov's assistant. In 1912 he started lecturing at a commercial school in St. Petersburg. In 1918 he took on a professorship in Kiev but he was forced to flee Russia in 1920 due to the Russian Revolution, first taking a post in Budapest (Hungary) before becoming a professor at the University of Economics at Varna (Bulgaria) in 1924. Anderson was one of the charter members of the Econometric Society, whose members also elected him to be a fellow of the society in 1933. In 1935 he was appointed director of the Statistical Institute for Economic Research at the University of Sofia and in 1942 he took up a full professorship of statistics at the University of Kiel, where he was joined by his brother Walter Anderson after the end of the second world war. In 1947 he took a position at the University of Munich, teaching there until 1956, when he retired.   == Writings == Über die repräsentative Methode und deren Anwendung auf die Aufarbeitung der Ergbnisse der bulgarischen landwirtschaftlichen Betriebszählung vom 31. Dezember 1926, München : Bayer. Statist. Landesamt, 1949 Die Saisonschwankungen in der deutschen Stromproduktion vor und nach dem Kriege , München : Inst. f. Wirtschaftsforschung, 1950   == External links == "Oskar Anderson". University of St. Andrews on Oskar Anderson. Retrieved March 15, 2005.  "Oskar Anderson". Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Famous scholars from Kiel. Retrieved November 16, 2015.    == References/Further reading ==  Sheynin, O.B. (1970). "Anderson, Oskar Johann Viktor". Dictionary of Scientific Biography 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 154–155. ISBN 0-684-10114-9.

Oswald "Ozzie", "Jake" Jacoby (December 8, 1902 – June 27, 1984) was an American contract bridge player and author, considered one of the greatest bridge players of all time. He also excelled at, and wrote about, other games including backgammon, gin rummy, and poker. He was from Dallas, Texas.   == Early life == Born in Brooklyn, he was taught to play whist at the age of six and played his first bridge at ten. During World War I, he joined the army at 15 by lying about his age but spent most of his time there playing poker. Dropping out of Columbia University as a math major to become an actuary, he became the youngest person ever to pass the examination of the Society of Actuaries at the age of 21. Having an exceptional aptitude for mathematics, Jacoby could multiply three and four digit numbers in his head without benefit of paper. During World War II and the Korean War, he applied these abilities to counterintelligence and cryptanalysis being referred to as a human computer; later, he lectured on probability at M.I.T. and wrote books on mathematics. However, his passion and lifelong focus was games, especially bridge.   == Bridge career == By the end of the twenties, Jacoby had achieved fame as a player at both auction and contract bridge, further gaining international recognition when chosen by Sidney Lenz to be his partner in the famous Culbertson–Lenz match of 1931. Jacoby's more aggressive bidding style confused Lenz and Jacoby withdrew after Lenz's criticism. Years later the analyst Terence Reese wrote, "That the Culbertsons did not win more easily ... was due to the fact that Jacoby was a player of quite different class from any of the others". Jacoby subsequently solidified his position as the most successful tournament player in the thirties as a member of the famous "Four Horsemen" from 1931 to 1933 and the "Four Aces" from 1933 to 1941, dominating tournament play. He is recognized by the American Contract Bridge League (ACBL) as Life Master #2, one of ten named in 1936. LM #1 is David Burnstine, his partner on the Four Horsemen and co-founder of the Four Aces. He pionereed many bidding ideas, including the Jacoby transfer and Jacoby 2NT bids. Throughout his career, he also worked as a bridge columnist; a prolific writer, he wrote over 10,000 newspaper articles on bridge, and his many books include not only bridge but volumes on poker, gin rummy, canasta, and the mathematics of card games and gambling, which he played at high stakes. He also released a record titled How to Win at Championship Bridge. Jacoby captained the North American and US teams that won the Bermuda Bowl in both 1970 and 1971. During a long playing career, he won tournaments with many partners including his son and co-author, James Jacoby (1933–1991), as well as his wife of more than 50 years, Mary Zita Jacoby. Terminally ill, his final tournament victory came in a major event at the ACBL North American Bridge Championships late in 1983, as a member of the team-of four champions for the Reisinger trophy with Edgar Kaplan, Norman Kay, Bill Root and Richard Pavlicek. In the same year, he was named Personality of the Year by the international bridge writers (Charles H. Goren Award). He died at his Dallas home of cancer on June 27, 1984. Jacoby, Lenz, and Milton Work were named to its hall of fame by The Bridge World in 1965, which brought the number of members to six. They were all made founding members of the ACBL Hall of Fame in 1995.   == Bridge accomplishments ==   === Honors === ACBL Hall of Fame, 1965 ACBL Honorary Member of the Year 1967 Honorary World Bridge Federation Grand Master   === Awards === Charles H. Goren Award (Personality of the Year), 1983, from the International Bridge Press Association McKenney Trophy 1959, 1961, 1962, 1963 Herman Trophy 1960   === Wins === IBL World Championship (1) 1935 North American Bridge Championships (31) Vanderbilt (7) 1931, 1934, 1935, 1937, 1938, 1946, 1965 Asbury Park Trophy (now Spingold) (4) 1931, 1932, 1933, 1937 Masters Teams-of-Four (now Spingold) (2) 1934, 1936 Spingold (5) 1938, 1939, 1945, 1950, 1959 Chicago (now Reisinger) (1) 1955 Reisinger (1) 1983 Men's Board-a-Match Teams (2) 1952, 1959 Master Mixed Teams (1) 1968 Life Master Pairs (1) 1936 Fall National Open Pairs (2) 1935, 1960 Open Pairs (1) 1964 Men's Pairs (3) 1934, 1939, 1949 Master Individual (1) 1935  United States Bridge Association (5) Grand National Open Teams (3) 1934, 1935, 1937 Open Pairs (2) 1936, 1937  American Bridge League (2) Men's Teams (2) 1931, 1932   === Runners-up === North American Bridge Championships (21) Vanderbilt (3) 1930, 1941, 1949 Spingold (4) 1941, 1948, 1949, 1957 Chicago (now Reisinger) (5) 1931, 1932, 1939, 1956, 1960 Men's Board-a-Match Teams (2) 1954, 1956 Master Mixed Teams (2) 1935, 1941 Life Master Pairs (2) 1939, 1941 Fall National Open Pairs (1) 1932 Hilliard Mixed Pairs (2) 1931, 1939   == Other games == A poker player and author on the subject, Jacoby was convicted of a gambling charge in 1944 while in the navy but acquitted of a charge of conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman. Although he did not pursue a career in competitive chess and did not write on the game, he was nevertheless a strong player. When in college, Jacoby beat US chess champion Frank Marshall, and in 1963, in a rapid-transit game, he played a draw with Tigran Petrosian, the then world champion. Jacoby was also an expert backgammon player, and in 1972 he was crowned World Backgammon Champion. In 1970, he wrote The Backgammon Book with John R. Crawford, which is considered the first book to deal with backgammon from an analytical viewpoint. The Jacoby Rule, which states that gammons and backgammons count only after the cube has been turned, is named after him.   == Publications ==  Bridge Famous hands of the Culbertson-Lenz match, 1932 Watson on the play of the hand at contract bridge, 1934. Foreword by Oswald Jacoby. The four aces system of contract bridge, 1935 Five-suit bridge, 1938 What's new in bridge, 1954 Hear how to play winning bridge, 1960 The complete book of duplicate bridge, 1965 Win at bridge with Jacoby & son, 1966 Jacoby transfer bids, 1981 Major suit raises, 1981 Improve Your Bridge With Oswald Jacoby: 125 Bridge Hands from the Master, 1983, ISBN 0-07-032238-4 Win at bridge with Oswald Jacoby : America's winningest bridge champion, 1963 Win at bridge with Jacoby modern, 1973 Poker Poker, 1940 Oswald Jacoby on Poker ... Revised edition, 1948 Winning poker, 1949 Oswald Jacoby on Poker, 1981, ISBN 978-0-385-17590-6 Backgammon The Backgammon Book (with John R. Crawford), 1970, ISBN 0-670-14409-6 Rummy Laws of Oklahoma, 1946 Oswald Jacoby on Oklahoma, the wild, wild rummy game, 1948 How to Win at Gin Rummy, 1978 Oswald Jacoby on Gin Rummy, etc., 1947 Canasta Oswald Jacoby's Complete Canasta, 1950 How to win at canasta, 1951 Other card games The book of card game rules and strategies, 1989 The fireside book of cards, 1957 Oswald Jacoby on Gambling, 1963, New Recreations with Magic Squares (with William H. Benson), 1976 Jacoby on card games, 1986 Magic cubes : new recreations, 1981 Mathematics Intriguing Mathematical Problems (with William H. Benson), 1996 How to figure the odds, 1947 Mathematics for pleasure, 1962   == Notes ==   == References ==   == External links == Citation at the ACBL Hall of Fame Oswald Jacoby international record at the World Bridge Federation. Biography at Bridge Bum Biographical information at the Wayback Machine (archived December 3, 2002) at Bridge Guys Oswald Jacoby at Library of Congress Authorities, with 29 catalog records James Jacoby at Library of Congress Authorities, with 6 catalog records

P. N. Mari Bhat (1951–2007), distinguished Indian demographer, was a student of Samuel H. Preston at the University of Pennsylvania from where he received his Ph.D. in 1987. At the time of his death he was the director of the International Institute of Population Science (IIPS) in Mumbai, which he formerly attended as a student.   == Professional career == P. N. Mari Bhat was an associate professor at the Center of Developmental Studies, Thiruvananthapuram, 1987-90. From there he moved on to become the director of the Population Research Center, Dharwad, between 1991 and 1997. Pravin Visaria (1937-2001), the then Director of Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi persuaded Bhat to move to New Delhi and join IEG as a Professor. Bhat joined IIPS in 2005 as its Director. He was a Visiting Professor at the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada, in 1996.   == Research == Bhat’s research career was focused exclusively on Indian demography. His work covered three major areas of Indian demography: mortality, fertility and nuptiality. In his research he always emphasized the primacy of facts and the importance of opinion to be based on facts. Beginning with his first major work, a monograph on Indian vital rates for 1961-81 co-authored with Tim Dyson and Samuel Preston and published in 1984 by the National Academy of Science, he showed exceptional grasp of technical demography, and was able to apply his skills in illuminating issues of public and policy concern. His work could be classified under two headings: the first, work dealing with the compilation and derivation of various demographic estimates and related methodologies; and second, work dealing with various theoretical issues. Bhat’s work provides an unparalleled source for Indian demographic data. Below are the selected references that show the breadth of his work on demographic estimates: 1984: Estimating the Incidence of Widow and Widower Remarriages in India from Census Data ("Population Studies", 38, 1, pp 89-103, co-authored with R Kanbargi). 1990: Fertility and Mortality in Colonial India ("Economic and Political Weekly, 25 (37): 2107-08). 1998: Demographic Estimates for Post-Independence India: A New Integration (Demography India, 27(1), 23-27). 2002: Maternal Mortality in India: An Update ("Studies in Family Planning", 33(3): 227-36). 2004: Indian Demographic Scenario: Vision 2020 in "Planning Commission (ed), India Vision 2020: The Report", Academic Foundation, New Delhi Besides demographic estimates, Bhat’s work covered various theoretical issues in demography. His work on fertility examined the role of education, regional fertility variation and the religious differences in fertility. Selected references for his work in this area are as follows: 1996: Contours of Fertility Decline in India: A District-level Study Based on the 1991 Census in K Srinivasan (ed.), Population Policy and Reproductive Health, Hindustan Publications, New Delhi. 2002: Returning a Favour: Reciprocity between Female Education and Fertility in India ("World Development", 30(10):1791-1803). 2005: Role of Religion in Fertility Decline: The Case of Indian Muslims ("Economic and Political Weekly", 40(5): 385-402; co-authored with F. Zavier) He also explored how fertility decline impacted sex ratios, that is whether preference for smaller families reduced the preference for sons in India. 1997: Fertility Decline and Increased Manifestation of Sex Bias in India ("Population Studies, 51(3): 307-15; co-authored with Monica Das Gupta). 2003: Fertility Decline and Gender Bias in Northern India ("Demography", 40(4): 637-57; co-authored with F. Zavier) His major work on nuptiality in India dealt with the impact of marriage squeeze on marriage age and rates. He and his co-author (S. Halli) proposed five new indicators that allow the examination of the influence of marriage squeeze on marriage rates. 1999: Demography of Brideprice and Dowry: Causes and Consequences of the Indian Marriage Squeeze ("Population Studies, 53:129-48; co-authored with S.S Halli).   == Administrative contribution == Mari Bhat played a key role in the implementation of the third round of the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3, 2005-6). In recognition of his contribution, the final report of the survey is dedicated in his memory.   == Sources == P N Mari Bhat: An Intellectual Tribute ("Economic and Political Weekly", 3611-15, 8 September 2007: Monica Das Gupta, Samuel H Preston, Vijayendra Rao, T V Sekher); contains a complete bibliography of his work and a discussion of his contributions to Indian demography   == External links == UNESCAP:Obituary of Professor Mari Bhat ICDCM2010-International Conference on Demography, Culture, and Marketing: Best Research Paper Award in DemographyProfessor Mari Bhat

Pafnuty Lvovich Chebyshev (Russian: Пафну́тий Льво́вич Чебышёв; IPA: [pɐfˈnutʲɪj ˈlʲvovʲɪtɕ tɕɪbɨˈʂof]) (May 16 [O.S. May 4] 1821 – December 8 [O.S. November 26] 1894) was a Russian mathematician. His name can be alternatively transliterated as Chebychev, Chebysheff, Chebyshov; or Tchebychev, Tchebycheff (French transcriptions); or Tschebyschev, Tschebyschef, Tschebyscheff (German transcriptions).   == Biography == One of nine children, Chebyshev was born in the central Russian village of Akatovo near Borovsk, to Agrafena Ivanova Pozniakova and Lev Pavlovich Chebyshev. His father had fought as an officer against Napoleon Bonaparte's invading army. Chebyshev was originally home schooled by his mother and his cousin, Avdotia Kvintillianova Soukhareva. He learned French early in life, which later helped him communicate with other mathematicians. A stunted leg prevented him from playing with other children, leading him to concentrate on his studies instead. Chebyshev studied at the college level at Moscow University, where he earned his bachelor's degree in 1841. At Moscow University, Chebyshev was a graduate student of Nikolai Brashman. After Chebyshev became a professor of mathematics in Moscow himself, his two most illustrious graduate students were Andrei Andreyevich Markov (the elder) and Aleksandr Lyapunov. Later he moved to St. Petersburg, where he founded one of the most important schools of mathematics in Russia, and there is today a research institute in mathematics called the Chebyshev Laboratory in that city.   == Mathematical contributions == Chebyshev is known for his work in the fields of probability, statistics, mechanics, and number theory. The Chebyshev inequality states that if  is a random variable with standard deviation σ > 0, then the probability that the outcome of  is no less than  away from its mean is no more than :  The Chebyshev inequality is used to prove the Weak Law of Large Numbers. The Bertrand–Chebyshev theorem (1845,1852) states that for any , there exists a prime number  such that . This is a consequence of the Chebyshev inequalities for the number  of prime numbers less than , which state that  is of the order of . A more precise form is given by the celebrated prime number theorem: the quotient of the two expressions approaches 1.0 as  tends to infinity. Chebyshev is also known for the Chebyshev polynomials and the Chebyshev bias – the difference between the number of primes that are 3 (modulo 4) and 1 (modulo 4).   == Legacy ==  Chebyshev is considered to be a founding father of Russian mathematics. Among his well-known students were the mathematicians Dmitry Grave, Aleksandr Korkin, Aleksandr Lyapunov, and Andrei Markov. According to the Mathematics Genealogy Project, Chebyshev has 10,629 mathematical "descendants" as of 2015. The lunar crater Chebyshev and the asteroid 2010 Chebyshev were named in his honour.   == Publications == Tchebychef, P. L. (1899), Markov, Andreĭ Andreevich; Sonin, N., eds., Oeuvres I, New York: Commissionaires de l'Académie impériale des sciences, MR 0147353, Reprinted by Chelsea 1962  Tchebychef, P. L. (1907), Markov, Andreĭ Andreevich; Sonin, N., eds., Oeuvres II, New York: Commissionaires de l'Académie impériale des sciences, MR 0147353, Reprinted by Chelsea 1962  Butzer, P. L. Chebyshev (1821–1894): A Guide to his Life and Work, doi:10.1006/jath.1998.3289    == See also == Chebyshev cube root Chebyshev distance Chebyshev filter, a family of analog filters in electronics and signal processing Chebyshev function in number theory Chebyshev polynomials and the "Chebyshev form" Chebyshev's inequality in probability and statistics Chebyshev's sum inequality Chebyshev equation Chebyshev iteration Chebyshev linkage, a straight line generating linkage Roberts–Chebyshev theorem on the generation of cognate coupler-curves. Chebyshev–Markov–Stieltjes inequalities Chebychev–Grübler–Kutzbach criterion for the mobility analysis of linkages Chebyshev nodes Chebyshev rational functions Chebyshev's bias Discrete Chebyshev polynomials Chebyshev integral   == References ==   == External links == Mechanisms by Chebyshev – short 3d films – embodiment of Tchebishev's inventions Pafnuty Chebyshev at the Mathematics Genealogy Project O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Pafnuty Chebyshev", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Works by or about Pafnuty Chebyshev in libraries (WorldCat catalog) Biography, another one, and yet another (all in Russian). Œuvres de P.L. Tchebychef (in French)

Paola Sebastiani is a biostatistician and a Professor at Boston University working in the field of genetic epidemiology, building prognostic models that can be used for the dissection of complex traits. Her most important contribution is a model based on a Bayesian network that integrates more than 60 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and other biomarkers to compute the risk for stroke in patients with sickle cell anemia. This model was shown to have high sensitivity and specificity and demonstrated, for the first time, how an accurate risk prediction model of a complex genetic trait that is modulated by several interacting genes can be built using Bayesian networks. Sebastiani obtained a first degree in Mathematics from the University of Perugia, Italy (1987), an M.Sc. in Statistics from University College London (1990), and a Ph.D. in Statistics from the Sapienza University of Rome (1992). Her research interests include Bayesian modeling of biomedical data, particularly genetic and genomic data. She came to Boston University in 2003, after previously having been an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. A controversial paper regarding the genetics of aging with which she was associated was retracted from the journal Science in 2011 due to flawed data. The corrected version was published in PLOS ONE, and several of the genes found associated with exceptional human longevity were replicated in other studies of centenarians.   == Publications == She has published several peer-reviewed papers. According to Scopus the most cited ones are: Ramoni, M.F., Sebastiani, P., Kohane, I.S., "Cluster analysis of gene expression dynamics" (2002) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99 (14), pp. 9121–9126. Sebastiani, P., Ramoni, M.F., Nolan, V., Baldwin, C.T., Steinberg, M.H., "Genetic dissection and prognostic modeling of overt stroke in sickle cell anemia" (2005) Nature Genetics, 37 (4), pp. 435–440. Mandl, K.D., Overhage, J.M., Wagner, M.M., Lober, W.B., Sebastiani, P., Mostashari, F., Pavlin, J.A., Gesteland, P.H., Treadwell, T., Koski, E., Hutwagner, L., Buckeridge, D.L., Aller, R.D., Grannis, S., "Implementing syndromic surveillance: A practical guide informed by the early experience" (2004) Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 11 (2), pp. 141–150. Sebastiani, P., Gussoni, E., Kohane, I.S., Ramoni, M.F., Baker, H.V., "Statistical challenges in functional genomics" (2003) Statistical Science, 18 (1), pp. 33–70.   == References ==

Paul Richard Halmos (Hungarian: Halmos Pál; March 3, 1916 – October 2, 2006) was a Hungarian-Jewish-born American mathematician who made fundamental advances in the areas of mathematical logic, probability theory, statistics, operator theory, ergodic theory, and functional analysis (in particular, Hilbert spaces). He was also recognized as a great mathematical expositor.   == Early life and educationEdit == Halmos arrived in the U.S. at 13 years of age, but never lost his Hungarian accent. Halmos obtained his B.A. from the University of Illinois, majoring in mathematics, but fulfilling the requirements for both a math and philosophy degree. He took only three years to obtain the degree, and was only 19 when he graduated. He then began a Ph.D. in philosophy; but, after failing his masters' oral exams, he shifted to mathematics, graduating in 1938. Joseph L. Doob supervised his dissertation, titled Invariants of Certain Stochastic Transformations: The Mathematical Theory of Gambling Systems.   == CareerEdit == Shortly after his graduation, Halmos left for the Institute for Advanced Study, lacking both job and grant money. Six months later, he was working under John von Neumann, which proved a decisive experience. While at the Institute, Halmos wrote his first book, Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces, which immediately established his reputation as a fine expositor of mathematics. Halmos taught at Syracuse University, the University of Chicago (1946–60), the University of Michigan, the University of California at Santa Barbara (1976–78), the University of Hawaii, and Indiana University. From his 1985 retirement from Indiana until his death, he was affiliated with the Mathematics department at Santa Clara University.   == AccomplishmentsEdit == In a series of papers reprinted in his 1962 Algebraic Logic, Halmos devised polyadic algebras, an algebraic version of first-order logic differing from the better known cylindric algebras of Alfred Tarski and his students. An elementary version of polyadic algebra is described in monadic Boolean algebra. In addition to his original contributions to mathematics, Halmos was an unusually clear and engaging expositor of university mathematics. He won the Lester R. Ford Award in 1971 and again in 1977 (shared with W. P. Ziemer, W. H. Wheeler, S. H. Moolgavkar, J. H. Ewing and W. H. Gustafson). Halmos chaired the American Mathematical Society committee that wrote the AMS style guide for academic mathematics, published in 1973. In 1983, he received the AMS's Steele Prize for exposition. In the American Scientist 56(4): 375–389, Halmos argued that mathematics is a creative art, and that mathematicians should be seen as artists, not number crunchers. He discussed the division of the field into mathology and mathophysics, further arguing that mathematicians and painters think and work in related ways. Halmos's 1985 "automathography" I Want to Be a Mathematician is an account of what it was like to be an academic mathematician in 20th century America. He called the book "automathography" rather than "autobiography", because its focus is almost entirely on his life as a mathematician, not his personal life. The book contains the following quote on Halmos' view of what doing mathematics means:  Don't just read it; fight it! Ask your own questions, look for your own examples, discover your own proofs. Is the hypothesis necessary? Is the converse true? What happens in the classical special case? What about the degenerate cases? Where does the proof use the hypothesis?  In these memoirs, Halmos claims to have invented the "iff" notation for the words "if and only if" and to have been the first to use the “tombstone” notation to signify the end of a proof, and this is generally agreed to be the case. The tombstone symbol ∎ (Unicode U+220E) is sometimes called a halmos. In 2005, Halmos and his wife Virginia funded the Euler Book Prize, an annual award given by the Mathematical Association of America for a book that is likely to improve the view of mathematics among the public. The first prize was given in 2007, the 300th anniversary of Leonhard Euler's birth, to John Derbyshire for his book about Bernhard Riemann and the Riemann hypothesis: Prime Obsession.   == Books by HalmosEdit == 1942. Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces. Springer-Verlag. 1950. Measure Theory. Springer Verlag. 1951. Introduction to Hilbert Space and the Theory of Spectral Multiplicity. Chelsea. 1956. Lectures on Ergodic Theory. Chelsea. 1960. Naive Set Theory. Springer Verlag. 1962. Algebraic Logic. Chelsea. 1963. Lectures on Boolean Algebras. Van Nostrand. 1967. A Hilbert Space Problem Book. Springer-Verlag. 1978 (with V. S. Sunder). Bounded Integral Operators on L² Spaces. Springer Verlag 1985. I Want to Be a Mathematician. Springer-Verlag. 1987. I Have a Photographic Memory. Mathematical Association of America. 1991. Problems for Mathematicians, Young and Old, Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, Mathematical Association of America. 1996. Linear Algebra Problem Book, Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, Mathematical Association of America. 1998 (with Steven Givant). Logic as Algebra, Dolciani Mathematical Expositions No. 21, Mathematical Association of America.   == See alsoEdit == Criticism of non-standard analysis   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == J. H. Ewing; F. W. Gehring (1991). Paul Halmos: Celebrating 50 Years of Mathematics. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-97509-8. OCLC 22859036.  Includes a bibliography of Halmos's writings through 1991. John Ewing (October 2007). "Paul Halmos: In His Own Words" (PDF). Notices of the American Mathematical Society 54 (9): pp.1136–1144. Retrieved 2008-01-15.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link) Paul Halmos (1985). I want to be a Mathematician: An Automathography. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-96470-3. OCLC 230812318.    == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Paul Halmos", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . "Paul Halmos: A Life in Mathematics", Mathematical Association of America (MAA) Paul Halmos at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Peter James Donnelly, FRS FMedSci (born 15 May 1959) is an Australian mathematician and Professor of Statistical Science at the University of Oxford. He is a specialist in applied probability and has made contributions to coalescent theory. His research group at Oxford has an international reputation for the development of statistical methodology to analyze genetic data.   == Background, family and education == Donnelly was born and raised in Brisbane, Queensland, the son of financial adviser, economic theorist and author Austin Donnelly and Sheila Donnelly. He is the brother of Sharon Donnelly and of eminent Australian financier, funds manager and company director Melda Donnelly. He was educated at St. Joseph's Christian Brothers College, Gregory Terrace, the University of Queensland and Balliol College, Oxford.   == Professional life == When elected to a chair at Queen Mary College, London in 1988 Donnelly was only 29, and possibly the youngest Professor in Great Britain. He held a chair at the University of Chicago (1994–96) and was head of the Department of Statistics at the University of Oxford from 1996 to 2001. Since 2007, he has been Director, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics (WTCHG) in Oxford, where he is currently based. He is a fellow at St Anne's College, Oxford. Many leading statistical geneticists worked with Donnelly as young researchers including David Balding, Carsten Wiuf, Matthew Stephens and Jonathan Pritchard. One area in which he has a leading reputation is in the interpretation of DNA evidence. He has acted as an expert witness on forensic science in criminal trials. He is noted for his collaborative work with biologists. He has been heavily involved in a number of large scale projects, such as the International HapMap Project and the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, a genome-wide association study.   == Awards and honours == Donnelly was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2006 and also elected as a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences in 2008. Other significant awards and honours have included: 1980 University Medal, University of Queensland 1980-1983 Rhodes Scholarship 1984-1985 University of Wales Research Fellowship 1988 Elected Ordinary Member of the International Statistical Institute 1990 Special Invited Lecturer, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1990-1995 SERC Advanced Fellowship 1995 Elected Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1999 Elected Honorary Fellow, Institute of Actuaries 2000 Bernoulli Lecturer, 5th World Congress of the Bernoulli Society 2001 Forum Lecturer, European Meeting of Statisticians 2002 Editor’s Invited Paper, Statistical Society of Australia 2002 Mitchell Prize, of the American Statistical Association and ISBA 2004 Guy Medal in Silver, Royal Statistical Society 2007 Medallion Lecturer, Institute of Mathematical Statistics. 2007 The main paper from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, which Donnelly chaired, won several awards, including The Lancet 's Paper of the Year, Scientific American 's Research Leader of the Year, the Amadeus Prize, and one of Nature's Editor's Picks for 2007. 2009 Awarded the Weldon Memorial Prize    == See also == R v Adams   == References ==   == External links == Peter Donnelly at TED Peter Donnelly: How juries are fooled by statistics (TEDGlobal 2005)  Nuffield department of Medicine-Podcast meet our researchers BBC Inside Science program -interview with Adam Rutherford re his work on the genetic map of the UK

Peter Gavin Hall FAA FRS AO (born 20 November 1951) is an Australian researcher in probability theory and mathematical statistics. He earned his Doctorate at the University of Oxford in 1976.   == Biography == Dr. Hall was born to radiophysics and radio astronomy pioneer Ruby Payne-Scott and telephone technician William Holman Hall. His younger sister is artistic photographer and sculptor, Fiona Margaret Hall. Hall is an author in probability and statistics. Mathscinet lists him with more than 500 publications as of January 2008. He has made contributions to nonparametric statistics, in particular for curve estimation and resampling: the bootstrap method, smoothing, density estimation, and bandwidth selection. He has worked on numerous applications across fields of economics, engineering, physical science and biological science. Hall has also made contributions to surface roughness measurement using fractals. In probability theory he has made many contributions to limit theory, spatial processes and stochastic geometry. His paper "Theoretical comparison of bootstrap confidence intervals" (Annals of Statistics, 1988) has been reprinted in the Breakthroughs in Statistics collection. Professor Hall is currently an ARC Laureate Fellow at the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, and also has a joint appointment at University of California Davis. He previously held a professorship at the Centre for Mathematics and its Applications at the Australian National University.   == Main Honours and Awards == 2013 Foreign Associate, National Academy of Sciences 2013 Officer of the Order of Australia 2011 Guy Medal in Silver 2010 George Szekeres Medal 2007 Matthew Flinders Medal and Lecture  2000 Fellow of the Royal Society of London 1996 Fellow of the American Statistical Association 1994 Hannan Medal of the Australian Academy of Science 1989 Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies Award 1987 Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science 1986 Rollo Davidson Prize, University of Cambridge 1986 Australian Mathematical Society Medal 1984 Fellow of Institute of Mathematical Statistics   == Bibliography == P. Hall; C.C. Heyde (1980): Martingale Limit Theory and its Application, Academic Press, New York. ISBN 0-12-319350-8 P. Hall (1982): Rates of Convergence in the Central Limit Theorem, Pitman, London. ISBN 0-273-08565-4 P. Hall (1988): Introduction to the Theory of Coverage Processes, Wiley, New York. ISBN 0-471-85702-5 P. Hall (1992): The Bootstrap and Edgeworth Expansion, Springer, New York. ISBN 0-387-97720-1   == References == ^ http://www.arc.gov.au/media/fl11/pdf/Peter_Hall_bio.pdf ^ "UCDavis - History of the Department of Statistics". Retrieved 4 March 2011.  ^ "News from the National Academy of Sciences 2013". 30 April 2013.  ^ "Science staff and alumni receive Australia Day honours 2013". 14 February 2013.  ^ "Peter Hall accepts Guy Medal". RSSeNews. Royal Statistical Society. 3 June 2011.  ^ "George Szekeres Medal for 2010". 10 January 2010.  ^ "Awardees for 2007". Australian Academy of Science. Retrieved 18 September 2015.  ^ List of Fellows of the Royal Society G,H,I ^ http://www.amstat.org/awards/fellowslist.cfm ^ COPSS Presidents' Award ^ http://www.sciencearchive.org.au/fellows/fellowship-list.html ^ Rollo Davidson Prize ^ Australian Mathematical Society Medal ^ http://imstat.org/awards/honored_fellows.htm   == External links == Mathematical genealogy of Peter Hall Peter Hall's Homepage at the University of Melbourne ISI Highly Cited Researcher: Peter Hall

Peter Laslett (18 December 1915 – 8 November 2001) was an English historian.   == Biography == Born Thomas Peter Ruffell Laslett and educated at the Watford Grammar School for Boys, Peter Laslett studied history at St John's College, Cambridge in 1935 and graduated with a double first in 1938. During World War II he learned Japanese and worked at Bletchley Park and Washington decoding Japanese naval intelligence. It was at Bletchley Park that he met his future wife, Janet Crockett Clark, whom he married in 1947. Returning to Cambridge in 1948 with a research fellowship at St John's College, Laslett edited Robert Filmer's political writings (Patriarcha and Other Political Writings, 1949). According to noted historian J.G.A. Pocock, it was with this work that Laslett provided the initial inspiration for the 'Cambridge School' of the history of political thought, the methods of which are now widely practised throughout the profession. Laslett combined such academic activity with a lifelong concern to engage a wider audience. He worked simultaneously as a BBC radio producer for the Third Programme. One product of this desire to reach a wider audience was his pathbreaking and highly-popular book The World We Have Lost: England Before the Industrial Age (1965; US edition, 1966), issued in a second edition in 1971 and in a retitled third revised edition, The World We Have Lost: Further Explored (1983; US edition, 1984). Simon Mitton credits Laslett with having launched in 1948 the radio broadcasting career of the astronomer Fred Hoyle. In 1953, Laslett was appointed a university lecturer in history at Cambridge, and was elected a fellow Trinity College in the same year. He continued work in the history of political theory, discovering Locke's library and demonstrating (against the accepted account) that John Locke's Two Treatises on Government had been written prior to the English "Glorious Revolution" of 1688–9, remarking that the "Two Treatises is an Exclusion Tract, not a Revolution Pamphlet." Laslett published an edition of the treatises in 1960, subsequently reprinted many times, which is now recognized as the definitive account of these pillars of modern liberal democracy. From 1957 he founded and co-edited Philosophy, Politics and Society, a series of collections on political philosophy. Laslett took up an entirely different line of historical research from the early 1960s. Trying to understand 17th-century listings of the inhabitants of Clayworth and Cogenhoe, Northamptonshire, he became persuaded of the need to pursue historical demography more systematically. In 1964, Laslett and Tony Wrigley co-founded the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure. With funding from the Social Science Research Council, the Cambridge Group worked alongside amateur volunteers on local records, and established the journal Local Population Studies. Laslett's practical reformism found an outlet from the 1960s in his efforts, together with Michael Young, to develop the Open University. When told of his family history of Kent yeomen back to 1600 he looked it over and said "Good. Not a gentleman in 400 years." Laslett was Reader in Politics and the History of Social Structure at Cambridge University (the title reflecting his own unusual mix of historical interests) from 1966 until retirement in 1983. At this point, his interests turned to the historical understanding and practical betterment of the elderly. Laslett played a pivotal role in founding the University of the Third Age in 1982. He died in 2001, aged 85, and was interred at Wolvercote Cemetery in Oxford, and was survived by his wife Janet, sons George and Robert, and grandchildren, Vivian, Alden and Claire. His fine library of early printed books by and about Filmer, Locke, and political thought (including political economy) was sold by Quaritch in 2006.   == Works == The World We Have Lost: England Before the Industrial Age (1965; New York, 1966; 2nd ed., 1971, 3rd ed., 1983; re-issued and updated 2000) Household and Family in Past Time (ed., 1972) Family Life and Illicit Love in Earlier Generations (1977) Statistical Studies in Historical Social Structure (1979) Bastardy and its Comparative History (1980) The World We Have Lost: Further Explored (London, 1983; New York, 1984) Family Forms in Historic Europe (1983) A Fresh Map of Life (1989) Justice Between Age Groups and Generations (co-edited with James Fishkin, 1992).   == References == Richard Smith, ‘Laslett, (Thomas) Peter Ruffell (1915–2001)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, online edition, Oxford University Press, January 2005; online edition, May 2006.

Phillip I. Good (born in 1937) is a Canadian-American mathematical statistician. He was educated at McGill University and the University of California at Berkeley. He was among the first to apply the bootstrap in his 1975 analyses of 2×2 designs with a missing cell. His chief contributions to statistics are in the area of small sample statistics, including a uniformly most powerful unbiased (UMPU) permutation test for Type I censored data, an exact test for comparing variances, and an exact test for cross-over designs.   == Selected publications ==  His published texts in statistics include the following: The A to Z of Error-Free Research,Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2012. A Practitioner's Guide to Resampling for Data Analysis, Data Mining, and Modeling,Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2011. Analyzing the Large Number of Variables in Biomedical and Satellite Imagery,Wiley, NY. 2011. Managers' Guide to the Design and Conduct of Clinical Trials, Wiley, NY, 2002 (2nd edition, 2006). Introduction to Statistics Using Resampling Methods and R/S-Plus. Wiley, 2005 (2nd edition, 2012). Introduction to Statistics Using Resampling Methods and Excel. Wiley, 2005. Common Errors in Statistics (and How to Avoid Them)(with J. Hardin), Wiley, 2003 (4th edition, 2012). Applying Statistics in the Courtroom: A New Approach for Attorneys and Expert Witnesses, Chapman Hall, London, 2001. ISBN 1-58488-271-9 Resampling Methods, Birkhauser, Boston, 1999 (3rd edition, 2005). Permutation, Parametric and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses, Springer-Verlag, NY, 1994 (3rd edition, 2005). He has published articles in Biology—Exp Geron 8(73)147; Mech Age Devel 4(75) 339. Biomathematics—J theoret Biol 34(72)99; Bull Math Biol 38(76)295. Biostatistics—Contemporary Clinical Trials 29(08)565. Computer Science—Computer Architecture News 16(88)3:40. Physics—Physics Essays 23(10)368. Probability—J Aust math soc 8(68)716. Statistics—J Nonpar Statist 1(92)253-262; J. Modern Appl. Statist. Meth. 1(02)243. He has published nine texts on the application of microcomputers in business as well as several hundred articles on microcomputers in over a dozen different computer magazines. He has published 34 novels using six nommes des plumes for the zanybooks imprint. Those using his own name include "I Love You Maggie,""In Search of Aimai Cristen,""Sad and Angry Man,""Marriage and Children," "Confessions of a Gentleman Host," "San Onofre,","Susan," and "Schoolcraft MI." He has published two collections of his short stories, "Pinkie: Stories of a Homeless Man," and "Relationships."

Phillip Longman (born April 21, 1956, Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg, West Germany) is an American demographer. Presently he is a Schwartz Senior Fellow at the New America Foundation, and he formerly worked as a senior writer and deputy assistant managing editor at U.S. News & World Report.   == Personal life and education == The son of Kenneth and Mary Longman, who worked in Baden-Württemberg as a result of the postwar occupation of that state by the US military, Phillip Longman spent most of his childhood in Princeton, New Jersey. He studied at Oberlin College and later obtained a Knight-Baghot fellowship at Columbia University. Phillip Longman was originally married to Robin Longman, but after she died he married Sandy Garbrecht. They have one son, Sam, and reside in Washington, D.C.   == Career == Focusing his attention on how demographic and social change interact and affect government finance, the environment, foreign policy, and the development of society generally, Longman published his first book, Born to Pay: The New Politics of Aging in America in 1987. In the following decade wrote many articles about the impact of aging populations on society in the future. During this period, his name became much more widely known in the academic community: his articles became published by such journals as The Atlantic Monthly, Financial Times, Harvard Business Review, Foreign Affairs and The New Republic. In 1997 Longman published his second book The Return of Thrift: How the Collapse of the Middle Class Welfare State will Reawaken Values in America, which argued that people today are spending in an unsustainable manner with the accelerating decline in fertility rates threatening the financial collapse of the welfare state throughout the world. By 2000 he had linked with the New America Foundation and began work on his most widely read work, The Empty Cradle in March 2004. This book expressed his strongly held opinion that sub-replacement fertility and resultant population decline is likely to have catastrophic economic consequences for those nations suffering from it and is also likely to reduce societies' ability to adjust to newly emerging problems because of unwillingness to innovate or take risks. It also examines the present effect of the rapid fall in birth rates around the globe. His research into the history of demographic decline in ancient Greece and Rome led to an article titled The Return of Patriarchy in the March, 2006 issue of Foreign Policy, and in other journals in an edited form under the title The Liberal Baby Bust. On January 1, 2007, his fourth full-length book was published by PoliPointPress. Titled Best Care Anywhere: Why VA Healthcare is Better Than Yours, it reflects on Longman's loss of his first wife to cancer and aims to show that in fact private health insurance is not superior to public health care as is often presumed.   == Awards == Phillip Longman has won numerous awards for his business and financial writing, including UCLA's Gerald Loeb Award, and the top prize for investigative journalism from Investigative Reporters and Editors.   == Books == Born to Pay: The New Politics of Aging in America (1987) The Return of Thrift: How the Collapse of the Middle Class Welfare State will Reawaken Values in America (1997) The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten World Prosperity and What To Do About It (2004) Best Care Anywhere: Why VA Healthcare is Better Than Yours (2007)   == External links == Phillip Longman's page at the New America Foundation

Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis FRS (29 June 1893 – 28 June 1972) was an Indian scientist and applied statistician. He is best remembered for the Mahalanobis distance, a statistical measure. He made pioneering studies in anthropometry in India. He founded the Indian Statistical Institute, and contributed to the design of large-scale sample surveys.   == Early life == Mahalanobis belonged to a family of Bengali landed gentry who lived in Bikrampur (now in Bangladesh). His grandfather Gurucharan (1833–1916) moved to Calcutta in 1854 and built up a business, starting a chemist shop in 1860. Gurucharan was influenced by Debendranath Tagore (1817–1905), father of the Nobel Prize–winning poet, Rabindranath Tagore. Gurucharan was actively involved in social movements such as the Brahmo Samaj, acting as its Treasurer and President. His house on 210 Cornwallis Street was the center of the Brahmo Samaj. Gurucharan married a widow against social traditions. His elder son Subodhchandra (1867–1953) was a distinguished educationist who studied physiology at Edinburgh University. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.[1] He was the Head of the Dept. of Physiology, University of Cardiff (first Indian to occupy this post in a British university). In 1900, he founded Dept. of Physiology in the Presidency College, Calcutta. Subodhchandra also became a member of the Senate of the Calcutta University. Gurucharan's younger son, Prabodh Chandra (1869-1942) was the father of P. C. Mahalanobis. Born in the house at 210 Cornwallis Street, P. C. Mahalanobis, grew up in a socially active family surrounded by intellectuals and reformers. Mahalanobis received his early schooling at the Brahmo Boys School in Calcutta graduating in 1908. He then joined the Presidency College, Calcutta where he was taught by teachers who included Jagadish Chandra Bose, and Prafulla Chandra Ray. Meghnad Saha was a year junior and Subhas Chandra Bose was two years his junior at college. Mahalanobis received a Bachelor of Science degree with honours in physics in 1912. He left for England in 1913 to join the University of London. He however missed a train and stayed with a friend at King's College, Cambridge. He was impressed by King's College Chapel there and his host's friend M. A. Candeth suggested that he could try joining there, which he did. He did well in his studies at King's, but also took an interest in cross-country walking and punting on the river. He interacted with the mathematical genius Srinivasa Ramanujan during the latter's time at Cambridge. After his Tripos in physics, Mahalanobis worked with C. T. R. Wilson at the Cavendish Laboratory. He took a short break and went to India and here he was introduced to the Principal of Presidency College and was invited to take classes in physics. He went back to England and was introduced to the journal Biometrika. This interested him so much that he bought a complete set and took them to India. He discovered the utility of statistics to problems in meteorology, anthropology and began working on it on his journey back to India. In Calcutta, Mahalanobis met Nirmalkumari, daughter of Herambhachandra Maitra, a leading educationist and member of the Brahmo Samaj. They married on 27 February 1923 although her father did not completely approve of it. The contention was partly due to Mahalanobis's opposition to various clauses in the membership of the student wing of the Brahmo Samaj, including restraining members from drinking and smoking. Sir Nilratan Sircar, P. C. Mahalanobis's maternal uncle took part in the wedding ceremony in place of the father of the bride.   == Indian Statistical Institute ==  Many colleagues of Mahalanobis took an interest in statistics and the group grew in the Statistical Laboratory located in his room at the Presidency College, Calcutta. A meeting was called on 17 December 1931 with Pramatha Nath Banerji (Minto Professor of Economics), Nikhil Ranjan Sen (Khaira Professor of Applied Mathematics) and Sir R. N. Mukherji. The meeting led to the establishment of the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), and formally registered on 28 April 1932 as a non-profit distributing learned society under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860. The Institute was initially in the Physics Department of the Presidency College and the expenditure in the first year was Rs. 238. It gradually grew with the pioneering work of a group of his colleagues including S. S. Bose, J. M. Sengupta, R. C. Bose, S. N. Roy, K. R. Nair, R. R. Bahadur, Gopinath Kallianpur, D. B. Lahiri and C. R. Rao. The institute also gained major assistance through Pitamber Pant, who was a secretary to the Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Pant was trained in statistics at the Institute and took a keen interest in the institute. In 1933, the journal Sankhya was founded along the lines of Karl Pearson's Biometrika. The institute started a training section in 1938. Many of the early workers left the ISI for careers in the United States and with the government of India. Mahalanobis invited J. B. S. Haldane to join him at the ISI and Haldane joined as a Research Professor from August 1957 and stayed on until February 1961. He resigned from the ISI due to frustrations with the administration and disagreements with Mahalanobis's policies. He was also very concerned with the frequent travels and absence of the director and complained that the ... journeyings of our Director define a novel random vector. Haldane however helped the ISI grow in biometrics. In 1959, the institute was declared as an institute of national importance and a deemed university.   == Contributions to statistics ==   === Mahalanobis distance ===  A chance meeting with Nelson Annandale, then the director of the Zoological Survey of India, at the 1920 Nagpur session of the Indian Science Congress led to Annandale asking him to analyse anthropometric measurements of Anglo-Indians in Calcutta. Mahalanobis had been influenced by the anthropometric studies published in the journal Biometrika and he chose to ask the questions on what factors influence the formation of European and Indian marriages. He wanted to examine if the Indian side came from any specific castes. He used the data collected by Annandale and the caste specific measurements made by Herbert Risley to come up with the conclusion that the sample represented a mix of Europeans mainly with people from Bengal and Punjab but not with those from the Northwest Frontier Provinces or from Chhota Nagpur. He also concluded that the intermixture more frequently involved the higher castes than the lower ones. This analysis was described by his first scientific paper in 1922. During the course of these studies he found a way of comparing and grouping populations using a multivariate distance measure. This measure, denoted "D2" and now eponymously named Mahalanobis distance, is independent of measurement scale.  Inspired by Biometrika and mentored by Acharya Brajendra Nath Seal he started his statistical work. Initially he worked on analysing university exam results, anthropometric measurements on Anglo-Indians of Calcutta and some meteorological problems. He also worked as a meteorologist for some time. In 1924, when he was working on the probable error of results of agricultural experiments, he met Ronald Fisher and Anil Kumar Gain, with whom he established a lifelong friendship. He also worked on schemes to prevent floods.   === Sample surveys === His most important contributions are related to large-scale sample surveys. He introduced the concept of pilot surveys and advocated the usefulness of sampling methods. Early surveys began between 1937 to 1944 and included topics such as consumer expenditure, tea-drinking habits, public opinion, crop acreage and plant disease. Harold Hotelling wrote: "No technique of random sample has, so far as I can find, been developed in the United States or elsewhere, which can compare in accuracy with that described by Professor Mahalanobis" and Sir R. A. Fisher commented that "The ISI has taken the lead in the original development of the technique of sample surveys, the most potent fact finding process available to the administration". He introduced a method for estimating crop yields which involved statisticians sampling in the fields by cutting crops in a circle of diameter 4 feet. Others such as P. V. Sukhatme and V. G. Panse who began to work on crop surveys with the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute suggested that a survey system should make use of the existing administrative framework. The differences in opinion led to acrimony and there was little interaction between Mahalanobis and agricultural research in later years.   === Linguistics === Mahalanobis also started research in the field of quantitative linguistics and language planning in the Linguistic Research Unit of the Indian Statistical Institute. He also worked on Speech Pathology in collaboration with Djordge Kostic, Rhea Das and Alakananda Mitter and made some contributions to the field of language correction.   == Later life == In later life, Mahalanobis was a member of the planning commission contributed prominently to newly independent India's five-year plans starting from the second. In the second five-year plan he emphasised industrialisation on the basis of a two-sector model. His variant of Wassily Leontief's Input-output model, the Mahalanobis model, was employed in the Second Five Year Plan, which worked towards the rapid industrialisation of India and with other colleagues at his institute, he played a key role in the development of a statistical infrastructure. He encouraged a project to assess deindustrialisation in India and correct some previous census methodology errors and entrusted this project to Daniel Thorner. Mahalanobis also had an abiding interest in cultural pursuits and served as secretary to Rabindranath Tagore, particularly during the latter's foreign travels, and also worked at his Visva-Bharati University, for some time. He received one of the highest civilian awards, the Padma Vibhushan from the Government of India for his contribution to science and services to the country. Mahalanobis died on 28 June 1972, a day before his seventy-ninth birthday. Even at this age, he was still active doing research work and discharging his duties as the Secretary and Director of the Indian Statistical Institute and as the Honorary Statistical Advisor to the Cabinet of the Government of India.   == Honours == Weldon Memorial Prize from the University of Oxford (1944) Fellow of the Royal Society, London (1945) President of Indian Science Congress (1950) Fellow of the Econometric Society, USA (1951) Fellow of the Pakistan Statistical Association (1952) Honorary Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, UK (1954) Sir Deviprasad Sarvadhikari Gold Medal (1957) Foreign member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR (1958) Honorary Fellow of King's College, Cambridge (1959) Fellow of the American Statistical Association (1961) Durgaprasad Khaitan Gold Medal (1961) Padma Vibhushan (1968) Srinivasa Ramanujam Gold Medal (1968) The government of India decided in 2006 to celebrate his birthday, 29 June, as National Statistical Day.   == See also == List of Indian mathematicians   == References ==   == Bibliography == Ashok Rudra (1996). Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis: A Biography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-563679-6.  A. Mahalanobis (1983). Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis. National Book Trust, India.    == External links == Gallery Biography from ISI Bangalore Website Biography at Calcuttaweb.com Mahalonobis Centennial articles ISI publication archives

Ravindra Khattree (born 1959) is an Indian-born statistician and professor of statistics at Oakland University. His contribution to the Fountain–Khattree–Peddada Theorem in Pitman measure of closeness is one of the important results of his work. Khattree is the coauthor of two books and has coedited two volumes. He has served as an associate editor of the Communications in Statistics journal and the editor of the Interstat online journal. He is Chief editor of Journal of Statistics and Applications. He is an elected fellow of the American Statistical Association. Khattree was born in Uttar Pradesh, India. He attended the Ewing Christian College-Allahabad University and the Indian Statistical Institute. In 1985, he earned a doctorate from the University of Pittsburgh with Calyampudi Radhakrishna Rao as his advisor. He became a faculty member at Oakland University in 1991. He was the biostatistics group leader in the Biomedical Research and Informatics Center and a professor of biostatistics in the College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University during 2005–2006. He worked as a senior research scientist at US National Academy of Sciences with assignment at the Radiation Effects Research Foundation (formerly known as Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission), Hiroshima during 2010–2011. Prior to joining Oakland University, he had been a faculty member at the North Dakota State University, Case Western Reserve University and also worked at BFGoodrich Chemical Group. He is the paternal grandson of Binda Prasad Khattri.   == Recognition == In 2002, Khattree received the Young Researcher Award from the International Indian Statistical Association. Khattree was honored with fellowship in the American Statistical Association in 2003 and became an elected member of the International Statistical Institute in 2004. He is also a recipient of Oakland University Research Excellence Award (2008).   == Bibliography == Applied Multivariate Statistics with SAS Software (1995, 1999) with Dayanand N. Naik. Multivariate Data Reduction and Discrimination with SAS Software (2000) with Dayanand N. Naik. Handbook of Statistics Volume 22, Statistics in Industry (2002) with C.R. Rao. Computational Methods in Biomedical Research (2008) with Dayanand N. Naik.   == References ==   == External links == Mathematical Genealogy

Reginald Crundall Punnett FRS (/ˈpʌnɪt/; 20 June 1875 – 3 January 1967) was a British geneticist who co-founded, with William Bateson, the Journal of Genetics in 1910. Punnett is probably best remembered today as the creator of the Punnett square, a tool still used by biologists to predict the probability of possible genotypes of offspring. His Mendelism (1905) is sometimes said to have been the first textbook on genetics; it was probably the first popular science book to introduce genetics to the public.   == Life and work == Reginald Punnett was born in 1875 in the town of Tonbridge in Kent, England. While recovering from a childhood bout of appendicitis, Punnett became acquainted with Jardine's Naturalist's Library and developed an interest in natural history. Punnett was educated at Clifton College. Attending Gonville and Caius College at the University of Cambridge, Punnett earned a degree in zoology in 1898, and a masters in 1901. Between these degrees he worked as a demonstrator and part-time lecturer at the University of St. Andrew's Natural History Department. In October 1901, Punnett was back at Cambridge when he was elected to a Fellowship at Gonville and Caius College, working in zoology, primarily the study of worms, specifically nemerteans. It was during this time that he and William Bateson began a research collaboration, which lasted several years.  When Punnett was an undergraduate, Gregor Mendel's work on inheritance was largely unknown and unappreciated by scientists. However, in 1900, Mendel's work was rediscovered by Carl Correns, Erich Tschermak von Seysenegg and Hugo de Vries. William Bateson became a proponent of Mendelian genetics, and had Mendel's work translated into English. It was with Bateson that Reginald Punnett helped established the new science of genetics at Cambridge. He, Bateson and Saunders co-discovered genetic linkage through experiments with chickens and sweet peas. In 1908, unable to explain how a dominant gene would not become fixed and ubiquitous in a population, Punnett introduced one of his problems to the mathematician G. H. Hardy, with whom he played cricket. Hardy went on to formulate the Hardy-Weinberg principle, independently of the German Wilhelm Weinberg. He was Superintendent of the Cambridge University Museum of Zoology from 1908-1909. In 1909 he went to Sri Lanka to meet Arthur Willey, FRS, then Director of the Colombo Museum and R H Lock, then Scientific Assistant at the Peradeniya Botanical Gardens and to catch butterflies. The following year, he published a monograph, '"Mimicry" in Ceylon Butterflies, with a suggestion as to the nature of Polymorphism', in Spolia Zeylanica, the journal of the Colombo Museum, in which he voiced his opposition to gradualistic accounts of the evolution of mimicry which he later expanded on, in his 1915 book 'Mimicry in Butterflies'. In 1910 Punnett became professor of biology at Cambridge, and then the first Arthur Balfour Professor of Genetics when Bateson left in 1912. In the same year, Punnett was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. He received the society's Darwin Medal in 1922. During World War I, Punnett successfully applied his expertise to the problem of the early determination of sex in chickens. Since only females were used for egg-production, early identification of male chicks, which were destroyed or separated for fattening, meant that limited animal-feed and other resources could be used more efficiently. Punnett's work in this area was summarized in Heredity in Poultry (1923). With Michael Pease as his assistant, he created the first auto-sexing chicken breed, the Cambar, by transferring the barring gene of the Barred Rock to the Golden Campine. Reginald Punnett retired in 1940, and died at the age of 91 in 1967 in Bilbrook, Somerset.   == Selected writings == Punnett, R. C. (1901). Lineus. London: Williams and Norgate. Retrieved 2008-05-11.  Punnett, R. C. (1905). Mendelism. Cambridge: Bowes and Bowes. - A scanned copy of the second edition is here. Punnett, R. C. (1915). Mimicry in Butterflies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 2008-05-11.    == References ==   == External links == A brief biographical sketch of Punnett A briefer biographical sketch of Punnett A brief history of the University of Cambridge's Department of Genetics Works by Reginald Punnett at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Reginald Punnett at Internet Archive

Rensis Likert (/ˈlɪkərt/ LIK-ərt; 5 August 1903–3 September 1981) was an American administrator and organizational psychologist based at the U.S. Department of Agriculture until 1946, then at the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. He is best known for survey research methods and for the Likert Scale, a psychometric scale commonly involved in research using questionnaires. After retirement in 1970 he was an active researcher in management styles; he also developed the linking pin model. Likert was known for his support of interdisciplinary collaborations and emphasis on using social science research to effect positive change.   == Personal life == Rensis Likert was born to George Herbert Likert and Cornelia Adrianne (Cora) (née Zonne) Likert in Cheyenne, Wyoming, where his father was an engineer with the Union Pacific Railroad. After training to be an engineer, the younger Likert was working as an intern with Union Pacific Railroad during the watershed 1922 strike. The lack of communication between the two parties made a profound impression on him and caused him to study organizations and their behavior for the rest of his life. Likert received his B.A. in economics and sociology from the University of Michigan in 1926. The social sciences of the 1920s were highly experimental and incorporated many aspects of modern psychology. In 1932 Likert received a Ph.D. in psychology from Columbia University. Likert died, 3 September 1981 in Ann Arbor, Michigan, at the age of 78; leaving behind his wife of 53 years, Jane Gibson (3 June 1902 - 29 November 1997). Both are interred in the Forest Hill Cemetery in Ann Arbor.   == Professional achievements == President, American Statistical Association; Honorary Degree, Tilburg University, the Netherlands, 1967   == Likert Scale ==  Likert devised a survey scale Likert Scale for measuring attitudes and showed that it captured more information than competing methods. The 5-point Likert Scale became Likert's best-known work. He developed the Likert scale in 1932 in his PhD thesis, using it to identify the extent of a person’s beliefs, attitudes, and feelings towards international affairs. The traditional Likert scale asks people the extent to which they agree or disagree with a statement on a 5-point scale. The scale ranges from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree. Using a 5 point scale allowed him to rank people's attitudes with fewer questions and greater exactness. ”   === Department of Agriculture === During World War II, Likert, as the Director of the Division of Program Surveys in the United States Department of Agriculture's Bureau of Agricultural Economics (B.A.E.), ran surveys first for U.S.D.A. but as the war progressed the Division ran surveys for many different governmental agencies including the Office of War Information, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Board and in 1944-45, the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey. In 1943, he developed the first national geographic sampling frame. Likert, although not at a university at the time, was actively recruiting other social psychologists into his expanding government survey shop during the war.   === Institute for Social Research === At war's end the Department of Agriculture were forced by conservative Congressmen to stop its social survey work. Likert and his team (many of them academics on temporary wartime duty) decided to move together to a university. After scouting Cornell and Chicago, they accepted an offer in summer 1946 from the University of Michigan. They formed the Survey Research Center (SRC) at the University of Michigan. This became the Institute for Social Research (ISR) in 1949 when Dorwin Cartwright moved the Center for Group Dynamics from MIT to the Michigan. Likert was the director of ISR until 1970, when he retired.   === Rensis Likert Associates === Upon retirement he founded Rensis Likert Associates to consult for numerous corporations. He also helped start what is now known as the Institute for Corporate Productivity (i4cp). During his tenure, Rensis Likert devoted particular attention to research on organizations. During the 1960s and 1970s, his books on management theory were closely studied in Japan and their impact can be seen across modern Japanese organizations. He did research on major corporations around the world, and his studies have accurately predicted the subsequent performance of the corporations.   == Management systems ==  Likert's Management Systems are management styles developed by Rensis Likert in the 1950s. He outlined four systems of management to describe the relationship, involvement, and roles of managers and subordinates in industrial settings. The four management systems are: 1) Exploitative Authoritative 2) Benevolent Authoritative 3) Consultative System 4) Participative System.   == Books == The following are books that Rensis Likert authored, or contributed to: New Ways of Managing Conflict 1976 (with Jane Gibson Likert) Human Organization : Its Management and Value (1967) New Patterns of Management (1961) Developing patterns in management (American Management Association, 1955) Co-editor: Some applications of Behavioural Research (1957)   == References ==   == Further reading == Brewer, J. D. (1968). Review of The Human Organization. American Sociological Review, 33(5), 825-826 Converse, Jean M. (1987) Survey Research in the United States: Roots and Emergence 1890-1960 (U of California Press) Effrat, A. (1968). Review: Democratizing and Producing. Science, 162(3859), 1260-1261. Hall, J. W. (1972). A Comparison of Halpin and Croft's Organizational Climates and Likert and Likert's Organizational Systems. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(4), 586-590. Huczynski, A.A. and Buchanan, D.A. (2007). Organizational Behaviour. 6th Edition, Pearson Education.

Reuven Rubinstein (1938-2012)(Hebrew: ראובן רובינשטיין‎) was an Israeli scientist known for his contributions to Monte Carlo simulation, applied probability, stochastic modeling and stochastic optimization, having authored more than one hundred papers and six books. During his career, Rubinstein has made fundamental and important contributions in these fields and has advanced the theory and application of adaptive importance sampling, rare event simulation, stochastic optimization, sensitivity analysis of simulation-based models, the splitting method, and counting problems concerning NP-complete problems. He is well known as the founder of several breakthrough methods, such as the score function method, stochastic counterpart method and cross-entropy method, which have numerous applications in combinatorial optimization and simulation. His citation index is in the top 5% among his colleagues in operations research and management sciences. His 1981 book "Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method", Wiley (second edition 2007, with D.P. Kroese) alone has over 4,400 citations. He has held visiting positions in various research institutes, including Columbia University, Harvard University, Stanford University, IBM and Bell Laboratories. He has given invited and plenary lectures in many international conferences around the globe. In 2010 Prof. Rubinstein won the INFORMS Simulation Society highest prize - the Lifetime Professional Achievement Award (LPAA), which recognizes scholars who have made fundamental contributions to the field of simulation that persist over most of a professional career. In 2011 Reuven Rubinstein won the Operations Research Society of Israel (ORSIS) highest prize - the Lifetime Professional Award (LPA), which recognizes scholars who have made fundamental contributions to the field of operations research over most of a professional career.   == Publications == Rubinstein R.Y., "Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method", Wiley, 1981. Rubinstein, R.Y., "The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and continuous Optimization", Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 2, 127—190, 1999. Rubinstein R.Y., "Randomized algorithms with splitting: Why the classic randomized algorithms do not work and how to make them work", Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 2009. doi:10.1007/s11009-009-9126-6 Rubinstein R.Y. and D.P. Kroese, "The Cross-Entropy Method: a Unified Approach to Combinatorial Optimization, Monte-Carlo Simulation and Machine Learning", Springer, 2004. Rubinstein R.Y. and D.P. Kroese, "Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method", Second Edition, Wiley, 2007. Rubinstein, R.Y. and A. Shapiro, "Discrete Event Systems: Sensitivity Analysis and Stochastic Optimization", Wiley, 1993.   == External links == Reuven Rubinstein's home page   == References ==

Dr. Prof. Riaz Ahsan (25 December 1951 – 8 September 2008) was a Pakistani statistician and mathematician who has worked in applied statistics, applied analysis, applications of special functions. He was a noted professor of applied statistics in University of Karachi, Karachi. Previously, he has served as the president of Sindh Professors and Lecturers’ Association (SPLA). Prof. Riaz Ahsan was born on 25 December 1951 and he died on 8 September 2008.   == Education and career == Born in Karachi, Ahsan had his initial education at the BYJ School, Karachi, and completed his intermediate from Adamjee Government Science College, Karachi. He received his B.Sc. (Hons) in Statistics and Mathematics. He did his M.Sc with distinctions in Statistics and M.A. in Mathematics with honors from Karachi University. Later, he received his double Ph.D. in applied statistics and applied mathematics from the same alma mater in 1974.   == Academic career == In 1975, he started his career from DJ Science College, Karachi. He also served as the president of Sindh Professors and Lecturers Association (SPLA) that works for the betterment of professors and lecturers in the province of Sindh. In 1982, he went to Nigeria on deputation and taught statistics and mathematics at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. Upon his return continued as a teacher at the Government Degree Science College, Karachi, from where he was later transferred to Saint Patrick's College, Karachi. In early 1990s, Ahsan joined Karachi University as a full professor of statistics and mathematics and continued his career till his death.   == Death == Dr. Ahsan was diagnosed with cancer in one of his legs in 2004 and was on medication since then. He recovered for a while and participated in many campaigns launched by the SPLA and fell ill again in 2008, never to recover. Registrar Prof. Raees Alvi paid him the following tribute: “He was a wise man who always guided teachers in the right direction. He always searched for development and never had any prejudice. He always worked for the promotion of merit. This great man always fought for the rights of teachers and I would call it an irreparable loss for all of us.” "The void he left behind can never be filled. It is a huge loss for SPLA and we would never get a personality like him in future". SPLA Senior Vice-President Manzoor Hussain Chishti said.   == Family == His father, Professor Syed Zaheer Ahsan, was a professor of Geography at Karachi University.   == References == ^ http://news.newsupdate.pk/?2008/9/9+396508 ^ Our Staff Reporter (September 12, 2008), "Prof. Ahsan Remembered", Dawn News  ^ The News, Karachi ^ Baloch, Farooq (September 9, 2008), "Prof. Riaz Ahsan passes away", The News International  ^ http://www.dinnews.tv/dinnews/national/prof_riaz_ahsan_passes_away-7348.aspx   == External links == http://news.newsupdate.pk/?2008/9/9+396508 http://www.dinnews.tv/dinnews/national/prof_riaz_ahsan_passes_away-7348.aspx   == External links == Prof. Riaz Ahsan

Richard David Gill (born 11 September 1951) is a mathematician born in the United Kingdom who has lived in the Netherlands since 1974. As a probability theorist and statistician, Gill is known for his research on counting processes and survival analysis, some of which has appeared in an advanced textbook. He is the chair of mathematical statistics at Leiden University. Gill is also known for his pro bono consulting and advocacy on behalf of victims of incompetent statistical testimony, including a Dutch nurse who was wrongfully convicted and jailed for six years.   == Biography == He studied mathematics at the University of Cambridge (1970–1973), and subsequently followed the Diploma of Statistics course there (1973–1974). Marrying a Dutch woman, he moved to the Netherlands where he worked from 1974 to 1988 at the Mathematical Centre (later renamed Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, or CWI) of Amsterdam. In 1979, Gill obtained his PhD with the thesis Censoring and Stochastic Integrals, which was supervised by Jacobus Oosterhoff of the Vrije Universiteit, which awarded the doctorate. Gill spent Autumn 1980 at the Statistical Research Unit at the University of Copenhagen. Gill continued to collaborate with Danish (and Norwegian) statisticians for ten years, helping to write the book Statistical models based on counting processes, which is often referred to as "ABGK" (for the authors Andersen, Borgan, Gill, and Keiding). In 1983 he became the head of the Department of Mathematical Statistics at CWI. In 1988 he moved to the Department of Mathematics of Utrecht University. Gill became the chair in mathematical stochastics—this chair represented the three mathematical sciences of mathematical statistics, probability theory, and operations research. His PhD students include Sara van de Geer and Mark van der Laan. In 2006, he moved to the Department of Mathematics at Leiden University, where he became the chair of mathematical statistics. Since then, he has conducted statistical research in the theory of quantum information and in biostatistics. He has also worked on survival analysis, semiparametric models, causality, missing data, machine learning, and statistics in image analysis. Gill also publishes on the foundations of several mathematical sciences: the foundations of statistics, of probability, of mathematics, and of quantum physics.   == Statistical advocacy against wrongful convictions == In recent years he has actively lobbied for retrials for Lucia de Berk and Kevin Sweeney. The nurse Lucia de Berk was sentenced to life imprisonment following testimony from a legal psychologist that de Berk with the fantastical likelihood committed a string of murders.  "The court was told by Dr Henk Elffers of the Netherlands Institute for the Study of Crime and Law Enforcement that more children had died on her shifts than appeared possible by chance. He put the odds of her presence being a mere coincidence at one in 342 million, a figure that seemed to have blinded the court to any alternative explanation of the deaths."  This statistical testimony was shown to be fallacious by professional statisticians, notably Gill. Continued scrutiny showed that the data had also been collected to support the prosecutor's conviction of Berk, which further invalidated the pseudo-statistical testimony.  "The conduct of the case, in Professor Gill's account, was extraordinary. Convinced she was guilty, the police and the managers of the Juliana Children's Hospital assembled a dossier in which it seemed every death became unnatural when it had occurred during, or after, a shift in which she had worked. For one of the alleged murders, it was established on appeal she had not even been in the hospital for three days around the time it occurred. Using more appropriate statistical methods reduced the odds from one in 342 million to one in 48. A further analysis by Professor Gill further reduces the odds to one in nine."  Professor Gill helped in the campaign to have a new trial. Consequently, a retrial was ordered, and de Berk was found not guilty, and received a public apology from the Dutch government, along with financial compensation (amount unknown) for her six years of incarceration.   == Honours == Richard Gill is a member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is a past president of The Netherlands Society for Statistics and Operations Research, which publishes the journal Statistica Neerlandica. Gill has been selected as the 2010–2011 Distinguished Lorentz Fellow by the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in Humanities and Social Sciences.   == References ==   == External links == Richard Gill's homepage at Leiden University. Mathematical Reviews. "Richard D. Gill". Retrieved 22 February 2011.

Sir Richard Peto FRS (born 14 May 1943) is Professor of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology at the University of Oxford, England. He attended Taunton's School in Southampton and subsequently studied Natural Sciences at Queens' College, Cambridge University. His career has included important collaborations with Richard Doll beginning at the Medical Research Council Statistical Research Unit in London. He set up the Clinical Trial Service Unit (CTSU) in Oxford in 1975 and is currently co-director. He was made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1989 for his contributions to the development of meta-analysis. He is a leading expert on deaths related to tobacco use. He was knighted for his services to epidemiology and to cancer prevention in 1999, and he received an honorary Doctor of Medical Sciences degree from Yale University in 2011.  His brother Julian Peto, with whom he has published work in mathematical statistics (e.g. on the logrank test), is also a distinguished epidemiologist. His family runs a Thai restaurant in Oxford's Covered Market, of whose parent company he is a director. Peto's paradox is named after him.   == References ==   == Selected publications == Gribbin B, Pickering TG, Sleight P, Peto R. Effect of age and high blood pressure on baroreflex sensitivity in man. Circ Res. 1971 Oct;29(4):424–31. PMID 5110922. Peto R, Peto J. Asymptotically efficient rank invariant test procedures. J R Stat Soc Ser A 1972;135(2):185–207. Doll R, Peto R. Mortality in relation to smoking: 20 years' observations on male British doctors. Br Med J. 1976 Dec 25;2(6051):1525–36. PMID 1009386. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, Breslow NE, Cox DR, Howard SV, Mantel N, McPherson K, Peto J, Smith PG. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient. I. Introduction and design. Br J Cancer. 1976 Dec;34(6):585–612. doi:10.1038/bjc.1976.220 PMID 795448. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, Breslow NE, Cox DR, Howard SV, Mantel N, McPherson K, Peto J, Smith PG. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient. II. Analysis and examples. Br J Cancer. 1977 Jan;35(1):1–39. doi:10.1038/bjc.1977.1 PMID 831755. Peto R, Doll R, Buckley JD, Sporn MB. Can dietary beta-carotene materially reduce human cancer rates? Nature. 1981 Mar 19;290(5803):201–8. PMID 7010181. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer: quantitative estimates of avoidable risks of cancer in the United States today. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1981 Jun;66(6):1191–308. PMID 7017215. Peto R, Schneiderman M, eds. Quantification of occupational cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1981. ISBN 0-87969-208-1. Yusuf S, Peto R, Lewis J, Collins R, Sleight P. Beta blockade during and after myocardial infarction: an overview of the randomized trials. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 1985 Mar–Apr;27(5):335–71. doi:10.1016/S0033-0620(85)80003-7 PMID 2858114. Peto R, zur Hausen H, eds. Viral etiology of cervical cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1986. ISBN 0-87969-221-9. MacMahon S, Peto R, Cutler J, Collins R, Sorlie P, Neaton J, Abbott R, Godwin J, Dyer A, Stamler J. Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Part 1, Prolonged differences in blood pressure: prospective observational studies corrected for the regression dilution bias. Lancet. 1990 Mar 31;335(8692):765–74. PMID 1969518. Collins R, Peto R, MacMahon S, Hebert P, Fiebach NH, Eberlein KA, Godwin J, Qizilbash N, Taylor JO, Hennekens CH. Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Part 2, Short-term reductions in blood pressure: overview of randomised drug trials in their epidemiological context. Lancet. 1990 Apr 7;335(8693):827–38. PMID 1969567. Peto R, Imperial Cancer Research Fund (Great Britain), World Health Organization, et al. Mortality from smoking in developed countries, 1950–2000: indirect estimates from national vital statistics. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-19-262619-1. Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, Stampfer M, Rosner B, Cook NR, Belanger C, LaMotte F, Gaziano JM, Ridker PM, Willett W, Peto R. Lack of effect of long-term supplementation with beta carotene on the incidence of malignant neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 1996 May 2;334(18):1145–9. PMID 8602179. Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, Monaco JH, Henley SJ, Heath CW Jr, Doll R. Alcohol consumption and mortality among middle-aged and elderly U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 1997 Dec 11;337(24):1705–14. doi:10.1056/NEJM199712113372401 PMID 9392695. Danesh J, Collins R, Appleby P, Peto R. Association of fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, albumin, or leukocyte count with coronary heart disease: meta-analyses of prospective studies. JAMA. 1998 May 13;279(18):1477–82. PMID 9600484. Peto R, Darby S, Deo H, Silcocks P, Whitley E, Doll R. Smoking, smoking cessation, and lung cancer in the UK since 1950: combination of national statistics with two case-control studies. BMJ. 2000 Aug 5;321(7257):323–9. doi:10.1136/bmj.321.7257.323 PMID 10926586. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P, Peto R; Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol-lowering with simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2003 Jun 14;361(9374):2005–16. PMID 12814710. Halliday A, Mansfield A, Marro J, Peto C, Peto R, Potter J, Thomas D; MRC Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST) Collaborative Group. Prevention of disabling and fatal strokes by successful carotid endarterectomy in patients without recent neurological symptoms: randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004 May 8;363(9420):1491–502. PMID 15135594. Doll R, Peto R, Boreham J, Sutherland I. Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male British doctors. BMJ. 2004 Jun 26;328(7455):1519. doi:10.1136/bmj.38142.554479.AE PMID 15213107. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Buck G, Pollicino C, Kirby A, Sourjina T, Peto R, Collins R, Simes R; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' (CTT) Collaborators. Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials of statins. Lancet. 2005 Oct 8;366(9493):1267–78. PMID 16214597. Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, Davies C, Elphinstone P, Evans E, Godwin J, Gray R, Hicks C, James S, MacKinnon E, McGale P, McHugh T, Peto R, Taylor C, Wang Y; Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group (EBCTCG). Effects of radiotherapy and of differences in the extent of surgery for early breast cancer on local recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005 Dec 17;366(9503):2087–106. PMID 16360786.   == External links == Royal Society citation BBC interview Clinical Trial Services Unit

Robert Fry Engle III (born November 10, 1942) is an American economist and the winner of the 2003 Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, sharing the award with Clive Granger, "for methods of analyzing economic time series with time-varying volatility (ARCH)".   == Biography == Engle was born in Syracuse, New York into Quaker family and went on to graduate from Williams College with a B.S. in physics. He earned an M.S. in physics and a Ph.D. in economics, both from Cornell University in 1966 and 1969 respectively. After completing his Ph.D., Engle became Professor of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1969 to 1977. He joined the faculty of the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) in 1975, wherefrom he retired in 2003. He now holds positions of Professor Emeritus and Research Professor at UCSD. He currently teaches at New York University, Stern School of Business where he is the Michael Armellino professor in Management of Financial Services. At New York University, Engle teaches for the Master of Science in Risk Management Program for Executives, which is offered in partnership with the Amsterdam Institute of Finance. Engle’s most important contribution was his path-breaking discovery of a method for analyzing unpredictable movements in financial market prices and interest rates. Accurate characterization and prediction of these volatile movements are essential for quantifying and effectively managing risk. For example, risk measurement plays a key role in pricing options and financial derivatives. Previous researchers had either assumed constant volatility or had used simple devices to approximate it. Engle developed new statistical models of volatility that captured the tendency of stock prices and other financial variables to move between high volatility and low volatility periods (“Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity: ARCH”). These statistical models have become essential tools of modern arbitrage pricing theory and practice. More recently, Engle (and Eric Ghysels) co-founded the Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE).   === Personal life === Paternal Grandfather – Robert Fry Engle, Sr. (b. 1879 d. 1946) Father – Robert Fry Engle, Jr. (b. 1910 d. 1981, DuPont chemist) Mother – Mary Starr Engle ("Murry", French teacher, m. 1939) Sister – Patricia Lee Engle ("Patty", twin, UNICEF official) Sister – Sally Starr Engle Merry (anthropologist, twin) Wife – Marianne Eger Engle (psychologist, m. 10-Aug-1969, two children) Daughter – Lindsey Engle Richland (psychologist) Son – Jordan Engle] (actor, b. May-1980)   == Selected works == "Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation". Econometrica 50 (4): 987–1008. 1982. JSTOR 1912773.  . (with David F. Hendry and Jean-Francois Richard). "Exogeneity". Econometrica 51 (2): 277–304. 1983. JSTOR 1911990.  . (with C. Granger, J. Rice and A. Weiss). "Semi-parametric Estimates of the Relation between Weather and Electricity Demand". J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81 (394): 310–320. 1986. doi:10.1080/01621459.1986.10478274.  . (with Clive Granger). "Co-Integration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing". Econometrica 55 (2): 251–276. 1987. JSTOR 1913236.  . (with David Lilien and Russell Robins). "Estimation of Time Varying Risk Premia in the Term Structure: the ARCH-M Model". Econometrica 55 (2): 391–407. 1987. JSTOR 1913242.  . (with V. Ng, and M. Rothschild). "Asset Pricing with a Factor ARCH Covariance Structure: Empirical Estimates for Treasury Bills". Journal of Econometrics 45 (1–2): 213–237. 1990. doi:10.1016/0304-4076(90)90099-F.  . (with J.R. Russell). "Autoregressive Conditional Duration: A New Model for Irregularly Spaced Transaction Data". Econometrica 66 (5): 1127–1162. 1998. JSTOR 2999632.  "Dynamic Conditional Correlation – A Simple Class of Multivariate GARCH Models". Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20 (3): 339–350. 2002. doi:10.1198/073500102288618487.  . (with Maureen O'Hara, David Easley and L. Wu). "Time-Varying Arrival Rates of Informed and Uninformed Traders". Journal of Financial Econometrics 6 (2): 171–207. 2008. doi:10.1093/jjfinec/nbn003.    == See also == Modeling and analysis of financial markets   == References ==   == External links == V-Lab: real time financial volatility and correlation measurements, modeling and forecasting The Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE) Robert F. Engle (1942– ). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  Robert F. Engle at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

For the U.S. Navy admiral, see Robert C. Giffen  Sir Robert Giffen KCB (22 July 1837 – 12 April 1910), was a Scottish statistician and economist. He was born at Strathaven, Lanarkshire. He entered a solicitor's office in Glasgow, and while in that city attended courses at the university. He drifted into journalism, and after working for the Stirling Journal he went to London in 1862 and joined the staff of the Globe. He also assisted John Morley, when the latter edited the Fortnightly Review. In 1868 he became Walter Bagehot's assistant-editor on The Economist; and his services were also secured in 1873 as city editor of the Daily News, and later of The Times. His high reputation as a financial journalist and statistician, gained in these years, led to his appointment in 1876 as head of the statistical department in the Board of Trade, and subsequently he became assistant secretary (1882) and finally controller-general (1892), retiring in 1897. In connection with his position as chief statistical adviser to the government, he was constantly employed in drawing up reports, giving evidence before commissions of inquiry, and acting as a government auditor, besides publishing a number of important essays on financial subjects. His principal publications were American Railways as Investments (1873), Essays on Finance (1879 and 1884), The Progress of the Working Classes (1884), The Growth of Capital (1890), The Case against Bimetallism (1892), and Economic Inquiries and Studies (1904). He was president of the Statistical Society (now called the Royal Statistical Society) (1882–1884); and after being made a Companion of the Order of the Bath, in 1891 was created Knight Commander in the Order of the Bath. In 1892 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1894 he received the Guy Medal (gold) from the RSS. He was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1897. Robert Giffen continued in later years to take a leading part in all public controversies connected with finance and taxation, and his high authority and practical experience were universally recognised. He was awarded a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in 1895. He died somewhat suddenly in Fort Augustus, Scotland on 12 April 1910. The concept of a Giffen good is named after him. Alfred Marshall wrote in the third (1895) edition of his Principles of Economics: As Mr. Giffen has pointed out, a rise in the price of bread makes so large a drain on the resources of the poorer labouring families and raises so much the marginal utility of money to them, that they are forced to curtail their consumption of meat and the more expensive farinaceous foods: and, bread being still the cheapest food which they can get and will take, they consume more, and not less of it. Scholars have not been able to identify any passage in Giffen's writings where he pointed this out. The main part of this entry is taken from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica.   == References == R. S. Mason Robert Giffen and the Giffen Paradox, Philip Allan (1989) A. E. Bateman, ‘Sir Robert Giffen’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 73, (1910) pp. 529–533. (includes photograph) F. Y. Edgeworth, ‘Sir Robert Giffen’, Economic Journal, 20, (1910) pp. 318–321. "Sir Robert Giffen - Dead" (PDF). New York Times. 13 April 1910  ^ "Sir Robert Giffen". The Times (London: The Times). Wednesday, Apr 13, 1910;. p. 13.     == External links ==  Works written by or about Robert Giffen at Wikisource Royal Society citation Giffen correspondence Alfred Marshall Principles of Economics Bk.III,Ch.VI in paragraph III.VI.17

Robert René ('René') Kuczynski (1876–1947) was a German-based, Jewish economist and demographer and is said to be one of the founders of modern vital statistics. Jürgen Kuczynski is his son. His father Wilhelm was a banker. René studied at the universities of Berlin, Munich, Freiburg and Strasburg and made his doctoral dissertation in 1897. Later, he worked for the United States Census Office. In 1904 he became director of the Staistical Office in Elberfeld and in 1906 took the same position in Berlin -Schoneberg. He studied rent and income in Berlin before the first World War and found that 600,000 people lived in flats which house five or more people per room. In 1926, Kuczynski chaired the Kuczynski Committee, working with the German League for Human Rights, which organized the petition for a referendum on the expropriation of the Princes. In 1928 he led the German delegation to the tenth anniversary of the Russian Revolution. In 1933, after Hitler had come to power, Kuczynski left Germany and went with around 20,000 books (half of the large family library) to Great Britain. There he lectured at the London School of Economics and became later adviser for the British Colonial Office. His most noted work was in the 1930s when he published figures on the extent of the slave trade between Africa and the Americas over the preceding three centuries. His figure of 15 million slaves became widely used by other researchers, but is no longer thought to be correct. An obituary of his son Jürgen [1] refers to Rene as a banker - and the family does seem to have been massively wealthy. Eric Hobsbawm ("Interesting Times", p.145) states that while Jürgen was a "charming and ever-hopeful economic historian", his family "owned the Grunewaldviertel" in Berlin and he was "probably the richest citizen of east Berlin". Kuczynski and wife Berta Gradenwitz had six children. Among them the GDR-economist Jürgen Kuczynski, Brigitte Kuczynski, and Ursula Kuczynski. All of them were Soviet spies.   == Works by Kuczynski == Kuczynski R., Munchner Volkswirtschaftliche Studien, Vierundzwanzigstes Stuck 1897 Kuczynski R., Der Zug Nach Der Stadt: Statistische Studien Uber Vorg Nge Der Bevolkerungsbewegung Im Deutschen Reiche, 1897 Lujo Brentano and Robert Kuczynski, Die heutige Grundlage der deutschen Wehrkraft. 1900 Kuczynski R., Das Existenzminimum und verwandte Fragen.1912 Kuczynski R., Arbeitslohn und Arbeitszeit in Europa und Amerika 1870–1909, Springer, 1913 Kuczynski R., Unsere Finanzen nach dem Kriege, Springer Verlag Gmbh, Jan 1917 Kuczynski R., Der Pflichtteil des Reiches, Springer, Berlin, 1917 Kuczynski R., Schulden, Steuern und Valuta, Verlag Hans Robert Engelmann, Berlin, 1920 Kuczynski R., Wiedergutmachung und deutsche Wirtschaft, Verlag Hans Robert Engelmann, Berlin, 1921 Kuczynski R., Ein Ausweg. Gesundung der Wirtschaft durch Gesundung der Reichsfinanzen, Verlag von Hans Robert Engelmann, Berlin 1921 Kuczynski R., Deutschlands Versorgung mit pflanzlichen Nahrungs- und Futtermitteln, J.F. Bergmann-Verlag, Jan 1926 Kuczynski R., Statistische Grundlagen zu Deutschlands Versorgung mit Nahrungs- und Futtermitteln, J.F. Bergmann-Verlag, Jan 1926 Kuczynski R., Deutschlands Versorgung mit tierischen Nahrungs- und Futtermitteln, J.F. Bergmann-Verlag Jan 1927 Kuczynski, Robert René; American Loans to Germany, With the Aid of the Council and Staff of the Institute of Economics in Washington, 378 pages, publisher: The Macmillan Company, New York, September 1927 Kuczynski, Robert René; Banker's Profits from German loans, publisher: The Brookings Institution, First Edition, Institute of Economics in Washington, Publication 41, 228 Seiten Washington,1932. Kuczynski R., The Measurement of Population Growth; Methods and Results, Sidgwick & Jackson, Ltd., London 1935 Kuczynski R., Colonial population, Oxford University Press London, 1937 Kuczynski R., Living-Space and Population Problems Clarendon Press, London. 1939 Kuczynski R., Demographic Survey of the British Colonial Empire: Vol III. West Indian and American Territories Oxford University Press, London, 1953 Kuczynski R., Fertility and reproduction : methods of measuring the balance of births and deaths., Kuczynski R., The Balance of Births and Deaths; Volume I (1): Western and Northern Europe & Volume II (2): Eastern and Southern Europe (The Brookings Institution Reprint Series) 1970   == References ==  Chapter 1 of The Final Victims : Foreign Slave Trade to North America, 1783–1810 by James A. McMillin, USC Press 2004, ISBN 1-57003-546-6 Excerpt from Demography as Policy Science in the British Empire, 1918-1969 Karl Ittmann in Journal of Policy History - Volume 15, Number 4, 2003, pp. 417–448 information about the R. Kuczynski Price Obituary in Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 110, No. 4. (1947), pp. 383–384 A radical democrat and a great demographer: for the 125th birthday of René Kuczynski, by Thomas Kuczynski, Radical Statistics #112, 2015:70-75.

Robert O. Schlaifer (13 September 1914 – 24 July 1994) was a pioneer of Bayesian decision theory. At the time of his death he was William Ziegler Professor of Business Administration Emeritus of the Harvard Business School. Robert Osher Schlaifer, a native of Vermillion, S.D. and a graduate of Amherst College, had a unique background for a statistical decision theorist. He was trained as a classical historian and classical Greek scholar: he attended the American School of Classical Studies in Athens and earned a Ph.D. in ancient history at Harvard in 1940. He taught history, economics and physics at the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard. During the Second World War he started writing technical reports and produced a major volume on the development of aircraft engines. He got an appointment at the Harvard Business School and when the statistics teacher retired he started to teach statistics—starting by teaching himself. He had very little mathematical background and Raiffa recalled how they worked together: "I would teach him something about linear algebra in the morning and he would show me how it could be applied in the afternoon." (from the interview with Fienberg) Schlaifer made an important contribution to Bayesian decision theory. His work and his character are described in the following appreciations. In 1992 the Decision Analysis Society awarded Schlaifer the Frank P. Ramsey Medal for distinguished contributions to the field of decision analysis. In making the award Bob Winkler noted Schlaifer's pioneering efforts in decision analysis. His 1959 book, Probability and Statistics for Business Decisions, was a landmark effort, coming only five years after L. J. Savage, in his classic Foundations of Statistics, presented a development of subjective probability and utility but then inexplicably reverted to minimax arguments in the latter part of the book. Schlaifer, with no formal training in statistics or mathematical modeling, got it right and took the first steps toward bridging the theory/practice gap. Winkler also quoted the following assessment from Howard Raiffa, who worked with Schlaifer and was the recipient of the first Ramsey Medal in 1984: “The basic ideas of statistical decision theory were conceived by (Schlaifer) independently of the work of L. J. Savage or de Finetti, and early on he saw that those ideas were broadly applicable to problems in decision making under uncertainty. He was a pioneer in the practical assessment of subjective probabilities and utilities… (Schlaifer) influenced my intellectual development more than any other individual — more than Abraham Wald or von Neumann or Savage or Arrow.” In the preface to the second 1971 edition of Foundations of Statistics Savage wrote This is a welcome opportunity to say that his [Schlaifer's] ideas were developed wholly independently of the present book, and indeed of other personalistic literature. They are in full harmony with the ideas of this book but are more down to earth and less spellbound by tradition. Schlaifer's book with John W. Pratt and Raiffa was published posthumously and his co-authors wrote this dedication: Robert O. Schlaifer (1915 – 1994): An original, deep, creative, indefatigable, persistent, versatile, demanding, sometimes irascible scholar, who was an inspiration to us both.   == Role in Development of Aircraft Engines & Fuels == Schlaifer was involved in the development of military aircraft engines and fuels prior to World War II. He found that the best way to get a good engine quickly was to bring to test as soon as possible a number of alternate designs, pick one that combined good characteristics with few development problems, and then work intensely to develop it.   == Some publications of Robert Schlaifer == Greek Theories of Slavery from Homer to Aristotle, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, Vol. 47 (1936), pp. 165–204. Demon of Paeania, Priest of Asclepius, Classical Philology, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Jan., 1943), pp. 39–43. Development of Aircraft Engines. Boston : Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University, 1950. Probability and statistics for business decisions. An introduction to managerial economics under uncertainty New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1959 Applied statistical decision theory (with Howard Raiffa) Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1961. Introduction to statistical decision theory John W. Pratt, Howard Raiffa, Robert Schlaifer preliminary edition, 1965. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995.   == References ==   == External links == The award of the Frank P. Ramsey Medal of the Decision Analysis Society is described in the newsletter August 1992 Newsletter New York Times obituary Stephen E. Fienberg "The Early Statistical Years: 1947–1967. A Conversation With Howard Raiffa" Statistical Science, 23, (2008), 136-149.

Roelof F. Botha (born 19 September 1973) is a venture capitalist and company director. By training, he is a qualified actuary. Botha is a partner at Sequoia Capital and currently sits on the boards of Jawbone, Eventbrite, Evernote, Mahalo, Natera, Nimbula, Square, Tokbox, Tumblr, Weebly, Unity, Whisper and Xoom. He also works with 10gen, AssureRX, FutureAdvisor, Instagram, MixPanel and MuSigma. He previously sat on the board of directors of Meebo and YouTube before they were each acquired by Google. On Forbes' Midas List, an annual ranking of venture capital professionals, he ranked 22nd in 2008 and 26th in 2009.   == Education and career == Botha was born in Pretoria, South Africa, and at the age of six he moved to Cape Town with his parents. He was raised in Hout Bay, a suburb of Cape Town, and attended Hoërskool Jan van Riebeeck. Botha earned a BSc in Actuarial Science, Economics, and Statistics from the University of Cape Town, graduating in 1996 with the highest GPA in the history of the program. A year and a half later he became the youngest actuary (Institute of Actuaries and Faculty of Actuaries) in South African history. Botha worked as a business analyst at McKinsey & Co., Johannesburg, from August 1996 through June 1998. He then moved to the United States, where he attended the Stanford University Graduate School of Business from 1998 through 2000 and received an MBA. In 2000, prior to his graduation from Stanford, Botha became director of corporate development for PayPal. He moved on to vice-president of finance and was named CFO in September 2001. Botha was 28 when PayPal went public in February 2002. The company was purchased by eBay in October 2002. Botha left to join Sequoia Capital in January 2003.   == Family == Botha's father, also named Roelof, is an economist. His grandfather is Roelof Frederik "Pik" Botha, a former South African politician who served as the country's foreign minister in the last years of the apartheid era. His uncle is the rock musician Piet Botha.   == References ==   == External links == Roelof Botha Bio

Stuart Jay Olshansky (born February 22, 1954) is a professor in the School of Public Health at the University of Illinois at Chicago concentrating on biodemography and gerontology. He is also a research associate at the Center on Aging (University of Chicago) and at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Olshansky is an associate editor of the Journal of Gerontology: Biological Sciences and Biogerontology and is a member of the editorial boards of several other scientific journals. Olshansky has been working with colleagues in the biological sciences to develop the modern "biodemographic paradigm" of mortality – an effort to understand the biological nature of the survival and dying out processes of living organisms. The focus of his research has been on estimates of the upper limits to human longevity, exploring the health and public policy implications associated with individual and population aging, forecasts of the size, survival, and age structure of the population, pursuit of the scientific means to slow aging in people (The Longevity Dividend), and global implications of the re-emergence of infectious and parasitic diseases, and insurance linked securities.   == Biography == Olshansky was born on February 22, 1954. He attended Michigan State University and was awarded a B.S. in 1975. He then attended the University of Chicago and was awarded a M.So. in 1982. He received his Ph.D. in sociology at the University of Chicago in 1984. His work on biodemography has been funded by a Special Emphasis Research Career Award and an Independent Scientist Award from the National Institute on Aging and a research grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration starting in 1991. In 2011 he published an article on the longevity of United States presidents in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Olshansky was the recipient of a 2005/2006 Senior Fulbright Award to lecture in France. In 2010 he was made fellow of the Gerontological Society of America. He is co-author with Bruce A Carnes of The Quest for Immortality: Science at the Frontiers of Aging (Norton, 2001); According to WorldCat, the book is held in 721 libraries. It has been translated into Spanish as En busca de la inmortalidad : la ciencia en las fronteras del envejecimiento, into German as Ewig jung? : Altersforschung und das Versprechen vom langen Leben; and into Japanese as 長生きするヒトはどこが違うか? : 不老と遺伝子のサイエンス / Nagaikisuru hito wa doko ga chigauka : Furō to idenshi no saiensu    == See also ==  Life extension Senescence   == References ==

Samuel Stanley Wilks (June 17, 1906 – March 7, 1964) was an American mathematician and academic who played an important role in the development of mathematical statistics, especially in regard to practical applications. Born in Little Elm, Texas and raised on a farm, Wilks was educated at the University of Iowa, where he acquired his Ph.D. under Everett F. Lindquist; his thesis dealt with a problem of statistical measurement in education, and was published in the Journal of Educational Psychology. Wilks became an instructor in mathematics at Princeton University in 1933; in 1938 he assumed the editorship of the journal Annals of Mathematical Statistics in place of Harry C. Carver. Wilks assembled an advisory board for the journal that included major figures in statistics and probability, among them Ronald Fisher, Jerzy Neyman, and Egon Pearson. Wilks was named professor of mathematics and director of the Section of Mathematical Statistics at Princeton in 1944, and became chairman of the Division of Mathematics at the university in 1958. He was noted for his work on multivariate statistics. He also conducted work on unit-weighted regression, proving the idea that under a wide variety of common conditions, almost all set of weights will yield composites that are very highly correlated (Wilks, 1938), a result that has been dubbed Wilks's theorem (Ree, Carretta, & Earles, 1998). From the start of his career, Wilks favored a strong focus on practical applications for the increasingly abstract field of mathematical statistics; he also influenced other researchers, notably John Tukey, in a similar direction. Drawing upon the background of his thesis, Wilks worked with the Educational Testing Service in developing the standardized tests like the SAT that have had a profound effect on American education. He also worked with Walter Shewhart on statistical applications in quality control in manufacturing. During World War II he was a consultant with the Office of Naval Research. Both during and after the War he had a profound impact on the application of statistical methods to all aspects of military planning. Wilks died in 1964 in Princeton. The American Statistical Association named its Wilks Memorial Award in his honor. Wilks's lambda distribution is a probability distribution related to two independent Wishart distributed variables. It is important in multivariate statistics and likelihood-ratio tests.   == References == Mosteller, Frederick. "Samuel S. Wilks: Statesman of Statistics." American Statistician, Vol. 18, No. 2 (April 1964), pp. 11–17. (Reprint on American Statistical Association's Statisticians in History website). Ree, M. J., Carretta, T. R., & Earles, J. A. (1998). "In top-down decisions, weighting variables does not matter: A consequence of Wilks's theorem. Organizational Research Methods, volume 1(4), pages 407–420. doi:10.1177/109442819814003 Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century. New York, W. H. Freeman, 2001. Stephan, Frederick F. et al. "Samuel S. Wilks." Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 60, No. 312 (Dec. 1965), pp. 939–66. Wilks, S. S. (1938). "Weighting systems for linear functions of correlated variables when there is no dependent variable". Psychometrika, volume 3, pages 23–40. doi:10.1007/BF02287917   == External links == Wilks at Princeton

Sewall Green Wright (December 16, 1889 – March 3, 1988) was an American geneticist known for his influential work on evolutionary theory and also for his work on path analysis. He was a founder of population genetics alongside Ronald Fisher and J.B.S. Haldane, which was a major step in the development of the modern evolutionary synthesis combining genetics with evolution. He discovered the inbreeding coefficient and methods of computing it in pedigree animals. He extended this work to populations, computing the amount of inbreeding between members of populations as a result of random genetic drift, and along with Fisher he pioneered methods for computing the distribution of gene frequencies among populations as a result of the interaction of natural selection, mutation, migration and genetic drift. Wright also made major contributions to mammalian and biochemical genetics.    == Biography == Sewall Wright was born in Melrose, Massachusetts to Philip Green Wright and Elizabeth Quincy Sewall Wright. His parents were first cousins, an interesting fact in light of Wright's later research on inbreeding. The family moved three years later after Philip accepted a teaching job at Lombard College, a Universalist college in Galesburg, Illinois. As a child, Wright helped his father and brother print and publish an early book of poems by his father's student Carl Sandburg. He was the oldest of three gifted brothers—the others being the aeronautical engineer Theodore Paul Wright and the political scientist Quincy Wright. From an early age Wright had a love and talent for mathematics and biology. Wright attended Galesburg High School and graduated in 1906. He then enrolled in Lombard College where his father taught, to study mathematics. He was influenced greatly by Professor Wilhelmine Entemann Key, one of the first women to receive a Ph.D. in biology. Wright received his Ph.D. from Harvard University, where he worked at the Bussey Institute with the pioneering mammalian geneticist William Ernest Castle investigating the inheritance of coat colors in mammals. He worked for the U.S. Department of Agriculture until 1925, when he joined the Department of Zoology at the University of Chicago. He remained there until his retirement in 1955, when he moved to the University of Wisconsin–Madison. He received many honors in his long career, including the National Medal of Science (1966), the Balzan Prize (1984), and the Darwin Medal of the Royal Society (1980). He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society. The American Mathematical Society selected him as the Josiah Willards Gibbs lecturer for 1941. For his work on genetics of evolutionary processes, Wright was awarded the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal from the National Academy of Sciences in 1945. Wright married Louise Lane Williams (1895–1975) in 1921. They had three children: Richard, Robert, and Elizabeth.   == Scientific achievements and credits ==   === Population genetics ===  His papers on inbreeding, mating systems, and genetic drift make him a principal founder of theoretical population genetics, along with R. A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane. Their theoretical work is the origin of the modern evolutionary synthesis or neodarwinian synthesis. Wright was the inventor/discoverer of the inbreeding coefficient and F-statistics, standard tools in population genetics. He was the chief developer of the mathematical theory of genetic drift, which is sometimes known as the Sewall Wright effect, cumulative stochastic changes in gene frequencies that arise from random births, deaths, and Mendelian segregations in reproduction. In this work he also introduced the concept of effective population size. Wright was convinced that the interaction of genetic drift and the other evolutionary forces was important in the process of adaptation. He described the relationship between genotype or phenotype and fitness as fitness surfaces or evolutionary landscapes. On these landscapes mean population fitness was the height, plotted against horizontal axes representing the allele frequencies or the average phenotypes of the population. Natural selection would lead to a population climbing the nearest peak, while genetic drift would cause random wandering.   === Evolutionary theory === Wright's explanation for stasis was that organisms come to occupy adaptive peaks. In order to evolve to another, higher peak, the species would first have to pass through a valley of maladaptive intermediate stages. This could happen by genetic drift if the population is small enough. If a species was divided into small populations, some could find higher peaks. If there was some gene flow between the populations, these adaptations could spread to the rest of the species. This was Wright's shifting balance theory of evolution. There has been much skepticism among evolutionary biologists as to whether these rather delicate conditions hold often in natural populations. Wright had a long standing and bitter debate about this with R. A. Fisher, who felt that most populations in nature were too large for these effects of genetic drift to be important.   === Path analysis === Wright's statistical method of path analysis, which he invented in 1921 and which was one of the first methods using a graphical model, is still widely used in social science. He was a hugely influential reviewer of manuscripts, as one of the most frequent reviewers for Genetics. Such was his reputation that he was often credited with reviews that he did not write.   === Plant and animal breeding === Wright strongly influenced Jay Lush, who was the most influential figure in introducing quantitative genetics into animal and plant breeding. From 1915 to 1925 Wright was employed by the Animal Husbandry Division of the U.S. Bureau of Animal Husbandry. His main project was to investigate the inbreeding that had occurred in the artificial selection that resulted in the leading breeds of livestock used in American beef production. He also performed experiments with 80,000 guinea pigs in the study of physiological genetics. Further more he analyzed characters of some 40,000 guinea pigs in 23 strains of brother-sister matings against a random-bred stock. (Wright 1922a-c). The concentrated study of these two groups of mammals eventually led to the Shifting Balance Theory and the concept of "surfaces of selective value" in 1932. (Wright 1988 Pg 122 American Naturalist) He did major work on the genetics of guinea pigs, and many of his students became influential in the development of mammalian genetics. He appreciated as early as 1917 that genes acted by controlling enzymes. An anecdote about Wright, disclaimed by Wright himself, describes a lecture during which Wright tucked an unruly guinea pig under his armpit, where he usually held a chalkboard eraser: according to the anecdote, at the conclusion of the lecture, Wright absent-mindedly began to erase the blackboard using the guinea pig.   === Wright and philosophy === Wright was one of the few geneticists of his time to venture into philosophy. He found a union of concept in Charles Hartshorne, who became a lifelong friend and philosophical collaborator. Wright endorsed a form of panpsychism. He believed that the birth of the consciousness was not due to a mysterious property of increasing complexity, but rather an inherent property, therefore implying these properties were in the most elementary particles.   == Legacy == Wright and Fisher, along with J.B.S. Haldane, were the key figures in the modern synthesis that brought genetics and evolution together. Their work was essential to the contributions of Dobzhansky, Mayr, Simpson, Julian Huxley, and Stebbins. The modern synthesis was the most important development in evolutionary biology after Darwin. Wright also had a major effect on the development of mammalian genetics and biochemical genetics. An interesting anecdote about Sewall Wright and Barbara McClintock is linked here: OpenMx has as its icon a representation of Wright's Piebald Guinea Pig   == Bibliography == Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 1 (Genetic & Biometric Foundations); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91038-5.  Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 2 (Theory of Gene Frequencies); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91039-3.  Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 3 (Experimental Results and Evolutionary Deductions); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91040-7.  Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 4 (Variability within and Among Natural Populations); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91041-5.    == References ==   == Further reading == Ghiselin, Michael T. (1997) Metaphysics and the Origin of Species. NY: SUNY Press. Provine, William (1986). Sewall Wright and Evolutionary Biology. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-68473-3.  Wright, Sewall (1932). "The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection in evolution". Proc. 6th Int. Cong. Genet 1: 356–366.  Wright, Sewall (1986). Evolution: Selected papers. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91053-9.    == External links == Sewall Wright: Darwin's Successor—Evolutionary Theorist by Edric Lescouflair and James F. Crow Sewall Wright Papers at the American Philosophical Society O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Sewall Wright", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Shyamaprasad Mukherjee, FNASc, known as S. P. Mukherjee, (born 16 June 1939) is an Indian statistician and the Centenary Professor of Statistics at the University of Calcutta. He is currently visiting professor at University of Calcutta after retiring formally as the Centenary Professor of Statistics in 2004.   == Early life and education == He was born in Kidderpore, Kolkata, India. In 1954 he appeared in his school final (10th grade) examination and was ranked second in the state of West Bengal. He received an M.Sc. in Statistics in 1960 and Ph.D. in Statistics in 1967 from University of Calcutta. After a short stint of teaching in the Presidency College, Calcutta he joined the University of Calcutta, as a lecturer in Statistics in 1964.   == Academic career == He has done research in Applied Probability, Parametric & Bayesian Estimation, Reliability Analysis, Quality Management, and Operations Research; published more than sixty research papers and review & expository articles; and supervised twenty one Ph. D. students. He was the President of the Operational Research Society of India as well as of the Association of Asian-Pacific Operational Research Societies (APORS). He was also a Vice-President of the International Federation of Operational Research Societies (IFORS). He has been the President  of the Calcutta Statistical Association. He has served as the Chairman of the Committee on Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability of the Bureau of Indian Standards. He is currently the President of the Indian Association for Productivity, Quality and Reliability (IAPQR)  as well as the Editor of IAPQR Transactions and is associated with the editorial work of several other journals.   === Areas of research contributions === Applied Probability Parametric and Bayesian Estimation Reliability Quality Management Operations Research   === Books authored === Graduate Employment and Higher Education in West Bengal Frontiers in Probability and Statistics   === Awards and medals === Prof P V Sukhatme Award for Senior Statisticians June 2012 P C Mahalanobis Birth Centenary Award Jan 2000   == References ==   == External links == List of Prestigious Chairs, University of Calcutta News on National Statistics Day 2012

Simon Smith Kuznets (/kʊzˈnɛts/, /ˈkʌznɛts/; Russian: Семён Абра́мович Кузне́ц; IPA: [sʲɪˈmʲɵn ɐˈbraməvʲɪtɕ kʊzʲˈnʲɛts]; April 30, 1901 – July 8, 1985) was an American economist, statistician, demographer, and economic historian who won the 1971 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences "for his empirically founded interpretation of economic growth which has led to new and deepened insight into the economic and social structure and process of development". Kuznets made a decisive contribution to the transformation of economics into empirical science and to the formation of quantitative economic history.   == Biography == He was born of a Jewish family in Pinsk, located in Belarus since the country's independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kuznets studied in the Second public school taking primary and secondary classes in 1915–1917. After the graduation he enrolled at the University of Kharkiv. There he began to study economics and became exposed to Joseph Schumpeter's theory of innovation and the business cycle. In 1918, Kuznets entered the Kharkiv Institute of Commerce where he studied economic sciences, statistics, history and mathematics under the guidance of professors P. Fomin (political economy), A. Antsiferov (statistics), V. Levitsky (economic history and economic thought), S. Bernstein (probability theory), V. Davats (mathematics), and others. Basic academic courses at the Institute helped him to acquire “exceptional” erudition in economics, as well as in history, demography, statistics and natural sciences. According to the Institute’s curriculum, development of the national economies had to be analyzed in the wider context of changes in connected spheres and with involvement of proper methods and empirical data. At the turn of 1920–1921 years, the normal course in the Institute was interrupted by the events of the Civil War and reorganizations undertaken by the Soviet authorities in the sphere of the higher education. There is no precise information whether Kuznets continued his studies at the Institute, but it is known that he joined the Department of Labor of UZHBURO (South Bureau) of the Central Council of Trade Unions. There he published his first scientific paper, "Monetary wages and salaries of factory workers in Kharkiv in 1920"; he explored the dynamics of different types of wages by industries in Kharkiv and income differentiation, depending on the wage system. In 1922, the Kuznets family emigrated to the United States. Kuznets then studied at Columbia University under the guidance of Wesley Clair Mitchell. He graduated with a B.Sc. in 1923, M.A. in 1924, and Ph.D. in 1926. As his magister thesis, he defended the essay “Economic system of Dr. Schumpeter, presented and analyzed”, written in Kharkiv. From 1925 to 1926, Kuznets spent time studying economic patterns in prices as the Research Fellow at the Social Science Research Council. It was this work that led to his book "Secular Movements in Production and Prices", defended as a doctoral thesis and published in 1930. In 1927, he became a member of the research staff of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), where he worked until 1961. From 1931 until 1936, Kuznets was a part-time professor at the University of Pennsylvania, he was elected to the Pi Gamma Mu social science honor society chapter at the University of Pennsylvania and actively served as a chapter officer in the 1940s; becoming a full-time professor 1936 until 1954. In 1954, Kuznets moved to Johns Hopkins University, where he was Professor of Political Economy until 1960. From 1961 until his retirement in 1970, Kuznets taught at Harvard. Apart from that, Kuznets collaborated with a number of research organizations and government agencies. In 1931–1934, at Mitchell’s behest, Kuznets took charge of the NBER’s work on U.S. national income accounts, given the first official estimation of the US national income. In 1936, Kuznets took the lead in establishing the Conference on Research Income and Wealth, which brought together government officials and academic economists, engaged in the development of the U.S. national income and product accounts, and in 1947 helped to establish its international counterpart, the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth. During the World War II, in 1942–1944 Kuznets became the associate director of the Bureau of Planning and Statistics, War Production Board. He took part in works aimed to assess the capacity to expand military production. Researchers used national income accounting together with a rough form of linear programming to measure the potential for increased production and the sources from which it would come and to identify the materials that were binding constraints on expansion. After the War, he worked as an advisor for the governments of China, Japan, India, Korea, Taiwan, and Israel in the establishment of their national systems of economic information. Kuznets cooperated with the Growth Center of Yale University, the Social Science Research Council (SSRC). He guided extensive research holding a number of positions in research institutions,such as the Chairman of the Falk Project for Economic Research in Israel, 1953–1963; member of the Board of Trustees and honorary chairman, Maurice Falk Institute for Economic Research in Israel, from 1963; and Chairman, Social Science Research Council Committee on the Economy of China, 1961–1970. Kuznets was elected as the President of the American Economic Association (1954), President of the American Statistical Association (1949), an honorable member of the Association of Economic History, the Royal Statistical Society of England and a member of the Econometric Society, the International Statistical Institute, the American Philosophical Society, the Royal Swedish Academy, a corresponding member of the British Academy. He was awarded the Medal of Francis Walker (1977). Simon Kuznets died on July 8, 1985, at the age of 84. In 2013 The Kharkiv National University of Economics where he studied in 1918–1921 was named after him (Semen Kuznets Kharkiv National University of Economics).   == His work and its impact on economics == His name is associated with the formation of the modern economic science such as an empirical discipline, the development of statistical methods of research and the emergence of quantitative economic history. Kuznets is credited with revolutionising econometrics, and this work is credited with fueling the so-called Keynesian revolution". The views and the scientific methodology of Kuznets were influenced by methodological settings received by him in Kharkov and fully shared by Mitchell for the statistical, inductive construction of hypotheses in economics and its empirical testing. Kuznets treated a priori and speculative conceptions with deep skepticism. At the same time, Kuznets tended to analyze economy in connection and with the wider context of historical situation, demographic, social processes that was peculiar for the Kharkov academics at the beginning of the 20th century. Kuznets was influenced by the work of such leading theorists as Joseph A. Schumpeter (who probed the relationship between technological change and business cycles), A. C. Pigou (who identified circumstances under which markets failed to maximize economic welfare), and Vilfredo Pareto (who propounded a law governing the distribution of income among households). Kuznets was closely familiar with the economics of Russia and Ukraine of the early 20th century. In the 1920s, he reviewed and translated the little known in the West papers of Kondratiev, Slutsky, Pervushin, Weinstein.   === Historical series of economic dynamics and Kuznets Cycles, or "long swings" === The first major research project in which Kuznets was involved was the study of long series of economic dynamics in the USA undertaken in the mid-1920s. The collected data covered the period from 1865 to 1925, and for some indices achieved 1770. Applying for the analysis of time series approximating Gompertz and logistic curves, Kuznets found that the characteristics of the curves with reasonable accuracy described the majority of economic processes. Fitting trend curves to data and analysis of the time series, comparison of theoretical and empirical levels, allowed him to identify medium-term extended cycles of economic activity, which lasted 15–25 years and had an intermediate position between the Kondratyev “long waves" and short business cycles. Aspiring to determine the nature of these cycles, Kuznets analyzed the dynamics of population, the construction industry performance, capital, national income data and other variables. These movements became known among economists and economic historians as "Kuznets Cycles", and alternatively as "long swings" in the economy's growth rate (following the work of Moses Abramovitz [1912-1999]. ```   === National income accounts === In 1931, at Mitchell’s behest, Kuznets took charge of the NBER’s work on U.S. national income accounts. In 1934, an assessment of the national income of the United States for the period 1929–1932 was given; further, it was extended to 1919–1938, and then, until 1869. Although Kuznets was not the first economist to try this, his work was so comprehensive and meticulous that it set the standard in the field. Kuznets had success to solve numerous problems ranging from lack of sources of information and bias assessments, to the development of the theoretical concept of national income. Kuznets achieved a high precision in calculations. His works allowed us to analyze the structure of the national income, and expose to detailed study a number of specific problems of the national economy. Improved methods for calculating the national income and related indicators have become classics and formed the basis of the modern system of national accounts. Having analyzed the distribution of income among different social groups, Kuznets put forward the hypothesis that in countries, which wereon the early stages of economic development, income inequality increased first, but as far as national economy was growing, it tended to decrease. This assumption formed the basis of so-called "Kuznets curve" empirical conception. Kuznets helped the U.S. Department of Commerce to standardize the measurement of GNP. He disapproved, however, of its use as a general indication of welfare, writing that "the welfare of a nation can scarcely be inferred from a measure of national income." Exploring the formation of the national income, Kuznets studied proportions between output and income, consumption and savings, etc. After analyzing the long-term data sets of economic conditions for 20 countries, Kuznets revealed long-term trends in capital / output ratios, shares of net capital formation, net investment, and so on. Collected and systematized data allowed exposing to empirical testing a number of existing hypotheses. In particular, this concerned premises of the Keynes theory – Keynes' 1936 Absolute Income Hypothesis. The hypothesis gave birth to what would become the first formal consumption function. However Kuznets shook the economic world by finding that Keynes' predictions, while seemingly accurate in short-run cross-sections, broke down under more rigorous examination. In his 1942 tome Uses of National Income in Peace and War, published by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Kuznets became the first economist to show that the Absolute Income Hypothesis gives inaccurate predictions in the long run (by using time-series data). Keynes had predicted that as aggregate income increases, so will marginal savings. Kuznets used new data to show that, over a longer span of time (1870's – 1940's) the savings ratio remained constant, despite large changes in income. This paved the way for Milton Friedman's Permanent Income Hypothesis, and several more modern alternatives such as the Life cycle hypothesis and the Relative Income Hypothesis.   === Economic growth === By the end of the Second World War Kuznets moved into a new research area, related to the tie between changes in income and growth. He proposed research program that involved extensive empirical studies on the four key elements of economic growth. In fact, the demographic growth, the growth of knowledge, in-country adaptation to growth factors and external economic relations between the countries. The general theory of economic growth should explain the development of advanced industrial countries, and the reasons that prevent the development of backward countries, include both market and planned economies, large and small, developed and developing countries, consider the impact on growth of foreign economic relations. He collected and analyzed statistical indicators of economic performance of 14 countries in Europe, the U.S. and Japan for 60 years. Analysis of the materials led to the advancement of a number of hypotheses relating to various aspects of the mechanism of economic growth, concerning the level and variability of growth, structure of the GNP and distribution of labor, the distribution of income between households, the structure of foreign trade. Kuznets founded the historically grounded theory of economic growth. The central theme of these empirical studies is that the growth of the aggregated product of the country necessarily implies a profound transformation of the whole of its economic structure. This transformation affects many aspects of economic life – the structure of production, sectoral and occupational structure of employment, the division of occupations among family and market activities, the income structure, size, age structure and spatial distribution of the population, cross-country flows of goods, capital, labor and knowledge, the organization of industry and governmental regulation. Such changes, in his opinion, are essential for overall growth and, once started, shape, constrain or support the subsequent economic development of the country. Kuznets made a profound analysis of the impact on economic growth by demographic processes and characteristics. His major thesis, which argued that underdeveloped countries of today possess characteristics different from those that industrialized countries faced before they developed, helped put an end to the simplistic view that all countries went through the same "linear stages" in their history and launched the separate field of development economics – which now focused on the analysis of modern underdeveloped countries' distinct experiences.   === Kuznets curve === Among his several discoveries which sparked important theoretical research programs was his discovery of the inverted U-shaped relation between income inequality and economic growth (1955, 1963). In poor countries, economic growth increased the income disparity between rich and poor people. In wealthier countries, economic growth narrowed the difference. By noting patterns of income inequality in developed and underdeveloped countries, he proposed that as countries experienced economic growth, the income inequality first increases and then decreases. The reasoning was that in order to experience growth, countries had to shift from agricultural to industrial sectors. While there was little variation in the agricultural income, industrialization led to large differences in income. Additionally, as economies experienced growth, mass education provided greater opportunities which decreased the inequality and the lower income portion of the population gained political power to change governmental policies. He also discovered the patterns in savings-income behavior which launched the Life-Cycle-Permanent-Income Hypothesis of Modigliani and Friedman.   === Historical and economic works of the 1970s === In his historical and economic studies of the 1970s., Kuznets expressed the idea of interaction of science and technology (innovations), and institutional shifts, as well as a role of external to the economy factors, such as those caused by the moral and political climate in society, and their impact on the progress and results of economic growth. Kuznets was awarded by the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel in 1971 “for his empirically founded interpretation of economic growth which has led to new and deepened insight into the economic and social structure and process of development”.   == Selected publications == "Secular Movements in Production and Prices: Their Nature and Their Bearing upon Cyclical Fluctuations". (1930) "National Income and Capital Formation, 1919–1935". (1937) "National Income and Its Composition, 1919–1938". (1941) "Economic Growth and Income Inequality". American Economic Review 45 (March): 1–28. (1955) "Quantitative aspects of the economic growth of nations, VIII: The distribution of income by size", Economic Development and Cultural Change, 11, pp. 1–92. (1963) "Modern Economic Growth: Rate, Structure, and Spread". (1966) "Toward a Theory of Economic Growth, with Reflections on the Economic Growth of Modern Nations". (1968) "Economic Growth of Nations: Total Output and Production Structure". (1971) "Population, Capital and Growth". (1973)   == See also == Capital formation Gross domestic product Information Revolution List of economists List of Jewish Nobel laureates Simon Kuznets Kharkiv National University of Economics   == References ==   == Further reading == Abramovitz M. Simon Kuznets (1901–1985) // The Journal of Economic History, March 1986, v. 46, no. 1, p. 241–246. Ben-Porath Y. Simon Kuznets in Person and in Writing // Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 36, No. 3 (Apr., 1988), pp. 435–447. Fogel, Robert W. (2000). "Simon S. Kuznets: April 30, 1901 – July 9, 1985". NBER Working Paper No. W7787.  Fogel, Robert William; Fogel, Enid M.; Guglielmo, Mark; Grotte, Nathaniel (2013). Political Arithmetic: Simon Kuznets and the Empirical Tradition in Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-25661-8.  Hoselitz B. F. Bibliography of Simon Kuznets // Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 31, No. 2 (Jan., 1983), pp. 433–454. Kapuria-Foreman V., Perlman M. An Economic Historian's Economist: Remembering Simon Kuznets // The Economic Journal, 105 (November), 1995, p. 1524–1547. Syed, Munir Khasru; Mohammad, Muaz Jalil (2004). "Revisiting Kuznets Hypothesis: An Analysis with Time Series and Panel Data". Bangladesh Development Studies 30 (3–4): 89–112.  Lundberg, Erik (1971). "Simon Kuznets contributions to Economics". The Swedish Journal of Economics 73 (4): 444–459. doi:10.2307/3439225. JSTOR 3439225.  Street J. H. The Contribution of Simon S. Kuznets to Institutionalist Development Theory // Journal of Economic Issues, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Jun., 1988), pp. 499–509.   == External links == Simon Kuznets (1901–1985). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  New School for Social Research. With partial bibliography and web links. Kuznets's Nobel Prize lecture. Fogel, Robert, 2000, "Simon S. Kuznets: 1901–1985," NBER Working Paper No. 7787. National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

Sir John Sinclair of Ulbster, 1st Baronet (10 May 1754 – 21 December 1835) was a Scottish politician, writer on finance and agriculture and the first person to use the word statistics in the English language, in his vast, pioneering work, Statistical Account of Scotland, in 21 volumes. Sinclair was the eldest son of George Sinclair of Ulbster, a member of the family of the Earls of Caithness, and was born at Thurso Castle, Caithness. After studying at the universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow and at Trinity College, Oxford, he was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland, and called to the English bar, though he never practised. In 1780, he was returned to the House of Commons for the Caithness constituency, and subsequently represented several English constituencies, his parliamentary career extending, with few interruptions, until 1811. Sinclair established at Edinburgh a society for the improvement of British wool, and was mainly instrumental in the creation of the Board of Agriculture, of which he was the first president. His reputation as a financier and economist had been established by the publication, in 1784, of his History of the Public Revenue of the British Empire; in 1793 widespread ruin was prevented by the adoption of his plan for the issue of Exchequer Bills; and it was on his advice that, in 1797, Pitt issued the "loyalty loan" of eighteen millions for the prosecution of the war.   == Family and private life == Sir John Sinclair, who was created a baronet in 1786, was twice married. He had two daughters by his first wife. One source gives his wife's name as Lady Catherine Camilla Tollemache, daughter of William Talmash, Lord Huntingtower. whilst a later source says her name was Sarah Maitland who died in 1785. The two daughters were Hannah and Janet, who became a religious writer. Sinclair was married, secondly, to Diana, daughter of Alexander Lord Macdonald, by whom he had thirteen children. His eldest son, Sir George Sinclair, 2nd Baronet (1790–1868) was a writer and a Member of Parliament, representing Caithness at intervals from 1811 until 1841. His son, Sir John George Tollemache Sinclair, 3rd Baronet, was member for the same constituency from 1869 to 1885. The first Baronet's third son, also John (1797–1875), became Archdeacon of Middlesex; the fourth son was Captain Archibald Sinclair RN; the fifth son, William (1804–1878), was Prebendary of Chichester and was the father of William Macdonald Sinclair (b. 1850), who in 1889 became Archdeacon of London; the fourth daughter, Catherine Sinclair was an author. In the 1830s he is listed as living at 133 George Street, in the centre of Edinburgh's New Town.   == Scientific agriculture == Sinclair's services to scientific agriculture were conspicuous. He supervised the compilation of the Statistical Account of Scotland (21 vols., 1791–1799) which was drawn up from the communications of the Ministers of the different parishes'. This became known as the "Old Statistical Account." In volume XX (p. xiii) Sinclair explained the choice of name and the purpose of the inquiry:  "Many people were at first surprised at my using the words "statistical" and "statistics", as it was supposed that some term in our own language might have expressed the same meaning. But in the course of a very extensive tour through the northern parts of Europe, which I happened to take in 1786, I found that in Germany they were engaged in a species of political enquiry to which they had given the name "statistics," and though I apply a different meaning to that word—for by "statistical" is meant in Germany an inquiry for the purposes of ascertaining the political strength of a country or questions respecting matters of state—whereas the idea I annex to the term is an inquiry into the state of a country, for the purpose of ascertaining the quantum of happiness enjoyed by its inhabitants, and the means of its future improvement; but as I thought that a new word might attract more public attention, I resolved on adopting it, and I hope it is now completely naturalised and incorporated with our language."  For Sinclair, statistics involved collecting facts, but these were not necessarily, or even typically, numerical. Sinclair was a proponent of new agricultural methods, and large tracts of land on his Caithness estate were let out to tenants who kept new breeds of livestock such as Cheviot sheep. This plan meant evicting the sitting tenants and giving them smaller plots of land to work, often in harsh coastal areas such as Badbea. Eventually many of the displaced tenants emigrated. Sinclair was a member of most of the continental agricultural societies, a fellow of the Royal Society of London and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, as well as of the Antiquarian Society of London, a member and sometimes president of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, and sat as president of the Highland Society of London in 1796. Also, in 1796, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1797. Originally a supporter of Pitt's war policy, Sinclair later joined the party of "armed neutrality." In 1805 he was appointed by Pitt a commissioner for the construction of roads and bridges in the north of Scotland, in 1810 he was made a member of the privy council and, next year, received the lucrative sinecure office of Commissioner of excise. When the Statistical Society of London (now the Royal Statistical Society) was founded in 1834, Sinclair at 80 was the oldest original member. In the same year he presented a paper on agriculture to the British Association for the Advancement of Science, but this was found to lack "facts which can be stated numerically."   == Archaeological recording == Sinclair's works sometimes were the first recording of details of archaeological monuments of Scotland. For example, the first recorded mention of the Catto Long Barrow in Aberdeenshire was made by Sinclair in 1795.   == Writings == He was the author of the books Statistical Accounts of Scotland; History of the Public Revenue of the British Empire 1784; The Code of Health and Longevity 1807; Code of Agriculture 1819. After a tour of agricultural inquiry in Flanders in 1815 he wrote a pamphlet: "Hints Regarding the Agriculture State of the Netherlands, Compared with that of Great Britain", Mc Millan, Londen, 1815   == Line notes ==   == References == Calder, John Traill (1887), Sketch of the Civil and Traditional History of Caithness, Rae  John Sinclair. The Correspondence of the Right Honourable Sir John Sinclair, Bart. With Reminiscences of the Most Distinguished Characters Who Have Appeared in Great Britain, and in Foreign Countries, During the Last Fifty Years. 2 Vols. London: H. Colburn & R. Bentley, 1831. googlebbooks.com Accessed 12 November 2007 Sinclair, Rev. John (Sir John's Sinclair's son). Memoirs of the Life and Works of the Late Right Honourable Sir John Sinclair, Bart. 2 Vols, Edinburgh: W. Blackwood and Sons, 1837. googlebooks.com Accessed 12 November 2007 C. Michael Hogan. 2008 Catto Long Barrow fieldnotes, The Modern Antiquarian R. Mitchison, Agricultural Sir John: The life of Sir John Sinclair of Ulbster, London: Geoffrey Bles (1962). Rosalind Mitchison, "Sinclair, Sir John, first baronet (1754–1835)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004, accessed 16 July 2005. "Sinclair, John", pp. 70–72 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. R. L. Plackett (1986) The Old Statistical Account, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, A, (149), 247–251. Urban, Sylvanus. "Obituary" The Gentleman's Magazine. London: 1836. (pp. 431–433) googlebooks.com Accessed 12 November 2007 Leigh Rayment's Historical List of MPs   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Royal Society citation Portraits of Sir John Sinclair, 1st Bt at the National Portrait Gallery, London Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Sir John Sinclair For a biography published in 1856 see "Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen" For a description of the "Old Statistical Account" (and the "New") see Statistical Accounts of Scotland. For more on the history of the term "statistics", see the entry in Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics: S.  Works written by or about John Sinclair (1754-1835) at Wikisource

Sir Richard Biddulph Martin, 1st Baronet (12 May 1838 – 23 August 1916) was an English banker and Liberal Party (and later Liberal Unionist) politician. Martin was the older of two sons of Robert Martin (1808–1897) of Overbury Court near Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire and his wife, Mary Ann (d. 1892), who was the daughter of John Biddulph of the banking firm of Cocks, Biddulph & Co. Robert Martin was a partner of the Grasshopper Bank, which later became Martins Bank. He was educated at Harrow School and at Exeter College, Oxford, before joining his maternal grandfather's bank. He later became one of the founders of the British North Borneo Company and of the Institute of Bankers. Martin first stood for election to the House of Commons at the 1868 general election, when he was an unsuccessful candidate in the Eastern division of Worcestershire. He was unsuccessful again in next candidacy, at the 1880 general election in the City of London. However, 3 months later he was elected as Member of Parliament (MP) for Tewkesbury at a by-election held in July 1880 after the result of the general election in April was overturned on petition. Several of his ancestors had held the seat in the past, but Richard was the last Martin to represent Tewkesbury. The Parliamentary Borough of Tewkesbury was abolished under the Reform Act 1885 and replaced with a wider county division of Gloucestershire. At the 1885 general election, he did not stand for re-election in the new Tewkesbury division of Gloucestershire, contesting instead the Chelmsford division of Essex, but without success. When the Liberal Party split over Irish Home Rule, he joined the breakaway Liberal Unionist Party, and stood as a Liberal Unionist in the Ashburton division of Devon, again without success. He finally returned to Parliament at the 1892 general election as MP for the Droitwich division of Worcestershire, replacing the Liberal Unionist John Corbett, who had retired. Martin remained Droitwich's MP until he stood down at the 1906 general election. He was made a baronet on 12 December 1905, of Overbury Court, in Gloucestershire. He died childless, and the title became extinct on his death. He was President of the Royal Statistical Society from 1906 to 1907.   == References ==   == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Richard Martin Richard Biddulph Martin in the National Register of Archives

Solomon Kullback (1907 – 1994) was an American cryptanalyst and mathematician, who was one of the first three employees hired by William F. Friedman at the US Army's Signal Intelligence Service (SIS) in the 1930s, along with Frank Rowlett and Abraham Sinkov. He went on to a long and distinguished career at SIS and its eventual successor, the National Security Agency (NSA). Kullback was the Chief Scientist at the NSA until his retirement in 1962, whereupon he took a position at the George Washington University. The Kullback–Leibler divergence is named after Kullback and Richard Leibler.   == Life and career == Kullback was born in Brooklyn, New York and attended Boy's High School there. He then went to City College of New York, graduating with a BA in 1927 and an MA in math in 1929. He completed a doctorate in math from George Washington University in 1934. His intention had been to teach, and he returned to Boy's High School to do so, but found it not to his taste; he discovered his real interest was using mathematics, not teaching it. At the suggestion of Abraham Sinkov, who showed him a Civil Service flyer for "junior mathematicians" at US$2,000 per year, he took the examination. Both passed, and were assigned to Washington as junior cryptanalysts. Upon arrival in Washington, Kullback was assigned to William F. Friedman. Friedman had begun an intensive program of training in cryptology for his new civilian employees. For several summers running, the SIS cryptanalysts attended training camps at Fort Meade until they received commissions as reserve officers in the Army. Kullback and Sinkov took Friedman's admonitions on education seriously and spent the next several years attending night classes; both received their doctorates in mathematics. Afterward, Kullback rediscovered a love of teaching; he began offering evening classes in mathematics at George Washington University from 1939 on. Once they had completed the training, the three were put to the work for which they had actually been hired, compilations of cipher or code material for the U.S. Army. Another task was to test commercial cipher devices which vendors wished to sell to the U.S. government. Kullback worked in partnership with Frank Rowlett against RED cipher machine messages. Almost overnight, they unravelled the keying system and then the machine pattern – with nothing but the intercepted messages in hand. Using the talents of linguist John Hurt to translate text, SIS started issuing current intelligence to military decision-makers. In May 1942, five months after Pearl Harbor, Kullback, by then a Major, was sent to Britain. He learned at Bletchley Park that the British were producing intelligence of high quality by exploiting the Enigma machine. He also cooperated with the British in the solution of more conventional German codebook-based systems. Shortly after his return to the States, Kullback moved into the Japanese section as its chief. When the National Security Agency (NSA) was formed in 1952, Rowlett became chief of cryptanalysis. The primary problem facing research and development in the post-war period was development of high-speed processing equipment. Kullback supervised a staff of about 60, including such innovative thinkers in automated data processing development as Leo Rosen and Sam Snyder. His staff pioneered new forms of input and memory, such as magnetic tape and drum memory, and compilers to make machines truly "multi-purpose." Kullback gave priority to using computers to generate communications security (COMSEC) materials.   == Retirement == Solomon Kullback retired from NSA in 1962, and focused on his teaching at George Washington University and publishing new papers. A colonel, he is a member of the Military Intelligence Hall of Fame. Kullback is remembered by his colleagues at NSA as straightforward; one described him as "totally guileless, you always knew where you stood with him." One former NSA senior recalled him as a man of unlimited energy and enthusiasm and a man whose judgment was usually "sound and right."   == References ==   == External links == Solomon Kullback at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Solomon Kullback at the NSA Hall of Fame

Abraham de Moivre (26 May 1667 in Vitry-le-François, Champagne, France – 27 November 1754 in London, England; French pronunciation: ​[abʁaam də mwavʁ]) was a French mathematician known for de Moivre's formula, one of those that link complex numbers and trigonometry, and for his work on the normal distribution and probability theory. He was a friend of Isaac Newton, Edmond Halley, and James Stirling. Even though he faced religious persecution he remained a "steadfast Christian" throughout his life. Among his fellow Huguenot exiles in England, he was a colleague of the editor and translator Pierre des Maizeaux. De Moivre wrote a book on probability theory, The Doctrine of Chances, said to have been prized by gamblers. De Moivre first discovered Binet's formula, the closed-form expression for Fibonacci numbers linking the nth power of the golden ratio φ to the nth Fibonacci number. He also was the first to postulate the Central Limit Theorem, a cornerstone of probability theory.   == Life ==   === Early years === Abraham de Moivre was born in Vitry in Champagne on May 26, 1667. His father, Daniel de Moivre, was a surgeon who, though middle class believed in the value of education. Though Abraham de Moivre's parents were Protestant, he first attended Christian Brothers' Catholic school in Vitry, which was unusually tolerant given religious tensions in France at the time. When he was eleven, his parents sent him to the Protestant Academy at Sedan, where he spent four years studying Greek under Jacques du Rondel. The Protestant Academy of Sedan had been founded in 1579 at the initiative of Françoise de Bourbon, the widow of Henri-Robert de la Marck. In 1682 the Protestant Academy at Sedan was suppressed, and de Moivre enrolled to study logic at Saumur for two years. Although mathematics was not part of his course work, de Moivre read several works on mathematics on his own including Elémens des mathématiques by Jean Prestet and a short treatise on games of chance, De Ratiociniis in Ludo Aleae, by Christiaan Huygens. In 1684, de Moivre moved to Paris to study physics, and for the first time had formal mathematics training with private lessons from Jacques Ozanam. Religious persecution in France became severe when King Louis XIV issued the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685, which revoked the Edict of Nantes, that had given substantial rights to French Protestants. It forbade Protestant worship and required that all children be baptized by Catholic priests. De Moivre was sent to the Prieure de Saint-Martin, a school that the authorities sent Protestant children to for indoctrination into Catholicism. It is unclear when de Moivre left the Prieure de Saint-Martin and moved to England, since the records of the Prieure de Saint-Martin indicate that he left the school in 1688, but de Moivre and his brother presented themselves as Huguenots admitted to the Savoy Church in London on August 28, 1687.   === Middle years === By the time he arrived in London, de Moivre was a competent mathematician with a good knowledge of many of the standard texts. To make a living, de Moivre became a private tutor of mathematics, visiting his pupils or teaching in the coffee houses of London. De Moivre continued his studies of mathematics after visiting the Earl of Devonshire and seeing Newton's recent book, Principia Mathematica. Looking through the book, he realized that it was far deeper than the books that he had studied previously, and he became determined to read and understand it. However, as he was required to take extended walks around London to travel between his students, de Moivre had little time for study, so he tore pages from the book and carried them around in his pocket to read between lessons. According to a possibly apocryphal story, Newton, in the later years of his life, used to refer people posing mathematical questions to him to de Moivre, saying, "He knows all these things better than I do." By 1692, de Moivre became friends with Edmond Halley and soon after with Isaac Newton himself. In 1695, Halley communicated de Moivre's first mathematics paper, which arose from his study of fluxions in the Principia Mathematica, to the Royal Society. This paper was published in the Philosophical Transactions that same year. Shortly after publishing this paper, de Moivre also generalized Newton's noteworthy binomial theorem into the multinomial theorem. The Royal Society became apprised of this method in 1697, and it made de Moivre a member two months later. After de Moivre had been accepted, Halley encouraged him to turn his attention to astronomy. In 1705, de Moivre discovered, intuitively, that "the centripetal force of any planet is directly related to its distance from the centre of the forces and reciprocally related to the product of the diameter of the evolute and the cube of the perpendicular on the tangent." In other words, if a planet, M, follows an elliptical orbit around a focus F and has a point P where PM is tangent to the curve and FPM is a right angle so that FP is the perpendicular to the tangent, then the centripetal force at point P is proportional to FM/(R*(FP)3) where R is the radius of the curvature at M. The mathematician Johann Bernoulli proved this formula in 1710. Despite these successes, de Moivre was unable to obtain an appointment to a chair of mathematics at any university, which would have released him from his dependence on time-consuming tutoring that burdened him more than it did most other mathematicians of the time. At least a part of the reason was a bias against his French origins. In November 1697 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and in 1712 was appointed to a commission set up by the society, alongside MM. Arbuthnot, Hill, Halley, Jones, Machin, Burnet, Robarts, Bonet, Aston, and Taylor to review the claims of Newton and Leibniz as to who discovered calculus. The full details of the controversy can be found in the Leibniz and Newton calculus controversy article. Throughout his life de Moivre remained poor. It is reported that he was a regular customer of Slaughter's Coffee House, St. Martin's Lane at Cranbourn Street, where he earned a little money from playing chess.   === Later years === De Moivre continued studying the fields of probability and mathematics until his death in 1754 and several additional papers were published after his death. As he grew older, he became increasingly lethargic and needed longer sleeping hours. He noted that he was sleeping an extra 15 minutes each night and correctly calculated the date of his death as the day when the sleep time reached 24 hours, November 27, 1754. He died in London and his body was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, although his body was later moved.   == Probability ==  De Moivre pioneered the development of analytic geometry and the theory of probability by expanding upon the work of his predecessors, particularly Christiaan Huygens and several members of the Bernoulli family. He also produced the second textbook on probability theory, The Doctrine of Chances: a method of calculating the probabilities of events in play. (The first book about games of chance, Liber de ludo aleae (On Casting the Die), was written by Girolamo Cardano in the 1560s, but it was not published until 1663.) This book came out in four editions, 1711 in Latin, and in English in 1718, 1738, and 1756. In the later editions of his book, de Moivre included his unpublished result of 1733, which is the first statement of an approximation to the binomial distribution in terms of what we now call the normal or Gaussian function. This was the first method of finding the probability of the occurrence of an error of a given size when that error is expressed in terms of the variability of the distribution as a unit, and the first identification of the calculation of probable error. In addition, he applied these theories to gambling problems and actuarial tables. An expression commonly found in probability is n! but before the days of calculators calculating n! for a large n was time consuming. In 1733 de Moivre proposed the formula for estimating a factorial as n! = cnn+1/2e−n. He obtained an approximate expression for the constant c but it was James Stirling who found that c was √(2π) . Therefore, Stirling's approximation is as much due to de Moivre as it is to Stirling. De Moivre also published an article called "Annuities upon Lives" in which he revealed the normal distribution of the mortality rate over a person’s age. From this he produced a simple formula for approximating the revenue produced by annual payments based on a person’s age. This is similar to the types of formulas used by insurance companies today.   === Priority regarding the Poisson distribution === Some results on the Poisson distribution were first introduced by de Moivre in De Mensura Sortis seu; de Probabilitate Eventuum in Ludis a Casu Fortuito Pendentibus in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, p. 219. As a result, some authors have argued that the Poisson distribution should bear the name of de Moivre.   == De Moivre’s formula == In 1707 de Moivre derived:  which he was able to prove for all positive integers n. In 1722 he suggested it in the more well known form of de Moivre's Formula:  In 1749 Euler proved this formula for any real n using Euler's formula, which makes the proof quite straightforward. This formula is important because it relates complex numbers and trigonometry. Additionally, this formula allows the derivation of useful expressions for cos(nx) and sin(nx) in terms of cos(x) and sin(x).   == Notes ==   == References == See de Moivre's Miscellanea Analytica (London: 1730) p 26–42. H. J. R. Murray, 1913. History of Chess. Oxford University Press: 846. Schneider, I., 2005, "The doctrine of chances" in Grattan-Guinness, I., ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 105–20   == Further reading == de Moivre, Abraham at the Wayback Machine (archived December 19, 2007) The Doctrine of Chance at MathPages. Biography (PDF), Matthew Maty's Biography of Abraham De Moivre, Translated, Annotated and Augmented. Excerpt from Trigonometric Delights de Moivre, On the Law of Normal Probability

Lambert Adolphe Jacques Quetelet (French: [kətlɛ]; 22 February 1796 – 17 February 1874) ForMemRS was a Belgian astronomer, mathematician, statistician and sociologist. He founded and directed the Brussels Observatory and was influential in introducing statistical methods to the social sciences. His name is sometimes spelled with an accent as Quételet.   == Biography == Adolphe was born in Ghent (which at that time was a part of the newborn French Republic), the son of François-Augustin-Jacques-Henri Quetelet, a Frenchman and Anne Françoise Vandervelde, a Flemish woman. His father François was born at Ham, in Picardy, and being of a somewhat adventurous spirit, crossed the English Channel and became a British citizen and the secretary of a Scottish nobleman. In this capacity he traveled with his employer on the Continent, particularly spending time in Italy. At aged about 31, he settled in Ghent and was employed by the city, where Adolphe was born the fifth of nine children, several of whom died in childhood. Francois died when Adolphe was only seven years old. Adolphe studied at the Ghent lycée, where he started teaching mathematics in 1815 at the age of 19. In 1819 he moved to the Athenaeum in Brussels and in the same year he completed his dissertation (De quibusdam locis geometricis, necnon de curva focal – Of some new properties of the focal distance and some other curves). Quetelet received a doctorate in mathematics in 1819 from the University of Ghent. Shortly thereafter, the young man set out to convince government officials and private donors to build an astronomical observatory in Brussels; he succeeded in 1828. He became a member of the Royal Academy in 1820. He lectured at the museum for sciences and letters and at the Belgian Military School. In 1825 he became correspondent of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands, in 1827 he became member. From 1841 to 1851 he was supernumerair' associate in the Institute, and when it became Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences he became foreign member. In 1850, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Quetelet also founded several statistical journals and societies, and was especially interested in creating international cooperation among statisticians. In 1855 Quetelet suffered from apoplexy, which diminished but did not end his scientific activity. He died in Brussels on 17 February 1874, and is buried in the Brussels Cemetery.   == Work == His scientific research encompassed a wide range of different scientific disciplines: meteorology, astronomy, mathematics, statistics, demography, sociology, criminology and history of science. He made significant contributions to scientific development, but he also wrote several monographs directed to the general public. He founded the Royal Observatory of Belgium, founded or co-founded several national and international statistical societies and scientific journals, and presided over the first series of the International Statistical Congresses. Quetelet was a liberal and an anticlerical, but not an atheist or materialist nor a socialist.   === Social physics === The new science of probability and statistics was mainly used in astronomy at the time, to get a handle on measurement errors with the method of least squares. Quetelet was among the first who attempted to apply it to social science, planning what he called a "social physics". He was keenly aware of the overwhelming complexity of social phenomena, and the many variables that needed measurement. His goal was to understand the statistical laws underlying such phenomena as crime rates, marriage rates or suicide rates. He wanted to explain the values of these variables by other social factors. These ideas were rather controversial among other scientists at the time who held that it contradicted the concept of freedom of choice. His most influential book was Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou Essai de physique sociale, published in 1835 (In English translation, it is titled Treatise on Man, but a literal translation would be "On Man and the Development of his Faculties, or Essays on Social Physics"). In it, he outlines the project of a social physics and describes his concept of the "average man" (l'homme moyen) who is characterized by the mean values of measured variables that follow a normal distribution. He collected data about many such variables. When Auguste Comte discovered that Quetelet had appropriated the term 'social physics', which Comte had originally introduced, Comte found it necessary to invent the term 'sociologie' (sociology) because he disagreed with Quetelet's collection of statistics.   === Criminology === Quetelet was an influential figure in criminology. Along with Andre-Michel Guerry, he helped to establish the cartographic school and positivist schools of criminology which made extensive use of statistical techniques. Through statistical analysis, Quetelet gained insight into the relationships between crime and other social factors. Among his findings were strong relationships between age and crime, as well as gender and crime. Other influential factors he found included climate, poverty, education, and alcohol consumption, with his research findings published in Of the Development of the Propensity to Crime.   === Anthropometry === In 1835 he presented his theory of the average man in Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, essai d'une physique sociale, which measurements of human trait are grouped according to the normal curve. This normal variation helped to provide proof that a population produces enough variation for artificial or natural selection to operate. In terms of influence over later public health agendas, was Quetelet's establishment of a simple measure for classifying people's weight relative to an ideal weight for their height. His proposal, the body mass index (or Quetelet index), has endured with minor variations to the present day. Anthropometric data is used in modern applications and referenced in the development of every consumer-based product.   == Awards and honours == Quetelet was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1839. The asteroid 1239 Queteleta is named after him.   == Publications == 1823. Relation d'un voyage fait à la grotte de Han au mois d'août 1822'. 'With M.M. Kickx. 1827. Recherches sur la population, les naissances, les décès, les prisons, les dépôts de mendicité, etc., dans le royaume des Pays-Bas. 1829. Recherches statistiques sur le royaume des Pays-Bas. 1831. The Propensity to Crime. 1834. Astronomie élémentaire. 1835. Sur l'homme et le développement de ses facultés, ou Essai de physique sociale. 2 volumes. 1838. De l'influence des saisons sur la mortalité aux différens âges dans la Belgique. 1839. Catalogue des principales apparitions d'étoiles filantes. 1842. A Treatise on Man and the Development of His Faculties. 1843. Sur l'emploi de la boussole dans les mines. 1845–1851. Sur le climat de la Belgique. 2 volumes. 1848. Du système social et des lois qui le régissent. 1848. Sur la statistique morale et les principes qui doivent en former la base. 1850. Mémoire sur les lois des naissances et de la mortalité à Bruxelles. 1853. Mémoire sur les variations périodiques et non périodiques de la température, d'après les observations faites, pendant vingt ans, à l'observatoire royal de Bruxelles. 1864. Histoire des sciences mathématiques et physiques chez les Belges. 1867. Météorologie de la Belgique comparée à celle du globe. 1867. Sciences mathématiques et physiques au commencement du XIXe siècle. 1869. Sur la physique du globe en Belgique. 1870. Anthropométrie, ou Mesure des différentes facultés de l'homme.   == References ==   == Further reading == Ian Hacking (1990). The Taming of Chance. Cambridge University Press, chapters 13–15. Alain Desrosières (1998). The Politics of Large Numbers: A History of Statistical Reasoning. Harvard University Press, chapter 3. Stephen Stigler (1999). Statistics on the Table. Harvard University Press, chapter 2. Philip Ball (2005). Critical Mass: How One Thing Leads to Another. Arrow Books 2005, chapter 3. Fabien Locher (2007). "The observatory, the land-based ship and the crusades: earth sciences in european context, 1830–1850", British Journal for History of Science, 40(4), 2007, pp. 491–504 (On the leading role of Adolphe Quetelet in the fields of meteorology and geomagnetism in early nineteenth-century).

Adrian E. Raftery (born 1955 in Dublin, Ireland) is an Irish and American statistician and sociologist. He is the Blumstein-Jordan Professor of Statistics and Sociology, and founding Director of the Center for Statistics and Social Sciences at the University of Washington in Seattle, Washington, USA. Raftery studied mathematics and statistics at Trinity College Dublin, Ireland, and obtained his doctorate in mathematical statistics in 1980 from the Université Pierre et Marie Curie in Paris, France, advised by Paul Deheuvels. From 1980 to 1986 he was a lecturer in statistics at Trinity College Dublin, and since then he has been on the faculty of the University of Washington. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2003 and a member of the United States National Academy of Sciences in 2009. He was identified as the world's most cited researcher in mathematics for the decade 1995-2005 by Thomson-ISI. As of 2009, Raftery has written or coauthored over 150 articles in scholarly journals. His research has focused on the development of new statistical methods, particularly for the social, environmental and health sciences. He has been a leader in developing methods for Bayesian model selection and Bayesian model averaging, and model-based clustering, as well as inference from computer simulation models. He has recently developed new methods for probabilistic weather forecasting and probabilistic population projections.   == Selected publications == Raftery, A. E. (2001). Statistics in Sociology, 1950—2000: A Selective Review. Sociological Methodology, 31, 1-45. Raftery, A. E.; Gneiting, T.; Balabdaoui, F.; Polakowski, M. (2005). "Using Bayesian Model Averaging to Calibrate Forecast Ensembles". Monthly Weather Review 133 (5): 1155. doi:10.1175/MWR2906.1.  Sloughter, J. M. L.; Raftery, A. E.; Gneiting, T.; Fraley, C. (2007). "Probabilistic Quantitative Precipitation Forecasting Using Bayesian Model Averaging". Monthly Weather Review 135 (9): 3209. doi:10.1175/MWR3441.1.  McLean Sloughter, J.; Gneiting, T.; Raftery, A. E. (2013). "Probabilistic Wind Vector Forecasting Using Ensembles and Bayesian Model Averaging". Monthly Weather Review 141 (6): 2107. doi:10.1175/MWR-D-12-00002.1.    == References ==   == External links == Adrian Raftery's home page

Alexander Craig "Alec" Aitken, FRS, FRSE, Hon FRSNZ, FRSL (1895–1967) was one of New Zealand's greatest mathematicians. In a 1935 paper he introduced the concept of generalized least squares, along with now standard vector/matrix notation for the linear regression model. Another influential paper co-authored with his student Harold Silverstone established the lower bound on the variance of an estimator, now known as Cramér–Rao bound.   == Life and workEdit == Aitken was born on 1 April 1895 in Dunedin, the eldest of the 7 children of William Aitken and Elizabeth Towers. Nevertheless he was of Scottish descent, his grandfather having emigrated from the Borders in 1868. He was educated at Otago Boys' High School in Dunedin (1908–13) and won the Thomas Baker Calculus Scholarship in his last year at school. He saw active service during World War I with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force, at Gallipoli, in Egypt, and at the Western Front. He was wounded at the Somme. Aitken graduated wit an M.A. degree from the University of Otago in 1920, then worked as a schoolmaster at Otago Boys' High School from 1920–3. Aitken studied for a Ph.D. degree at the University of Edinburgh, in Scotland, where his dissertation, "Smoothing of Data", was considered so impressive that he was awarded a Sc.D. degree in 1926. Aitken's impact at the University had been so great that he had been elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (FRSE) the year before the award of his degree, upon the proposal of Sir Edmund Whittaker, Sir Charles Galton Darwin, Edward Copson and David Gibb. Aitken was awarded the Makdougall-Brisbane Prize for 1930-2, and was very active in the affairs of the RSE, serving as Councillor (1934–36), Secretary to Ordinary Meetings (1936–40), and Vice-President (1948–51; 1956-9). He was also an active member of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society and a Fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries. Aitken spent his entire career at Edinburgh University, working as Lecturer in Actuarial Mathematics & Statistics (1925–36), Reader in Statistics (1936–46), and finally Professor of Mathematics (1946–65). During World War II he worked in Hut 6 Bletchley Park decrypting ENIGMA code. Aitken was one of the best mental calculators known, and had a prodigious memory. He knew the first 1000 digits of , the 96 recurring digits of 1/97, and memorised the Aeneid in high school. Unfortunately, his inability to forget the horrors he witnessed in World War I led to recurrent depression throughout his life. Aitken was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1936 and an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand (Hon FRSNZ) in 1940, both for his work in statistics, algebra and numerical analysis. He was an accomplished writer, being elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature (FRSL) in 1964 in response to the publication of his war memoirs. He was also an excellent musician, being described by Eric Fenby as the most accomplished amateur musician he had ever known, and was a champion athlete in his younger days.   == Awards and honoursEdit == An annual "Aitken Prize" is awarded by the New Zealand Mathematical Society for the best student talk at their colloquium. The prize was inaugurated in 1995 at the University of Otago's Aitken Centenary Conference, a joint mathematics and statistics conference held to remember Aitken a hundred years after his birth.   == Personal lifeEdit == He married a lecturer in Biology at Otago University, and they had a son and a daughter. Aitken died on 3 November 1967, in Edinburgh.   == ReferencesEdit ==   === Further readingEdit === I. M. L. Hunter, An exceptional talent for calculative thinking, British Journal of Psychology 53 (3) (1962), 243–258. New Zealand Mathematical Society Newsletter, Number 63, April 1995 (Centerfold) NZ Heroes page on Aitken A.C. Aitken (1895–1967), P.C. Fenton, Gazette of the Australian Mathematical Society, March 1995 Alexander Aitken, Econometrics Beat: Dave Giles' Blog Times obituary Royal Society citation Aitken prize Transcript of 1954 radio interview with Aitken and another mental calculator

Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov (or Tschuprov) (Russian: Алекса́ндр Александро́вич Чупро́в) (Mosal'sk, February 18, 1874 - Geneva, April 19, 1926) Russian statistician who worked on mathematical statistics, sample survey theory and demography. Chuprov was born in Mosal'sk but grew up and was educated in Moscow where his father, Alexander Ivanovich (1842–1908), a distinguished economist and statistician, was a professor. Alexander Alexandrovich graduated from the physico-mathematical faculty of Moscow University in 1896 with a dissertation on "The theory of probability as the foundation of theoretical statistics." He spent the years 1897-1901 studying political economy in Germany, in Berlin and Strasbourg. His doctoral dissertation, supervised by Georg Friedrich Knapp (1842–1926) Die Feldgemeinschaft, eine morphologische Untersuchung was published in 1902. The most important result of his stay in Germany was his friendship with the statistician Ladislaus Bortkiewicz. On his return to Russia and, in order to get a teaching position, Chuprov completed master's examinations at the University of Moscow, concentrating on theoretical economics and the application of mathematical methods. He started teaching at the St. Petersburg Polytechnical Institute and was in charge of the teaching of statistics until 1917. Chuprov used to go abroad regularly to work in foreign libraries. In June 1917 he went to Stockholm to the Statistical Bureau. He was away from Russia when the Bolshevik Revolution occurred. He intended to return but first illness and then money problems prevented him. In January 1919 he became director of the statistical bureau of the Central Union in Stockholm and in charge of its publication Bulletin of World Economy. In the middle of 1920 he moved to Dresden where in complete seclusion he wrote furiously. In 1925 he took up an appointment with the Russian College in Prague. The following year he died.   == Work and influence == Chuprov was influential both as a teacher and as a writer. The curriculum he designed for the St. Petersburg Polytechnic Institute was modern and his book on the theory of statistics was influential. He had some good students, the best known was Oskar Anderson. Chuprov's research was influenced by Bortkiewicz on the theoretical side and his father, A. I. Chuprov, on the empirical. Bortkiewicz was the leading exponent of the dispersion theory of Lexis and Chuprov contributed to this research. (There is a brief account of the history of this theory in Heyde & Seneta (1977.)) A. I. Chuprov was the leader of a movement to get statistical information on social conditions in Russia. By 1910 his son A. A. Chuprov was writing about the use of random sampling in such investigations. His work paralleled that of Bowley in England. Chuprov's first work on sampling was not mathematical but in the 1920s he developed the formula for optimal allocation in stratified sampling (to be rediscovered by Neyman in 1934 and usually associated with him). Chuprov also did demographic research. Chuprov tried to bring together the approaches of Bortkiewicz and Lexis, of the Russian mathematicians and of the English biometricians. He watched developments in Britain and was sympathetic to the work of Karl Pearson, much more so than A. A. Markov with whom he corresponded on statistical matters. Both Chuprov and his student Oskar Anderson published in Pearson’s journal Biometrika. Chuprov was not above telling the English off, “English scientific tradition rejects the concept of ‘mathematical probability’ … and the method of mathematical expectation has naturally shared the fate of the concept … on which it rests.” For a brief period Chuprov was known in Britain. In John Maynard Keynes' Treatise on Probability (1921) he is put with Markov and Chebyshev as the three great Russian names in the theory of statistics. However, with the rise of Fisherian statistics, Chuprov was forgotten. In Scandinavia he had a more lasting influence, principally through the papers he published in the Skandinavisk Aktuarietidskrift.   == Publications == Until recently (see Sheynin link below) only a few of Chuprov's many works were available in English Al. A. Tchouproff (1918) On the Mathematical Expectation of the Moments of Frequency Distributions, Biometrika, 12, No. 1/2, pp. 140-169. A. A. Chuprov (1924) On the Mathematical Expectation of the Moments of Frequency Distributions in the Case of Correlated Observations, Metron, 2, 461-493, 646-683. A. A. Tschuprow Principles of the Mathematical Theory of Correlation; translated by M. Kantorowitsch. W. Hodge & Co. 1939 The Correspondence between A.A. Markov and A.A. Chuprov on the Theory of Probability and Mathematical Statistics, ed. Kh.O. Ondar (1981, Springer)   == Obituaries == L. I. (Leon Isserlis) (1926) Alexander Alexandrovitch Tschuprow, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 89, No. 3 (May, 1926), pp. 619-622. J. M. K. (John Maynard Keynes) (1926) Obituary: Professor A. A. Tschuprow, Economic Journal, Vol. 36, No. 143 (Sep., 1926), pp. 517-518.   == Discussion == E. Seneta (2001) Aleksander Aleksandrovich Chuprov, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 303-307. New York: Springer. E. Seneta "Chuprov, Alexander Alexandrovich," pp. 185–7 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. O Sheynin, Aleksandr A Chuprov : life, work, correspondence. The making of mathematical statistics (Göttingen, 1996). E. Seneta (1985) A Sketch of the History of Survey Sampling in Russia, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 148, 118-125. C. C. Heyde & E. Seneta (1977) I. J. Bienaymé: Statistical Theory Anticipated, New York: Springer.   == External links == Seneta, Eugene William (2010). "Aleksander Aleksandrovich Chuprov (or Tschuprow)". StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC.  The richest source of information about Chuprov is Oscar Sheynin's article: Alexandr Chuprov Statistical Papers and Memorial Publications (The same website now [2007] also offers a downloadable version, in Russian, of the recently discovered Bortkiewicz-Chuprov correspondence 1895-1926.) The MacTutor site does not have an entry for Chuprov but it has entries for Chuprov's 'masters', Bortkiewicz and Lexis, and his student, Oskar Anderson. Wilhelm Lexis Ladislaus Josephowitsch Bortkiewicz Oskar Anderson There is a photograph of Chuprov at Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov on the Portraits of Statisticians page. The photograph also appears on the Russian Academy of Sciences website, as does one of his father A. I. Chuprov. Aleksandr Ivanovich Chuprov

Brigadier General Alexander Jobson DSO (2 April 1875 – 7 November 1933) was an Australian Army Brigadier General in World War I.   == Early life and career == Alexander Jobson was born on 2 April 1875 in Clunes, Victoria. He was educated in the public system and at the age of 14 he started working as a junior clerk with the Australian Mutual Provident Society (AMP) in Melbourne. He studied accountancy and qualified as an Associate of the Institute of Actuaries and a Fellow of the Australian Corporation of Public Accountants. Jobson moved to Sydney in 1902 and became actuary for an American firm. He established his own business as an accountant and actuary in 1906. From 1910 to 1916, he also wrote a financial column in the Sydney Sun. Jobson enlisted in the Scottish Rifles in August 1898 and was commissioned as a full lieutenant on 2 December 1899. He was promoted to captain on 29 August 1902. After moving to Sydney he joined the New South Wales Scottish Rifles with the rank of lieutenant on 1 January 1903 and was promoted to captain again on 1 July. He was promoted major on 13 September 1909. He transferred to the 25th Infantry on 1 July 1912 and on 1 July 1913 he was promoted to lieutenant colonel; and appointed to command the 34th Infantry Regiment.   == World War I == Jobson was appointed to the First Australian Imperial Force on 10 February 1916 with the rank of colonel and given command of the 9th Infantry Brigade. He was promoted to temporary brigadier general on 1 May 1916, shortly before departing Sydney. He arrived in London via South Africa and Dakar on 11 July 1916. The brigade trained on Salisbury Plain before moving to France in November. The brigade entered the an area of the line known as "Nursery Sector" at Armentières on 26 November 1916. Twice, during the absence of Major General Monash in 1917, Jobson became acting commander of the 3rd Division. His brigade was involved in a number of raids and Jobson was mentioned in dispatches for his part. At the Battle of Messines in June 1917, Jobson's planning and performance was excellent, but afterwards Jobson seemed badly affected by the stress of the situation. At a conference on 24 July 1917, Jobson appeared to be in an agitated state and Monash felt that his friend was becoming unstable. Jobson relinquished command on 25 August 1917 and returned to Australia where his appointment with the AIF was terminated on 9 December. Monash arranged for him to be again mentioned in dispatches and awarded the Distinguished Service Order in the 1918 New Year's List.   == Post war == In October 1918, Jobson was appointed to command the 2nd Battalion, 53rd Infantry Regiment with the rank of lieutenant colonel and honorary brigadier general. Failure in the field was apparently considered no bar to promotion and he was promoted to colonel in December 1919 and transferred to the Reserve of Officers in 1921. After the war, Jobson held a number of company directorates, most notably director of AMP in 1925 and Vice Chairman in 1932. Jobson collapsed and died from a coronary occlusion in King Street, Sydney on 7 November 1933 and was cremated.   == See also == List of Australian Generals   == References == Ross Mallett, Alexander Jobson, General Officers of the First AIF, adfa.edu.au Colin Forster, 'Jobson, Alexander (1875–1933)', Australian Dictionary of Biography, Volume 9, Melbourne University Press, 1983, pp 488–489.

Allan Birnbaum (May 27, 1923 – July 1, 1976) was an American statistician who contributed to statistical inference, foundations of statistics, statistical genetics, statistical psychology, and history of statistics. Birnbaum was born in San Francisco. His parents were Russian-born Orthodox Jews. He studied mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, doing a premedical programme at the same time. After taking a bachelor's degree in mathematics in 1945, he spent two years doing graduate courses in science, mathematics and philosophy, planning perhaps a career in the philosophy of science. One of his philosophy teachers, Hans Reichenbach, suggested he combine philosophy with science. He went to Columbia University to do a PhD with Abraham Wald but, when Wald died in a plane crash, Birnbaum asked Erich Leo Lehmann, who was visiting Columbia to take him on. Birnbaum's thesis and his early work was very much in the spirit of Lehmann's classic text Testing Statistical Hypotheses. Birnbaum stayed at Columbia until 1959 when he moved to the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, becoming a full Professor of Statistics in 1963. He travelled a good deal and liked Britain especially. In 1975 he accepted a post at the City University, London, and worked with The Open University on their course M341 (with Adrian Smith). He killed himself in 1976. The article in the Leading Personalities volume opens with the declaration, "Allan Birnbaum was one of the most profound thinkers in the field of foundations of statistics." The assessment is based on Birnbaum's 1962 article and the publications surrounding it. Birnbaum's argument for the likelihood principle generated great controversy; it implied, amongst other things, a repudiation of the approach of Wald and Lehmann, that Birnbaum had followed in his own research. Leonard Jimmie Savage opened the discussion by saying  Without any intent to speak with exaggeration or rhetorically, it seems to me that this is really a historic occasion. This paper is landmark in statistics because it seems to me improbable that many people will be able to read this paper or to have heard it tonight without coming away with considerable respect for the likelihood principle.  Although Birnbaum made other contributions, none compared with this for impact or continuing resonance.   == Publications of Allan Birnbaum == 41 papers are listed by Barnard and Godambe. The first appeared in 1953 and the last, posthumously, in 1977. The most celebrated is the 1962 paper on the likelihood principle. Birnbaum, Allan (1962). "On the foundations of statistical inference". Journal of the American Statistical Association (American Statistical Association) 57 (298): 269–326. doi:10.2307/2281640. JSTOR 2281640.  (With discussion.)   == Discussions == Norton, B. (1977). "Obituary of Allan D. Birnbaum". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 140: 564–565. ISSN 0035-9238.  Barnard, G. A.; Godambe, V. P. (1982). "Memorial Article: Allan Birnbaum 1923-1976". Annals of Statistics 10 (4): 1033–1039. doi:10.1214/aos/1176345968.  N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz (eds), ed. (1997). "Allan Birnbaum". Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present. New York: Wiley. pp. 83–85. ISBN 0-471-16381-3.  Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science.   == External links == For Birnbaum’s PhD students see Allan Birnbaum at the Mathematics Genealogy Project For information about Birnbaum's correspondence with R. A. Fisher (and a copy of one letter) see Correspondence of Sir R.A. Fisher: Calendar of Correspondence with Allan Birnbaum

The American Statistical Association (ASA) is the main professional organization for statisticians and related professionals in the United States. It was founded in Boston, Massachusetts on November 27, 1839, and is the second oldest continuously operating professional society in the US (only the Massachusetts Medical Society, founded in 1781, is older). The ASA services statisticians, quantitative scientists, and users of statistics across many academic areas and applications.   == Mission == The organization's mission is to broadly promote good application of statistical science, specifically to: support excellence in statistical practice, research, journals, and meetings work for the improvement of statistical education at all levels promote the proper application of statistics anticipate and meet member needs use the discipline of statistics to enhance human welfare seek opportunities to advance the statistics profession   == Membership == ASA has about 18,000 members, found in government, academia, and the private sector. The membership is involved in a wide variety of activities including: research in medical areas such as AIDS environmental risk assessment the development of new therapeutic drugs the exploration of space quality assurance in industry the examination of social issues such as the homeless and the poor analytic research on current business problems and economic forecasting the setting of standards for statistics used at all levels of government the promotion and development of statistical education for the public and the profession, and the expansion of methods and the use of computers and graphics to advance the science of statistics   == Fellowship == New Fellowships of the ASA are granted annually by the ASA Committee on Fellows. Candidates must have been members for the preceding three years but may be nominated by anyone. The maximum number of recipients each year is one-third of one percent of the ASA membership.   == Organizational structure == ASA is organized in Sections, Chapters and Committees. Chapters are arranged geographically, representing 78 areas across the US and Canada. Sections are subject-area and industry-area interest groups covering 22 sub-disciplines. ASA has more than 60 committees coordinating meetings, publications, education, careers, and special-interest topics involving statisticians.   == Accredited Professional Statistician == As of April 2010, the ASA offers PStat, the Accredited Professional Statistician status, to members who meet the ASA's credentialing requirements, which include an advanced degree in statistics or related quantitative field, five years of documented experience, and evidence of professional competence. A list of current members with PStat status is available.   == Publications ==  The ASA publishes several scientific journals: Journal of the American Statistical Association (JASA) The American Statistician (TAS) Journal of Business & Economic Statistics (JBES) Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics (JABES) Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics (JCGS) Technometrics (TECH) Online-only journals: Journal of Statistics Education (JSE) Journal of Statistical Software (JSS) It co-sponsors: The Current Index to Statistics (CIS) Quarterly magazine: Chance Historical publications include: Edward Jarvis, William Brigham and John Wingate Thornton, Memorial Of The American Statistical Association Praying The Adoption Of Measures For The Correction Of Errors In The Census, 1844 Publications of the American Statistical Association, 1888-1919 (Vols. 1-16) and Quarterly Publications of the American Statistical Association, 1920-1921   == See also == Fellows of the American Statistical Association President of the American Statistical Association American Mathematical Society COPSS Presidents' Award Statistics Without Borders (SWB)   == References ==   == External links == American Statistical Association The ASA: the First 160 years by Robert L. Mason MacTutor: American Statistical Association

Anders Lindstedt (27 June 1854 – 16 May 1939) was a Swedish mathematician, astronomer, and actuarial scientist, known for the Lindstedt-Poincaré method.   == Life and work == Lindstedt was born in a small village in the district of Sundborns, Dalecarlia a province in central Sweden. He obtained a PhD from the University of Lund aged 32 and was subsequently appointed as a lecturer in astronomy. He later went on to a position at the University of Dorpat (then belonging to Russia, now University of Tartu in Estonia) where he worked for around seven years on theoretical astronomy. He combined practical astronomy with an interest in theory, developing especially an interest in the three body problem This work was to influence Poincaré whose work on the three-body problem led to the discovery that there can be orbits which are nonperiodic, and yet not forever increasing nor approaching a fixed point, the beginning of what we now know as 'chaos theory'. His papers on celestial mechanics written during that period include a technique for uniformly approximating periodic solutions to ordinary differential equations when regular perturbation approaches fail. This was later developed by Henri Poincaré and is known today as the Lindstedt–Poincaré method. Lindstedt returned to Sweden in 1886 to take a post as professor at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm. During the period occupying this position, until 1909, he developed an interest in actuarial science. He made contributions to the theory of pension funds and worked as a member of government committees responsible for insurance law and social insurance. He became a corresponding member of the Institute of Actuaries in London. He was for a time Kings Inspector of insurance companies. In 1909 he resigned his professorial position to work full-time on insurance. From 1909 to 1916 Lindstedt was also a Justice of the Supreme Administrative Court of Sweden. In 1912 Lindstedt constructed a life table for annuities using data from Swedish population experience and for each age was able to extrapolate the sequence of annual probability of death, namely the mortality profile. Probably, this work constitutes the earliest projection of age-specific functions. He directed the actuarial work which underpinned the state old age an invalidity pensions in Sweden introduced in 1913 as part of the National Pension Act (see Swedish welfare). Even after his retirement aged 70 he continued to take an active interest in actuarial activities both in Sweden and abroad, attending meetings of the Swedish Actuarial Society until shortly before his death in 1939.   == Notes == ^ a b Hvar 8 dag, 10:de Årg, No 11, 13 december 1908, sid. 162. ^ a b Memoir Anders Lindstedt 27 June 1854-16 May 1939, Journal of the Institute of Actuaries, 70 (1939) p. 269. [1] ^ Lindstedt, A. (1884). "Über die Bestimmung der gegenseitigen Entfernungen in dem Probleme der drei Körper". Astronomische Nachrichten 107 (13–14): 197–214. Bibcode:1884AN....107..197L. doi:10.1002/asna.18841071301.  (Roughly translated, the title of this paper is "On determining the mutual distances in the three body problem".), ^ Jules Henri Poincaré (1890) "Sur le problème des trois corps et les équations de la dynamique. Divergence des séries de M. Lindstedt," Acta Mathematica, vol. 13, pages 1–270., ^ A. Lindstedt, Abh. K. Akad. Wiss. St. Petersburg 31, No. 4 (1882) ^ H. Poincaré, Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique Célèste I, II, III (Dover Publ., New York,1957). ^ A brief history of the professors at the department of Mathematics, KTH Dept. of Mathematics, retrieved 2013-12-29. ^ Cramer H and H Wold (1935), Mortality variations in Sweden: a study in graduation and forecasting, Skandinavisk Aktuarietidskrift, 18: 161–241 ^ Pitcco, Ermnno, From Halley to Frailty: A Review of Survival Models for Actuarial Calculations, [2]

Anderson Gray McKendrick (8 September 1876 – 30 May 1943) was a Scottish physician and epidemiologist pioneered the use of mathematical methods in epidemiology. Irwin (see below) commented on the quality of his work, "Although an amateur, he was a brilliant mathematician, with a far greater insight than many professionals." McKendrick was born in Edinburgh the fifth and last child of John Gray McKendrick FRS, a distinguished physiologist. The son trained as a doctor at the University of Glasgow and joined the Indian Medical Service. He worked with Ronald Ross and eventually would continue his work on mathematical epidemiology. His primary interest was in research and he became director of the Pasteur Institute at Kasauli in the Punjab. He was invalided home to Britain in 1920 and settled in Edinburgh where he became Superintendent of the Laboratory of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. He held this post for the rest of his life. McKendrick's career as a mathematical epidemiologist began in India. In 1911, McKendrick rediscovered the logistic equation and fit it to bacterial growth data. In 1914 he published a paper in which he gave equations for the pure birth process and a particular birth-death process. After his return to Scotland he published more. His 1926 paper, 'Applications of mathematics to medical problems' was particularly impressive, including the widely used McKendrick–Von Foerster partial differential equation  Some of this papers other results for stochastic models of epidemics and population growth were rediscovered by William Feller in 1939. Feller remarks in his Introduction to the Theory of Probability & its Applications (3rd edition p. 450), "It is unfortunate that this remarkable paper passed practically unnoticed." The same paper is also the earliest reference in Dempster et al.'s 1977 paper that defined and popularized the EM algorithm (expectation-maximization algorithm) In 1927 McKendrick began a collaboration with W. O. Kermack (1898–1970) which produced a notable series of papers on the Kermack–McKendrick theory, a general theory of infectious disease transmission. W. M. Hirsch gives this picture of the man: "McKendrick was a truly Christian gentleman, a tall and handsome man, brilliant in mind, kind and modest in person, a skilful counsellor and administrator who gave of himself and knew how to enable others."   == Selected works == A. G. McKendrick Applications of mathematics to medical problems Kapil Proceedings of the Edinburgh Mathematical Society, vol 44, (1925–6), pp. 1–34. Reprinted with commentary in S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson (Editors) (1997) Breakthroughs in Statistics: Volume III New York Springer. W. O. Kermack; A. G. McKendrick “A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 115, (1927), pp. 700–721. W. O. Kermack; A. G. McKendrick “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. II. The Problem of Endemicity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 138, (1932) pp. 55–83. W. O. Kermack; A. G. McKendrick “Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics. III. Further Studies of the Problem of Endemicity,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 141, (1933), pp. 94–122.   == Commentary == There is an account of McKendrick's Applications paper in J. O. Irwin The Place of Mathematics in Medical and Biological Statistics, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), Vol. 126, No. 1. (1963), pp. 1–45.   == Biography == Warren M. Hirsch (2004) McKendrick, Anderson Gray (1876–1943), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press. Gani, J. (2001) Anderson Gray McKendrick, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 323–327. New York: Springer.   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Anderson Gray McKendrick", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . There is a photograph at A. G. McKendrick on the Portraits of Statisticians page. There is a modern presentation of one of the Kermack–McKendrick models in Mathworld: Kermack–McKendrick model McKendrick's father was elected to the Royal Society, as was Kermack his co-worker Royal Society citation for John Gray McKendrick Royal Society citation for William Ogilvy Kermack Photo of Kermack KERMACK, William Ogilvy

Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (Russian: Андрей Николаевич Колмогоров; IPA: [ɐnˈdrʲej nʲɪkɐˈlajɪvʲɪtɕ kəlmɐˈɡorəf], 25 April 1903 – 20 October 1987) was a 20th-century Soviet mathematician who made significant contributions to the mathematics of probability theory, topology, intuitionistic logic, turbulence, classical mechanics, algorithmic information theory and computational complexity.   == BiographyEdit ==   === Early lifeEdit === Andrey Kolmogorov was born in Tambov, about 500 kilometers south-southeast of Moscow, in 1903. His unmarried mother, Maria Y. Kolmogorova, died giving birth to him. Andrey was raised by two of his aunts in Tunoshna (near Yaroslavl) at the estate of his grandfather, a well-to-do nobleman. Little is known about Andrey's father. He was supposedly named Nikolai Matveevich Kataev and had been an agronomist. Nikolai had been exiled from St. Petersburg to the Yaroslavl province after his participation in the revolutionary movement against the czars. He disappeared in 1919 and he was presumed to have been killed in the Russian Civil War. Andrey Kolmogorov was educated in his aunt Vera's village school, and his earliest literary efforts and mathematical papers were printed in the school journal "The Swallow of Spring". Andrey (at the age of five) was the "editor" of the mathematical section of this journal. Kolmogorov's first mathematical discovery was published in this journal: at the age of five he noticed the regularity in the sum of the series of odd numbers.  etc. In 1910, his aunt adopted him, and they moved to Moscow, where he graduated from high school in 1920. Later that same year, Kolmogorov began to study at the Moscow State University and at the same time Mendeleev Moscow Institute of Chemistry and Technology. Kolmogorov writes about this time: "I arrived at Moscow University with a fair knowledge of mathematics. I knew in particular the beginning of set theory. I studied many questions in articles in the Encyclopedia of Brockhaus and Efron, filling out for myself what was presented too concisely in these articles." Kolmogorov gained a reputation for his wide-ranging erudition. While an undergraduate student in college, he attended the seminars of the Russian historian S. V. Bachrushin, and he published his first research paper on the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries' landholding practices in the Novgorod Republic. During the same period (1921–22), Kolmogorov worked out and proved several results in set theory and in the theory of Fourier series.   === AdulthoodEdit === In 1922, Kolmogorov gained international recognition for constructing a Fourier series that diverges almost everywhere. Around this time, he decided to devote his life to mathematics. In 1925, Kolmogorov graduated from the Moscow State University and began to study under the supervision of Nikolai Luzin. He formed a lifelong friendship with Pavel Alexandrov. (Both were later involved in the political persecution of their common teacher Nikolai Luzin, in the so-called Luzin affair in 1936.) Kolmogorov (together with Aleksandr Khinchin) became interested in probability theory. Also in 1925, he published his work in intuitionistic logic — On the principle of the excluded middle, in which he proved that under a certain interpretation, all statements of classical formal logic can be formulated as those of intuitionistic logic. In 1929, Kolmogorov earned his Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree, from the Moscow State University. In 1930, Kolmogorov went on his first long trip abroad, traveling to Göttingen and Munich, and then to Paris. He had various scientific contacts in Göttingen. First of all with Courant and his students working on limit theorems, where diffusion processes turned out to be the limits of discrete random processes, then with H. Weyl in intuitionistic logic, and lastly with Landau in function theory. His pioneering work, About the Analytical Methods of Probability Theory, was published (in German) in 1931. Also in 1931, he became a professor at the Moscow State University. In 1933, Kolmogorov published his book, Foundations of the Theory of Probability, laying the modern axiomatic foundations of probability theory and establishing his reputation as the world's leading expert in this field. In 1935, Kolmogorov became the first chairman of the department of probability theory at the Moscow State University. Around the same years (1936) Kolmogorov contributed to the field of ecology and generalized the Lotka–Volterra model of predator-prey systems. In a 1938 paper, Kolmogorov "established the basic theorems for smoothing and predicting stationary stochastic processes"—a paper that would have major military applications during the Cold War. In 1939, he was elected a full member (academician) of the USSR Academy of Sciences. During World War II Kolmogorov contributed to the Soviet war effort by applying statistical theory to artillery fire, developing a scheme of stochastic distribution of barrage balloons intended to help protect Moscow from German bombers. In his study of stochastic processes (random processes), especially Markov processes, Kolmogorov and the British mathematician Sydney Chapman independently developed the pivotal set of equations in the field, which have been given the name of the Chapman–Kolmogorov equations.  Later, Kolmogorov focused his research on turbulence, where his publications (beginning in 1941) significantly influenced the field. In classical mechanics, he is best known for the Kolmogorov–Arnold–Moser theorem, first presented in 1954 at the International Congress of Mathematicians. In 1957, working jointly with his student V. I. Arnold, he solved a particular interpretation of Hilbert's thirteenth problem. Around this time he also began to develop, and was considered a founder of, algorithmic complexity theory – often referred to as Kolmogorov complexity theory. Kolmogorov married Anna Dmitrievna Egorova in 1942. He pursued a vigorous teaching routine throughout his life, not only at the university level but also with younger children, as he was actively involved in developing a pedagogy for gifted children (in literature, music, and mathematics). At the Moscow State University, Kolmogorov occupied different positions, including the heads of several departments: probability, statistics, and random processes; mathematical logic. He also served as the Dean of the Moscow State University Department of Mechanics and Mathematics. In 1971, Kolmogorov joined an oceanographic expedition aboard the research vessel Dmitri Mendeleev. He wrote a number of articles for the Great Soviet Encyclopedia. In his later years, he devoted much of his effort to the mathematical and philosophical relationship between probability theory in abstract and applied areas. Kolmogorov died in Moscow in 1987, and his remains were buried in the Novodevichy cemetery. A quotation attributed to Kolmogorov is [translated into English]: "Every mathematician believes that he is ahead of the others. The reason none state this belief in public is because they are intelligent people." Vladimir Arnold once has said: "Kolmogorov – Poincaré – Gauss – Euler – Newton, are only five lives separating us from the source of our science".   == Awards and honoursEdit == Kolmogorov received numerous awards and honours both during and after his lifetime: Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Awarded the Stalin Prize in 1941 Award the Balzan Prize in 1962 Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1963 Elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1964. Awarde the Lenin Prize in 1965 Awarded the Wolf Prize in 1980 Awarded the Lobachevsky Prize in 1986 The following are named in Kolmogorov's honour:   == BibliographyEdit == A bibliography of his works appeared in "Publications of A. N. Kolmogorov". Annals of Probability 17 (3): 945–964. July 1989. doi:10.1214/aop/1176991252.   Kolmogorov, Andrey (1933). Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung (in German). Berlin: Julius Springer. Translation: Kolmogorov, Andrey (1956). Foundations of the Theory of Probability (2nd ed.). New York: Chelsea. ISBN 0-8284-0023-7.   1991–93. Selected works of A.N. Kolmogorov, 3 vols. Tikhomirov, V. M., ed., Volosov, V. M., trans. Dordrecht:Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 90-277-2796-1 1925. "On the principle of the excluded middle" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 414–37. Kolmogorov, Andrei N. (1963). "On Tables of Random Numbers". Sankhyā Ser. A. 25: 369–375. MR 178484.  Kolmogorov, Andrei N. (1998) [1963]. "On Tables of Random Numbers". Theoretical Computer Science 207 (2): 387–395. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(98)00075-9. MR 1643414.  Kolmogorov, Andrei N. (2005) Selected works. In 6 volumes. Moscow (in Russian) Textbooks: A. N. Kolmogorov and B. V. Gnedenko. "Limit distributions for sums of independent random variables", 1954. A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin. "Elements of the Theory of Functions and Functional Analysis", Publication 1999, Publication 2012   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Biography at Scholarpedia The Legacy of Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov Curriculum Vitae and Biography. Kolmogorov School. Ph.D. students and descendants of A. N. Kolmogorov. A. N. Kolmogorov works, books, papers, articles. Photographs and Portraits of A. N. Kolmogorov. The origins and legacy of Kolmogorov's Grundbegriffe Vitanyi, P.M.B., Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov. Scholarpedia, 2(2):2798; 2007 Collection of links to Kolmogorov resources Interview with Professor A. M. Yaglom about Kolmogorov, Gelfand and other (1988, Ithaca, New York) Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (in Russian) Kolmogorov School at Moscow University Annual Kolmogorov Lecture at the Computer Learning Research Centre at Royal Holloway, University of London Lorentz G. G., Mathematics and Politics in the Soviet Union from 1928 to 1953 Kutateladze S. S., The Tragedy of Mathematics in Russia Video recording of the G. Falkovich's lecture: "Andrey Nikolaevich Kolmogorov (1903–1987) and the Russian school"

André-Michel Guerry (December 24, 1802 – April 9, 1866) was a French lawyer and amateur statistician. Together with Adolphe Quetelet he may be regarded as the founder of moral statistics which led to the development of criminology, sociology and ultimately, modern social science.   == Early life and education == Guerry was born in Tours, Indre-et-Loire, the only child of Michel Guerry, a building contractor, whose family had a long history as innkeepers, merchants, farmers and trades-people. About 1817-1820 he studied at the Imperial College of Tours (now the Lyceum Descartes, founded in 1807) and subsequently studied law at the University of Poitiers. About 1824-1825 he moved to Paris and was admitted to the bar as a royal advocate. Shortly after, he was employed by the Ministry of Justice. Guerry worked with the data on crime statistics in France collected as part of the General office for administration of criminal justice in France, the first centralized national system of crime reporting. Guerry was so fascinated with these data, and the possibility to discover empirical regularities and laws that might govern them, that he gave up the active practice of law to devote the rest of his life to study crime and its relation to other moral variables.   == Moral statistics and criminology == Guerry's first work on what would come to be called moral statistics was a large, one page sheet containing three shaded maps of France, prepared together with the Venetian geographer, Adriano Balbi in 1829. These showed the departments of France, shaded according to crimes against persons, crimes against property, and school instruction. Such statistical maps, now called choropleth maps had just been invented in 1826 by Baron Charles Dupin. Guerry is best known for his Essay on moral statistics of France, presented to the French Academy of Sciences on July 2, 1832 and published in 1833 after it was awarded the Prix Montyon in statistics. His presentation, in tables and thematic maps, showed that rates of crime and suicide remained remarkably stable over time, when broken down by age, sex, region of France and even season of the year. Yet, these numbers also varied systematically across departments of France. This regularity of social numbers created the possibility to conceive that human actions could be described by social laws, just as inanimate actions were governed by physical laws. Throughout his career, Guerry was particularly interested in uncovering the relation between social and moral variables. How are personal crime and property related to each other, and to suicide, donations to the poor, illegitimate births, wealth, and so forth? How do different types of crimes vary with age of the accused? Statistical methods (correlation and regression) were still in their infancy, so Guerry relied on graphic comparisons of maps and semi-graphic tables. Shown below are three of the six thematic maps that Guerry included in his Essay.   === Suicide === In addition to a map of France showing rates of suicide by department, Guerry collected all the suicide notes found by the police in Paris over a four-year period. He classified these by the apparent motive expressed for taking one's life, perhaps the first content analysis in the social sciences.   === Ordonnateur statistique === Around 1851, Guerry invented the Ordonnateur Statistique, probably the first mechanical device designed to aid in statistical calculations and the assessment of relationships among moral variables. This device is now known to have been used for sorting one target variable (e.g., crimes of different types) in relation to other possibly explanatory variables (e.g., population density).   === Polar area diagram === In 1829, Guerry invented a new graphic form, the Polar area diagram to show variations in weather and other phenomena over calendar cycles. This variation of the Pie chart uses equi-angular sectors of differing radii, in contrast to the pie chart that uses sectors with varying angle, but equal radii. The polar area diagram is often mistakenly credited to Florence Nightingale, who used it to great effect to illustrate needless mortality in the Crimean War due to unsanitary medical conditions. Nightingale most probably got the idea from William Farr, who in turn was acquainted with Guerry's work.   === Other activities === Guerry also resided in Beaumont-sur-Dême, where he was mayor of the village from 1846–1855.   == Major works == Balbi, Adriano, and André-Michel Guerry. 1829. Statistique comparée de l'état de l'instruction et du nombre des crimes dans les divers arrondissements des Académies et des Cours Royales de France. Paris. Guerry, André-Michel. 1829. Mémoire sur les variations méterologiques comparées aux phénomènes physiologiques. Annales d'Hygiène Publique et de Médecine Légal 1:228. Guerry, André-Michel. 1833. Essai sur la statistique morale de la France. Paris: Crochard. Gallica Guerry, André-Michel. 1864. Statistique morale de l'Angleterre comparée avec la statistique morale de la France, d'après les comptes de l'administration de la justice criminelle en Angleterre et en France, etc. Paris: J.-B. Baillière et fils.   == References ==   == External links == Milestones project A.-M. Guerry's Moral Statistics of France Friendly M. (2007) A.-M. Guerry's Moral Statistics of France: Challenges for Multivariable Spatial Analysis, Statistical Science, 22 (3), 368-399. Project Euclid Friendly, M. & de Saint Agathe, N. (2012) André-Michel Guerry's Ordonnateur Statistique: The First Statistical Calculator?, The American Statistician, v. 66(3), 195-200. [1]

Anil Kumar Gain (Bengali: অনীল কুমার গায়েন), FRS (1 February 1919 – 7 February 1978) (also spelt Anil Kumar Gayen) was an Indian mathematician and statistician best known for his works on the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient in the field of applied statistics, with his colleague Ronald Fisher. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge under the supervision of Henry Ellis Daniels, who was the then President of the Royal Statistical Society. He was honoured as a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and the famous Cambridge Philosophical Society. Gain was the President of the Statistics section of the Indian Science Congress Association, as well as the Head of the Department of Mathematics at the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. He later went on to found Vidyasagar University, naming it after the famous social reformer of the Bengali renaissance, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar.   == Early life == Anil Kumar Gain was born in a poor Bengali family of a village named Lakkhi in Purba Medinipur, West Bengal, to Jibankrishna Gain and Panchami Devi. His father having died in his childhood, he and his siblings were brought up by his widowed mother under economic hardship. He started his education in an informal village school or Pathshala and was admitted to a formal school when he was eight. In his schooldays, he showed particular interest in English and Mathematics, subjects he was primarily taught by his mother. Upon finishing school, he travelled to Kolkata to complete an Honours degree in Mathematics from Surendranath College, followed by a Master's degree in Applied mathematics from the University of Calcutta. He was declared the University Gold Medalist for the year 1943.   == Career ==  After briefly teaching at Presidency College and Bengal College of Engineering & Technology, Gain got married to Krishna Chongdar, daughter of a famous and wealthy businessman. He travelled to England in 1947, to pursue his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in Mathematical statistics – only to complete it in the year 1950. It was there that he met the famous Henry Ellis Daniels, under whose supervision he wrote most of his papers. He also befriended Sir Ronald Fisher there, and spent much of his time working with him in the field of Applied statistics, particularly on the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. After returning to India, he started teaching at the Indian Statistical Institute as well as the University of Calcutta, and finally joined the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, where he spent most of his remaining career. During his years at Kharagpur, he began to work on educational projects such as the National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT) to reform the education sector in Bengal. This interest in revolutionizing education eventually led to the inception of Vidyasagar University, which he founded with the vision of having a non-traditional teaching and learning environment at the University level. The University was finally established by the University Grants Commission (India) under the Vidyasagar University Act of 1981.   == Legacy and Death ==  Due to his efforts to revolutionise education in Bengal, he became a key figure in the latter half of the Bengali renaissance, as well as a renowned scholar and academic. In 2012, Vidyasagar announced the establishment of the Anil Kumar Gain Memorial Lecture, in honour of his contributions to the university, and to Bengal as a whole. He died a week after his birthday, on the 7th of February 1978, of natural causes at his residence in Kolkata, India. His descendants still live in Kolkata, as well as abroad.   == See also ==   == References ==

Sir Arthur Lyon Bowley (Bristol, 6 November 1869 – Surrey, 21 January 1957) was an English statistician and economist who worked on economic statistics and pioneered the use of sampling techniques in social surveys.   == Early life == Bowley's father, James William Lyon Bowley, was a minister in the Church of England. He died in 1870 when Arthur was under two, leaving Arthur's mother as mother or stepmother to seven children. Arthur was educated at a Christ's Hospital, and won a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge to study mathematics. He graduated as Tenth Wrangler. At Cambridge Bowley had a short course of study with the economist Alfred Marshall who had also been a Cambridge wrangler. Under Marshall's influence Bowley became an economic statistician. His Account of England's Foreign Trade won the Cobden Essay Prize and was published as a book. Marshall watched over Bowley's career, recommending him for jobs and offering him advice. Most notoriously Marshall told him the Elements of Statistics contained "too much mathematics."   == Academic career == After leaving Cambridge Bowley taught mathematics at St John's School in Leatherhead from 1893 to 1899. Meanwhile, he was publishing in economic statistics; his first article for the journal of the Royal Statistical Society) appeared in 1895. In that year the London School of Economics opened. Bowley was appointed as a part-time lecturer and he would be connected with the School until he retired in 1936. He can be considered one of the School's intellectual fathers. However, he continued to teach elsewhere; for more than a decade he taught at University College, Reading (now the University of Reading). He was the Newmarch lecturer at University College, London (1897–98 and 1927–28). At the LSE he became Reader in 1908, and Professor in 1915. In 1919 he was appointed to a newly established Chair of Statistics, probably the first of its kind in Britain. In Bowley's time, however, the LSE statistics group was very small: E. C. Rhodes arrived in 1924 and R. G. D. Allen in 1928. Bowley produced a stream of studies of British economic statistics, beginning in the 1890s with work on trade and on wages and income, and proceeding to studies of national income in the 1920s and –30s. Specially noteworthy was his collaboration with Josiah Stamp on a comparison of the UK national income in 1911 and 1924. (Official national income statistics date only from the Second World War.) From around 1910 Bowley worked on social statistics as well. In aim, the work was a continuation of such surveys of social conditions as Charles Booth's "Life and Labour of the People in London" (1889–1903) and Seebohm Rowntree's "Poverty, A Study of Town Life" (1901). The methodological innovation was the use of sampling techniques. Bowley gave a detailed exposition of his approach to sampling in a 62-page paper published in 1926. The culmination of Bowley's work on social surveys was the monumental New Survey of London Life and Labour. Even in the 1930s his research could take a new direction, as when he collaborated with his junior colleague R. G. D. Allen on an econometric study of family expenditure.   == Books == Bowley's "Elements of Statistics" is generally regarded as the first English-language statistics text-book. It described the techniques of descriptive statistics that would be useful for economists and social sciences, and in the early editions contained little statistical theory. In statistical theory Bowley was not an innovator but drew on the writings of Karl Pearson, Udny Yule and F. Y. Edgeworth. In the 1930s Bowley informed Fisher that "Professor Edgeworth had written a great deal on a kindred subject" and slapping Neyman down with "I am not at all sure that the 'confidence' [in confidence interval] is not a 'confidence trick.'" Bowley's teaching presaged several of the EDA ideas later popularised by John Tukey, including stemplots, decile boxplots, the seven-figure summary and trimean. Bowley's '"The Mathematical Groundwork of Economics'" was a notable attempt to provide the practising economist with the main ideas and techniques of mathematical economics; it was the first book in English of its kind. One of its successes was to bring the Edgeworth box to the attention of economists generally. Bowley was so successful that this is often referred to as the "Edgeworth-Bowley box". He also introduced the concept of conjectural variation into the theory of oligopoly in this book.   == Honours == Bowley received many honours. In 1922 he became Fellow of the British Academy and in 1950 he was knighted. He served on the council of the Royal Economic Society and was president of the Econometric Society 1938-9. The Royal Statistical Society awarded him its Guy Medal in Gold in 1935 and he served as its president 1938–40.   == Personal life == According to Allen and George, "In personality Bowley was somewhat shy and retiring. He did not readily make friends and his close friendship with Edwin Cannan over many years was an almost unique experience." They recall an anecdote about an occasion when Bowley and Cannan were cycling with Edgeworth. When Edgeworth wanted to discuss a mathematical question Cannan said, "Bowley, let us go a little faster, Edgeworth cannot talk mathematics at more than eight miles an hour." His daughter Marian Bowley also had an academic career in economics.   == Bowley's law == Bowley formulated Bowley's law, which says that the proportion of GNP from labour is constant.   == Main publications of A. L. Bowley == A Short Account of England's Foreign Trade in the Nineteenth Century, 1893. Wages and Income in the United Kingdom Since 1860, 1900. Elements of Statistics, 1901. (4th edition in 1920) An Elementary Manual of Statistics, 1909. Livelihood and Poverty: a study in the economic conditions of working-class households, with A.R. Bennett-Hurst, 1915. The Division of the Product of Industry, 1919 The Mathematical Groundwork of Economics, 1924. Has Poverty Diminished? with M.Hogg, 1925. Measurement of Precision attained in Sampling, Bulletin de l'Institut International de Statistique,(1926) 22, Suppl. to Book 1, 1–62. Gallica (after p. 451) The National Income 1924 with J. Stamp, 1927. Bilateral Monopoly, 1928, Economic Journal. F. Y. Edgeworth's Contributions to Mathematical Statistics, 1928. New Survey of London Life and Labour, 1930–35. Family Expenditure with R.G.D. Allen, 1935. Three Studies in National Income, 1939.   == Discussions == Allen, R.D.G. and George R. F. (1957) Obituary of Professor Sir Arthur Bowley. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, A, 102, 236–241. W F Maunder and Sir Arthur Lyon Bowley (1869–1957) in Studies in the History of Statistics Probability, (ed. E S Pearson and M G Kendall) 1970. London: Griffin. Darnell, A. (1981), "A.L. Bowley, 1969-1957", in O'Brien, D. P.; Presley, J. R., Pioneers of Modern Economics in Britain, London: Macmillan, pp. 140–174 . Bowley, Arthur Lyon, pp. 277–9 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science.   == See also == Stem-and-leaf display attributed to Bowley's work   == References ==   == External links == Horizons March 2005: Stats in History—Arthurian Legend Bowley Papers at the LSE Archives New School: Arthur Lyon Bowley The New School entry has a photograph. There is another at Bowley on the Portraits of Statisticians page. In the 4th edition of the Elements (1920) Bowley gave a lot more space to statistical theory. The following excerpt illustrates his approach Bowley's Pearsonian approach to chi-squared on the Life and Work of Statisticians page. This was written just before Bowley got involved in the controversy between Fisher and Pearson on chi-squared. In the fifth edition (1926) Bowley added a reference to his own contribution. For Bowley's contribution to sampling theory put in historical perspective see Part D: A Review of Statistical Sampling from Laplace to Neyman

Sir Franz Arthur Friedrich Schuster FRS FRSE (12 September 1851 – 17 October 1934) was a German-born British physicist known for his work in spectroscopy, electrochemistry, optics, X-radiography and the application of harmonic analysis to physics. Schuster's Integral is named after him. He contributed to making the University of Manchester a centre for the study of physics.   == Early years == Arthur Schuster was born in Frankfurt am Main, Germany into a family of merchants and bankers. Schuster's parents were married in 1849, converted from Judaism to Christianity, and brought up their children in that faith. In 1869, his father moved to Manchester where the family textile business was based. Arthur, who had been to school in Frankfurt and was studying in Geneva, joined his parents in 1870 and he and the other children became British citizens in 1875. Edgar Schuster (1897–1969) was his nephew. From his childhood, Schuster had been interested in science and after working for a year for Schuster Brothers he persuaded his father to let him study at Owens College. He studied mathematics under Thomas Barker and physics under Balfour Stewart, and began research with Henry Roscoe on the spectra of hydrogen and nitrogen. He spent a year with Gustav Kirchhoff at the University of Heidelberg, and having gained his PhD, returned to Owens as an unpaid demonstrator in physics. Schuster later used his family's wealth to buy material and equipment and to endow readerships in mathematical physics at Manchester and meteorology at the University of Cambridge. He also contributed to the Royal Society and the International Union for Co-operation in Solar Research. After a further period of study in Germany with Wilhelm Eduard Weber and Hermann von Helmholtz, he returned to England, where his knowledge of spectrum analysis led to him being appointed to lead an expedition to Siam, to photograph the coronal spectrum during the total solar eclipse of 6 April 1875. This was an important appointment for such a junior scientist. On the way, he wrote a letter dated 21 February 1875, to Nature describing his observation of the "green flash" phenomenon.   == Career ==  On his return to Manchester, he began research on electricity and then went on to spend five years at the Cavendish Laboratory of the University of Cambridge. His status there was quite unofficial; he was neither a student nor a fellow. He worked with James Clerk Maxwell and with Rayleigh. In 1881 he was appointed to the Beyer Chair of Applied Mathematics at Owens, by now one of the colleges of the new Victoria University. He succeeded his teacher Balfour Stewart as professor of physics in 1888. This appointment gave him the opportunity to establish a large, active teaching and research department. In 1900 a new laboratory, for which he had fought and which he had designed, was officially opened. It was the fourth largest in the world. The laboratory quickly became a serious rival to the Cavendish; see Manchester Science Hall of Fame. Much of this later fame was associated with Ernest Rutherford who succeeded Schuster as Langworthy Professor in 1907. Schuster resigned from the chair, partly for health reasons and partly to promote the cause of international science. He ensured that Rutherford would succeed him. Schuster is credited with coining the concept of "antimatter" in two letters to Nature in 1898. He hypothesized antiatoms, and whole antimatter solar systems, which would yield energy if the atoms combined with atoms of normal matter. His hypothesis was given a mathematical foundation by the work of Paul Dirac in 1928, which predicted antiparticles and later led to their discovery. Schuster is perhaps most widely remembered for his periodogram analysis, a technique which was long the main practical tool for identifying statistically important frequencies present in a time series of observations. He first used this form of harmonic analysis in 1897 to disprove C. G. Knott's claim of periodicity in earthquake occurrences. He went on to apply the technique to analysing sunspot activity. This was an old interest. In 1875 Stewart's friend and Roscoe's cousin, the economist Jevons, reported, "Mr. A Schuster of Owens College has ingeniously pointed out that the periods of good vintage in Western Europe have occurred at intervals somewhat approximating to eleven years, the average length of the principal sun-spot cycle." Schuster is credited by Chandrasekhar to have given a fresh start to the radiative transfer problem. Schuster formulated in 1905 a problem in radiative transfer in an attempt to explain the appearance of absorption and emission lines in stellar spectra. Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the Schuster family was subjected to anti-German prejudice in the press and, in Arthur's case, in some quarters of the Royal Society. His brother Sir Felix Schuster had to issue a statement pointing out the family's loyalty to Britain and that they all had sons serving in the British army. On the day Arthur gave his presidential address to the 1915 British Association meeting, he learned that his son had been wounded. Schuster was regarded by his contemporaries as a mathematical physicist of exceptional ability but also as a capable administrator and teacher, and an advocate for the role of science in education and industry.   == Honours and awards == Schuster was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1879, and knighted in the 1920 New Year Honours. Other honours include doctorates from the universities of Calcutta (1908), Geneva (1909), St Andrews (1911), and Oxford (1917) and the award of the Royal, Rumford and Copley medals of the Royal Society (1893, 1926 and 1931). ; LLD, Calcutta, 1876; Schuster served as secretary of the Royal Society and was elected vice-president (1919–20) and foreign secretary (1920–24). He also served as secretary of the International Research Council (1919–28) and on the management committees for the Meteorological Office (1905–32) and National Physical Laboratory (1899–1902, 1920–25). The University of Manchester's Schuster Laboratory, home to the School of Physics and Astronomy is named after him.   == Bibliography == The Progress of Physics (1910) Four lectures delivered to the University of Calcutta during March 1908, which give cautious provisional approval of Einstein's Special Relativity and Max Planck's initial ideas about Quanta. An introduction to the theory of optics (1904) There are two subsequent editions to this book, and Schuster is the author. Edition two was published in 1909 and edition three appears to have two publication dates of 1924, and 1928.   == Gallery ==   == References ==   == Further reading == Beginning in 1871 Schuster contributed many articles to the Royal Society journals. These articles are available online at JSTOR and at Gallica. Arthur Schuster Biographical Fragments London; Macmillan (1932). – An attractive collection of reminiscences about Schuster's education and his expeditions with recollections of the scientists he knew. The Physical Laboratories of the University of Manchester – Professor Arthur Schuster: Biographical and Bibliographical Notes. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 1906. pp. 39–60.    == External links == Arthur Schuster, "On Lunar and Solar Periodicities of Earthquakes ", Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 61 (1897), pp. 455–465 – Schuster's first paper on the use of the technique he later called the periodogram Arthur Schuster, "On the Periodicities of Sunspots", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Vol. 206. (1906), pp. 69–100. – Schuster's later paper on sunspots Schuster's Royal Society citation signed by Maxwell, Joule, and others Obituary Notices : Fellows:- Schuster, Sir Arthur, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 95, p.326 There is a photograph of Schuster at the Science and Society Picture Library and many more (as well as the X ray photographs he took) at Wellcome Images. The story of Schuster and the medical use of X-rays is told at Sir Arthur Schuster A pioneer in the use of X-Rays The position of Schuster at the Cavendish is described in Cavendish Laboratory: the First Ten Years

Sir Austin Bradford Hill FRS (8 July 1897 – 18 April 1991), English epidemiologist and statistician, pioneered the randomized clinical trial and, together with Richard Doll, demonstrated the connection between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. Hill is widely known for pioneering the "Bradford Hill" criteria for determining a causal association.   == Early life == Son of Sir Leonard Erskine Hill FRS a distinguished physiologist, Hill was born in London, lived as a child at the family home, Osborne House, Loughton, Essex; and educated at Chigwell School, Essex. He served as a pilot in the First World War but was invalided out when he contracted tuberculosis. Two years in hospital and two years of convalescence put a medical qualification out of the question and he took a degree in economics by correspondence at London University.   == Career == In 1922 Hill went to work for the Industry Fatigue Research Board. He was associated with the medical statistician Major Greenwood and, to improve his statistical knowledge, Hill attended lectures by Karl Pearson. When Greenwood accepted a chair at the newly formed London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Hill moved with him, becoming Reader in Epidemiology and Vital Statistics in 1933 and Professor of Medical Statistics in 1947. Hill had a distinguished career in research and teaching and as author of a very successful textbook, Principles of Medical Statistics, but he is famous for two landmark studies. He was the statistician on the Medical Research Council Streptomycin in Tuberculosis Trials Committee and their study evaluating the use of streptomycin in treating tuberculosis, is generally accepted as the first randomised clinical trial. The use of randomisation in agricultural experiments had been pioneered by Ronald Aylmer Fisher. The second study was rather a series of studies with Richard Doll on smoking and lung cancer. The first paper, published in 1950, was a case-control study comparing lung cancer patients with matched controls. Doll and Hill also started a long-term prospective study of smoking and health. This was an investigation of the smoking habits and health of over 30,000 British doctors for several years (British doctors study). Fisher was in profound disagreement with the conclusions and procedures of the smoking/cancer work and from 1957 he criticised the work in the press and in academic publications. Hill was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1954. Fisher was actually one of the proposers. The certificate of election read  Has, by the application of statistical methods, made valuable contributions to our knowledge of the incidence and aetiology of industrial diseases, of the effects of internal migration upon mortality rates, and of the natural and experimental epidemiology of various infections, for example of the risks of an attack of poliomyelitis following inoculation procedures and of the risk of congenital abnormalities being precipitated by maternal rubella in the pregnant woman. Since the war he has demonstrated in an exact and controlled field survey the association between cigarette smoking and the incidence of cancer of the lung, and has been the leader in the development in medicine of the precise experimental methods now used nationally and internationally in the evaluation of new therapeutic and prophylactic agents.  In 1950–52 Hill was president of the Royal Statistical Society and was awarded its Guy Medal in Gold in 1953. He was knighted in 1961. On Hill's death Peter Armitage wrote, "to anyone involved in medical statistics, epidemiology or public health, Bradford Hill was quite simply the world’s leading medical statistician." In 1965, built upon the work of Hume and Popper, Hill suggested several aspects of causality in medicine and biology (read more), which have remained in use by epidemiologists to date.   == Bibliography == Note that Austin Bradford Hill's surname was Hill and he always used the name Hill, AB in publications. However, he is often referred to as Bradford Hill. To add to the confusion, his friends called him Tony. Furthermore, there is often a misleading hyphen such as in "Bradford-Hill criteria." "Principles of Medical Statistics" (1937) London: The Lancet, 1937. Doll, R.; Hill, A. B. (1 September 1950). "Smoking and Carcinoma of the Lung". British Medical Journal 2 (4682): 739–748. doi:10.1136/bmj.2.4682.739. ISSN 0007-1447. PMC 2038856. PMID 14772469.  Doll, R.; Hill, A. B. (1954). "The mortality of doctors in relation to their smoking habits; a preliminary report". British Medical Journal 1 (4877): 1451–1455. doi:10.1136/bmj.1.4877.1451. PMC 2085438. PMID 13160495.  Hill, A. B. (1965). "The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation?". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine 58 (5): 295–300. PMC 1898525. PMID 14283879.  [1] Chalmers, I. (2003). "Fisher and Bradford Hill: Theory and pragmatism?". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 922–924; discussion 924–8. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg295. PMID 14681246.  Armitage, P. (2003). "Fisher, Bradford Hill, and randomization". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 925–928; discussion 928–8. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg286. PMID 14681247.  Doll, R. (2003). "Fisher and Bradford Hill: Their personal impact". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 929–931; discussion 931–8. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg287. PMID 14681248.  "Fisher and Bradford Hill: A discussion". International Journal of Epidemiology 32 (6): 945–948. 2003. doi:10.1093/ije/dyg316.    == References == ^ Doll, R. (1994). "Austin Bradford Hill. 8 July 1897-18 April 1991". Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 40: 128–126. doi:10.1098/rsbm.1994.0032.  ^ Farewell, V.; Johnson, T. (2010). "Woods and Russell, Hill, and the emergence of medical statistics". Statistics in Medicine: n/a. doi:10.1002/sim.3893.  ^ Armitage, P. (1991). "Obituary: Sir Austin Bradford Hill, 1897-1991". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 154 (3): 482–484. doi:10.2307/2983156 (inactive 2015-11-29).  ^ Yoshioka, A. (1998). "Use of randomisation in the Medical Research Council's clinical trial of streptomycin in pulmonary tuberculosis in the 1940s". BMJ 317 (7167): 1220–1223. doi:10.1136/bmj.317.7167.1220. PMC 1114162. PMID 9794865.    == External links == Doll has some comments on his teacher and boss in Interview with Richard Doll Photographs of Hill: on University of York site on National Portrait Gallery site

Basílio de Bragança Pereira (born 29 April 1945 in Rio de Janeiro) is a Brazilian statistician. He studied at Escola Nacional de Ciências Estatísticas since 1958 until his BSc in Statistics (1968), and obtained his Ph.D.and D.I.C. from the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine (1976) supervised by Sir David Cox. He also obtained an MSc in Operational Research (1970) and a Docent Free in Applied Statistics (1989) from Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro. In 2003 he spent a year working on a Project on Neural Networks in Statistics with Professor C.R. Rao at Penn State University on a postdoctoral grant from the Brazilian Government (CAPES). He is employed by the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro since 1970, in the Institute of Mathematics, Postgraduate School of Engineering (COPPE) and School of Medicine. Associate Professor at the Institute of Mathematics (1970–1989 and 1994–1997),Research Professor at COPPE (1970-present),Titular Professor of Applied Statistics at COPPE(1989-1994,retired),Titular Professor of Biostatistics at the School of Medicine(1998-2015, retired). He has supervised more than 70 thesis and dissertations. He was Elected member of the International Statistical Institute. His current statistical interests are Applications of Statistical Learning Methods in Medicine, acting mainly in choice of separated models, likelihood and Bayesian inference, time series,regression and survival analysis, neural networks in statistics.   == Books == SANTOS, A. M.; PEREIRA, B de B. Modelos Gráficos e Aplicações. 56a RBRAS e 14o SEAGRO, Maringa, 2011, 56p [1] PEREIRA, B. de B. ; RAO, Calyampudi Radhakrishna. Data Mining Using Neural Networks: A Guide for Statisticians. State College, Pennsylvania, 2009. 186 p. PEREIRA, B. de B. ; RODRIGUES, C V C . Redes Neurais em Estatística. Rio de Janeiro:, 1998. v. 1. 144 p. Associação Brasileira de Estatística PEREIRA, B. de B. ; SANT'ANNA, A. P. . Análise Econométrica de Séries Temporais. Rio de Janeiro:, 1989. 343 p. IM/UFRJ SALES, P. R. H. ; PEREIRA, B. de B. ; VIEIRA, A. M. . Identificação e Estimação Recursiva de Modelos de Séries Temporais Uni e Multivariadas. Rio de Janeiro: 1989. 60 p. 3a ESTE, Rio de Janeiro. PEREIRA, B. de B. ; PAIS, M. B. Z. ; SALES, P. R. H. . Análise Espectral de Séries Temporais: Uma Introdução para Engenharia, Economia e Estatística. Rio de Janeiro: 1986. 109 p. Arte Final e Eletrobrás PEREIRA, B. de B. . Séries Temporais Multivariadas., 1984. 219 p. Associação Brasileira de Estatística PEREIRA, B. de B. Tópicos em Séries Temporais: Métodos Automáticos de Previsão. PDD 07/80 COPPE/UFRJ. Rio de Janeiro, 1980   == References ==   == External links == Mathematical Genealogy

Bernard Walter Silverman FRS (born 22 February 1952) is a British statistician and Anglican Priest. He was Master of St Peter's College, Oxford from 1 October 2003 to 31 December 2009. He is a member of the Statistics Department at Oxford University, and is also attached to the Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, the Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, and the Oxford-Man Institute of Quantitative Finance. He has been a member of the Council of Oxford University and of the Council of the Royal Society. He was briefly President of the Royal Statistical Society in January 2010, a position from which he stood down upon announcement of his appointment as Chief Scientific Advisor to the Home Office.   == Career == 1970–73 Undergraduate, Jesus College, Cambridge. 1973–74 Graduate Student, Jesus College, Cambridge. 1974–75 Research Student, Statistical Laboratory, Cambridge. 1975–77 Research Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge. 1976–77 Calculator Development Manager, Sinclair Radionics Ltd. 1977–78 Junior Lecturer in Statistics, Oxford University and Weir Junior Research Fellow of University College, Oxford. 1978–80 Lecturer in Statistics, University of Bath. 1981–84 Reader in Statistics, University of Bath. 1984 and 1992–93 Head of Statistics Group, University of Bath. 1984–93 Professor of Statistics, University of Bath. 1988–91 Head of School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Bath. 1993–2003 Professor of Statistics, University of Bristol 1993–97 and 1998–99 Head of Statistics Group, University of Bristol 1999–2003 Henry Overton Wills Professor of Mathematics, University of Bristol 2000–03 Provost of the Institute for Advanced Studies, University of Bristol 2003–09 Master of St Peter's College, Oxford 2010– Senior Research Fellow, Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, Oxford (part-time) 2010– Professorial Research Associate, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford (part-time) 2010– Chief Scientific Advisor, Home Office   === Degrees and qualifications === 1973 Bachelor of Arts, Cambridge. (Wrangler) 1974 Part III of Mathematical Tripos, Cambridge (with Distinction) 1977 Doctor of Philosophy, Cambridge 1989 Doctor of Science, Cambridge 1993 Chartered Statistician, Royal Statistical Society 2000 Bachelor of Theology, Southampton (First Class Honours) through STETS   === Awards and honours === 1970 Gold Medal, International Mathematical Olympiad 1974 Mayhew Prize for Mathematical Tripos Part III, University of Cambridge 1976 Smith's Prize, Cambridge University 1984 Royal Statistical Society Guy Medal in Bronze 1985 Special Invited Paper, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1988 Technometrics Special Discussion Paper, American Statistical Association 1991 Presidents' Award of the Committee of presidents of Statistical Societies 1993 Fulkerson Lecturer, Cornell University 1995 Royal Statistical Society Guy Medal in Silver 1997 Fellow of the Royal Society 1999 Special Invited Paper, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1999 Henri Willem Methorst Medal, International Statistical Institute 2000 Corcoran Lecturer, Oxford University 2001 Member of Academia Europaea 2002 Original Member, Highly Cited Researchers database, ISI 2003 Honorary Fellow, Jesus College, Cambridge   === Ecclesiastical === 1999 Ordained deacon, Church of England 2000 Ordained priest, Church of England   == Books == Green, P.J.; Silverman, B.W. (1994). Nonparametric Regression and Generalized Linear Models: A Roughness Penalty Approach. Chapman & Hall.  Ramsay, J.O.; Silverman, B.W. (2002). Applied Functional Data Analysis: Methods and Case Studies. Springer-Verlag.  Ramsay, J.O.; Silverman, B.W. (2005) [1997]. Functional Data Analysis (second, expanded and rewritten ed.). Springer-Verlag.  Silverman, B.W. (1986). Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall.  Silverman, B.W.; Vassilicos, J.C., eds. (2000). Wavelets: The Key to Intermittent Information?. Oxford University Press.    == References ==   == Sources and links == Bernard Silverman's CV Bernard Silverman home page Bernard Silverman's results at the International Mathematical Olympiad Prof Bernard Silverman, FRS at Debrett's People of Today

George William "Bill" James (born October 5, 1949) is an American baseball writer, historian, and statistician whose work has been widely influential. Since 1977, James has written more than two dozen books devoted to baseball history and statistics. His approach, which he termed sabermetrics in reference to the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR), scientifically analyzes and studies baseball, often through the use of statistical data, in an attempt to determine why teams win and lose. His Baseball Abstract books in the 1980s are the modern predecessor to websites using sabermetrics such as Baseball Prospectus and Baseball Primer (now Baseball Think Factory). In 2006, Time named him in the Time 100 as one of the most influential people in the world. He is a Senior Advisor on Baseball Operations for the Boston Red Sox. In 2010, Bill James was inducted into the Irish American Baseball Hall of Fame.   == Early lifeEdit == James was born in Holton, Kansas; he never knew his mother, who died in 1954. His father was a janitor at a high school. After four years at the University of Kansas residing at Stephenson Scholarship hall, James joined the Army in 1971. He was the last person in Kansas to be sent to fight in the Vietnam War, although he never saw action there. Instead, he spent two years stationed in South Korea, during which time he wrote to KU about taking his final class. He was told he actually had met all his graduation requirements, so he returned to Lawrence in 1973 with degrees in English and economics. He also finished an Education degree in 1975, likewise from the University of Kansas.   == The Bill James Baseball AbstractsEdit == An aspiring writer and obsessive fan, James began writing baseball articles after leaving the United States Army in his mid-twenties. Many of his first baseball writings came while he was doing night shifts as a security guard at the Stokely-Van Camp's pork and beans cannery. Unlike most writers, his pieces did not recount games in epic terms or offer insights gleaned from interviews with players. A typical James piece posed a question (e.g., "Which pitchers and catchers allow runners to steal the most bases?"), and then presented data and analysis written in a lively, insightful, and witty style that offered an answer. Editors considered James's pieces so unusual that few believed them suitable for their readers. In an effort to reach a wider audience, James self-published an annual book titled The Bill James Baseball Abstract beginning in 1977. The first edition of the book presented 80 pages of in-depth statistics compiled from James's study of box scores from the preceding season and was offered for sale through a small advertisement in The Sporting News. Over the next three years James's work won respect, including a very favorable review by Daniel Okrent in Sports Illustrated. New annual editions added essays on teams and players. By 1982 sales had increased tenfold, and a media conglomerate agreed to publish and distribute future editions. While writers had published books about baseball statistics before (most notably Earnshaw Cook's Percentage Baseball, in the 1960s), few had ever reached a mass audience. Attempts to imitate James's work spawned a flood of books and articles that continues to this day.   == Post-Abstracts workEdit == In 1988, James ceased writing the Abstract, citing workload-related burnout and concern about the volume of statistics on the market. He has continued to publish hardcover books about baseball history, which have sold well and received admiring reviews. These books include three editions of The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract (1985, 1988, 2001, the last entitled The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract.) James has also written several series of new annuals: The Baseball Book (1990–1992) was a loosely organized collection of commentary, profiles, historical articles, and occasional pieces of research. James' assistant Rob Neyer was responsible for much of the research, and wrote several short pieces. Neyer went on to become a featured baseball columnist at ESPN and SB Nation. The Player Ratings Book (1993–95) offered statistics and 50-word profiles aimed at the fantasy baseball enthusiast. The Bill James Handbook (2003–present) provides past-season statistics and next-season projections for Major League players and teams, and career data for all current Major League players. Results for the Fielding Bible Awards, an alternative to the Gold Glove Awards voted on by a 10-person panel that includes James, are also included. The Bill James Gold Mine (2008–2010) was a collection of new essays and never-before-seen statistics, as well as profiles of players and teams. Playing off the name of the earlier series, Solid Fool's Gold: Detours on the Way to Conventional Wisdom (2011) was a mixed collection of both baseball-related and miscellaneous pieces, culled from the Bill James Online archives (see below). In 2008, James launched Bill James Online. Subscribers can read James' new, original writing and interact with one another —- as well as with James —- in a question-and-answer format. The web site also offers new "profiles" of teams and players full of facts and statistics that hope to one day map what James has termed "the lost island of baseball statistics."   == InnovationsEdit == Among the statistical innovations attributable to James are: Runs created. A statistic intended to quantify a player's contribution to runs scored, as well as a team's expected number of runs scored. Runs created is calculated from other offensive statistics. James's first version of it was: Runs Created = (Total bases * (Hits + Walks))/(Plate Appearances). Applied to an entire team or league, the statistic correlates closely to that team's or league's actual runs scored. Since James first created the statistic, sabermetricians have refined it to make it more accurate, and it is now used in many different variations. Range factor. A statistic that quantifies the defensive contribution of a player, calculated in its simplest form as RF = (Assists + Put Outs)/(Games Played). The statistic is premised on the notion that the total number of outs that a player participates in is more relevant in evaluating his defensive play than the percentage of cleanly handled chances as calculated by the conventional statistic Fielding percentage. Defensive Efficiency Rating. A statistic that shows the percentage of balls in play a defense turns into an out. It is used to help determine a team's defensive ability. Calculated by: 1 – ((Opp. Hits + Reached on Error – Opp. Home runs) / (Plate appearances – Walks – Strikeouts – HitByPitch – Opp. Home runs)). Win shares. A unifying statistic intended to allow the comparison of players at different positions, as well as players of different eras. Win Shares incorporates a variety of pitching, hitting and fielding statistics. One drawback of Win Shares is the difficulty of computing it. Pythagorean Winning Percentage. A statistic explaining the relationship of wins and losses to runs scored and runs allowed. In its simplest form: Pythagorean Winning Percentage equals Runs squared divided by the square of Runs plus the square of Runs Allowed. The statistic correlates closely to a team's actual winning percentage. Game Score is a metric to determine the strength of a pitcher in any particular baseball game. Major League Equivalency. A metric that uses minor league statistics to predict how a player is likely to perform at the major league level. The Brock2 System. A system for projecting a player's performance over the remainder of his career based on past performance and the aging process. Similarity scores. Scoring a player's statistical similarity to other players, providing a frame of reference for players of the distant past. Examples: Lou Gehrig comparable to Don Mattingly; Joe Jackson to Tony Oliva. Secondary average. A statistic that attempts to measure a player's contribution to an offense in ways not reflected in batting average. The formula is (Extra bases on hits+Walks+Stolen Bases)/At bats. Secondary averages tend to be similar to batting averages, but can vary widely, from less than .100 to more than .500 in extreme cases. Extra bases on hits is calculated with the formula (Doubles)+(Triplesx2)+(Homerunsx3) or more easily, (Total Bases)-(Hits). Power/Speed Number. A statistic that attempts to consolidate the various "clubs" of players with impressive numbers of both home runs and stolen bases (e.g., the "30/30" club (Bobby Bonds was well known for being a member), the "40/40" club (José Canseco was the first to perform this feat), and even the "25/65" club (Joe Morgan in the '70s)). The formula: (2x(Home Runs)x(Stolen Bases))/(Home Runs + Stolen Bases). Approximate Value. A system of cutoffs designed to estimate the value a player contributed to various category groups (including his team) to study broad questions such as "how do players age over time". "Temperature gauge" to determine how "hot" a player is, based on recent performance. The gauge has been used in NESN Red Sox telecasts and has provoked mixed reactions from critics. Although James may be best known as an inventor of statistical tools, he has often written on the limitations of statistics and urged humility concerning their place amid other kinds of information about baseball. To James, context is paramount: he was among the first to emphasize the importance of adjusting traditional statistics for park factors and to stress the role of luck in a pitcher's win-loss record. Many of his statistical innovations are arguably less important than the underlying ideas. When he introduced the notion of secondary average, it was as a vehicle for the then-counterintuitive concept that batting average represents only a fraction of a player's offensive contribution. (The runs-created statistic plays a similar role vis-à-vis the traditional RBI.) Some of his contributions to the language of baseball, like the idea of the "defensive spectrum", border on being entirely non-statistical.   == STATS, Inc.Edit == In an essay published in the 1984 Abstract, James vented his frustration about Major League Baseball's refusal to publish play-by-play accounts of every game. James proposed the creation of Project Scoresheet, a network of fans that would work together to collect and distribute this information. While the resulting non-profit organization never functioned smoothly, it worked well enough to collect accounts of every game from 1984 through 1991. James's publisher agreed to distribute two annuals of essays and data – the 1987 and 1988 editions of Bill James Presents The Great American Baseball Statbook (though only the first of these featured writing by James). The organization was eventually disbanded, but many of its members went on to form for-profit companies with similar goals and structure. STATS, Inc., the company James joined, provided data and analysis to every major media outlet before being acquired by Fox Sports in 2001.   == Acceptance and employment in mainstream baseballEdit == Oakland Athletics general manager Billy Beane began applying sabermetric principles to running his low-budget team in the late 1990s, to notable effect, as chronicled in Michael Lewis' book Moneyball. In 2003, James was hired by a former reader, John Henry, the new owner of the Boston Red Sox. One point of controversy was in handling the relief pitching of the Red Sox. James had previously published analysis of the use of the closer in baseball, and had concluded that the traditional use of the closer both overrated the abilities of that individual, and used him in suboptimal circumstances. He wrote that it is "far better to use your relief ace when the score is tied, even if that is the seventh inning, than in the ninth inning with a lead of two or more runs." The Red Sox in 2003 staffed their bullpen with several marginally talented relievers. Red Sox manager Grady Little was never fully comfortable with the setup, and designated unofficial closers and reshuffled roles after a bad outing. When Boston lost a number of games due to bullpen failures, Little reverted to a traditional closer approach and moved Byung-Hyun Kim from being a starting pitcher to a closer. The Red Sox did not follow James' idea of a bullpen with no closer, but with consistent overall talent that would allow the responsibilities to be shared. Red Sox reliever Alan Embree thought the plan could have worked if the bullpen had not suffered injuries. During the 2004 regular season Keith Foulke was used primarily as a closer in the conventional model; however, Foulke's usage in the 2004 postseason was along the lines of a relief ace with multiple inning appearances at pivotal times of the game. Houston Astros manager Phil Garner also employed a relief ace model with his use of Brad Lidge in the 2004 postseason. As of 2014, James is still employed by the Red Sox, having published several new sabermetric books during his tenure (see Bibliography, below). Indeed, although James is typically tight-lipped about his activities on behalf of the Red Sox, he is credited with advocating some of the moves that led to the team's first World Series championship in 86 years, including the signing of non-tendered free agent David Ortiz, the trade for Mark Bellhorn, and the team's increased emphasis on on-base percentage. After the Red Sox suffered through a disastrous 2012 season, Henry stated that James had fallen "out of favor [in the front office] over the last few years for reasons I really don't understand. We've gotten him more involved recently in the central process and that will help greatly." During his time with the Red Sox, Bill James has received three World Series rings for the team's 2004, 2007, and 2013 victories.   == In cultureEdit == James was profiled on 60 Minutes on March 30, 2008, in his role as a sabermetric pioneer and Red Sox advisor. Michael Lewis, in his book Moneyball, dedicates a chapter to James' career and Sabermetrics as background for his portrayal of Billy Beane and the Oakland Athletics' unlikely success. James made a guest appearance on the The Simpsons episode "MoneyBART". Steven Soderbergh's planned film adaptation of Moneyball would have featured an animated version of James as a "host". This script was discarded when director Bennett Miller and writer Aaron Sorkin succeeded Soderbergh on the project. Ultimately, the film as produced mentions James several times. His unlikely bio is briefly recapped, and Billy Beane is depicted telling John Henry that Henry's hiring of James is the reason Beane is interested in the Red Sox general manager job.   == Dowd Report controversyEdit == In his Baseball Book 1990, James heavily criticized the methodology of the Dowd Report, which was an investigation (commissioned by baseball commissioner Bart Giamatti) on the gambling activities of Pete Rose. James reproached commissioner Giamatti and his successor, Fay Vincent, for their acceptance of the Dowd Report as the final word on Rose's gambling. (James' attitude on the matter surprised many fans, especially after the writer had been deeply critical of Rose in the past, especially what James considered to be Rose's selfish pursuit of Ty Cobb's all-time record for base hits.) James expanded his defense of Rose in his 2001 book The New Historical Baseball Abstract, with a detailed explanation of why he found the case against Rose flimsy. James wrote "I would characterize the evidence that Rose bet on baseball as...well, not quite non-existent. It is extremely weak." This countered the popular opinion that the case against Rose was a slam dunk, and several critics claimed that James misstated some of the evidence in his defense of Rose. Derek Zumsteg of Baseball Prospectus wrote an exhaustive review of the case James made and concluded: "James' defense of Rose is filled with oversights, errors in judgment, failures in research, and is a great disservice to the many people who have looked to him for a balanced and fair take on this complicated and important issue." In 2004, Rose admitted publicly that he had bet on baseball and confirmed the Dowd Report was correct. James remained steadfast, continuing to insist that the evidence available to Dowd at the time was insufficient to reach the conclusion that it did.   == Paterno controversyEdit == On November 4, 2011, Jerry Sandusky was indicted for committing sex crimes against young boys, which brought the Penn State child sex abuse scandal to national attention. On December 11, 2011, James published an article called "The Trial of Penn State", depicting an imaginary trial in which Penn State defended itself against charges of "acting rashly and irresponsibly in the matter of Joe Paterno, in such a manner that [they] defamed, libeled and slandered Paterno, unfairly demolishing his reputation." On July 12, 2012, the Freeh report was released, charging Paterno and three other University officials with covering up reports of sexual assaults and enabling the attacker to prey on other children for more than a decade, often in Penn State facilities. Soon afterwards, during an interview on ESPN radio, James claimed that the Freeh report's characterizations of Paterno as a powerful figure were wrong, and that it wasn't Paterno's responsibility to report allegations of child molestation to the police. "[Paterno] had very few allies. He was isolated and he was not nearly as powerful as people imagine him to have been." When asked if he knew anyone who had showered with a boy they were not related to, James said it was a common practice when he was growing up. "That was actually quite common in the town I grew up in. That was quite common in America 40 years ago." The July 2012 interview comments were widely criticized. Rob Neyer wrote in defense of James. James' employer, the Boston Red Sox, issued a statement disavowing the comments James made and saying that he has been asked not to make further public comments on the matter.   == Other activitiesEdit == James is a fan of the University of Kansas men's basketball team and has written about basketball. He has created a formula for what he calls a "safe lead" in the sport. James has written a true crime book titled Popular Crime: Reflections on the Celebration of Violence.   == BibliographyEdit == Bill James Baseball Abstract (annual editions published 1977–1988) The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract (1985; revised edition 1988) This Time Let's Not Eat the Bones (1989) The Bill James Baseball Book (annual editions published 1990–1992) The Politics of Glory (1994) (revised as Whatever Happened to the Hall of Fame?) The Bill James Player Ratings Book (annual editions published 1993–1996) The Bill James Guide to Baseball Managers (1997) The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract (2001) Win Shares (2002) The Bill James Handbook (annual editions published 2003–present) The Neyer/James Guide to Pitchers (2004, with co-author Rob Neyer) The Bill James Gold Mine (annual editions published 2008–2010) Popular Crime – Reflections on the Celebration of Violence (ISBN 978-1-4165-5273-4, published 2011) Solid Fool's Gold (2011)   == Books about JamesEdit == The Mind of Bill James (2006) How Bill James Changed Our View of Baseball: by Colleagues, Critics, Competitors and Just Plain Fans (2007)   == See alsoEdit ==  Baseball Prospectus Defensive spectrum Keltner list Similarity score Win shares   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Baseball Prospectus (2005). Mind Game: How the Boston Red Sox Got Smart, Won a World Series, and Created a New Blueprint for Winning. New York City: Workman Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7611-4018-4. Retrieved March 3, 2011.    == Further readingEdit == Lewis, Michael (April 10, 2003). Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 45–47. ISBN 0-393-05765-8.    == External linksEdit == Bill James Online –interactions with James through statistics, articles, conversations and more Works of Bill James Audio interview by Jesse Thorn, public radio program The Sound of Young America (April 29, 2008) Chronister, Levi (April 25, 2004). "Grassroots Guru". Lawrence Journal-World (Lawrence, KS). Interview at Baseball Digest Daily – Part I, Baseball Digest Interview at Baseball Digest Daily – Part II Interview at Baseball Digest Daily – Part III McGrath, Ben (July 14, 2003). "The Professor of Baseball". The New Yorker Wall Street Journal profile Does Bill James Belong in the Hall of Fame? Okrent, Daniel (May 25, 1981). "He Does It by the Numbers". Sports Illustrated.  Wright, Craig R.. "Dick Allen:Another View". White Sox Interactive.  – contrary to James Schwarz, Alan (July 18, 2006). "25 For 25: Don Fehr, Peter Gammons, Pat Gillick, Bo Jackson, Bill James". 25 for 25: Stars in the Baseball America Universe. Baseball America. Henry, John (May 8, 2006). "Scientists & Thinkers: Bill James". The 2006 TIME 100. TIME. Surowiecki, James (June 10, 2003). "Moneyball Redux: Slate talks to the man who revolutionized baseball.". Slate. Lederer, Bill (February 28, 2005). "Breakfast with Bill James". Baseball Analysts (baseballanalysts.com). Bill James at Library of Congress Authorities, with 18 catalog records

William (Bill) Patrick McLennan (born 26 January 1942) is an Australian statistician who was Director of the Central Statistical Office (CSO) of the United Kingdom and Australian Statistician.   == Early yearsEdit == Bill McLennan was born on 26 January 1942 in Grafton, New South Wales. He joined the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) on 29 February 1960 as a statistics cadet and by 1964 had completed a degree in Statistics and Economics from the Australian National University and started working at the ABS full-time.   == Australian Bureau of StatisticsEdit == McLennan spent almost all his career at the ABS. Initially, he worked on sampling and methodology, then was promoted to Assistant Statistician in 1973. He left the ABS in 1979 to become Victorian Deputy Commonwealth Statistician in Melbourne but shortly afterwards, he was promoted to First Assistant Statistician and returned to the ABS as the head of Coordination and Management Division, where he led a review of the Census and Statistics Act in the early 1980s. He oversaw the establishment of the corporate planning system and the production of the ABS's first Corporate Plan in 1987. He championed the adoption of PC and Internet technologies to reduce the cost structure in the ABS and improved the readability of statistical output. In 1986, he became Deputy Australian Statistician.   == Central Statistical Office, United KingdomEdit == In 1992, McLennan was appointed Director of the Central Statistical Office (CSO) and head of the Government Statistical Services of the United Kingdom. He was the first person from outside the UK to be appointed to that post. During his tenure, he proposed the merger of the OPCS and the CSO in August 1994, which was subsequently announced by Prime Minister John Major in September 1995 following a consultation period and took place on 1 April 1996 when the Office for National Statistics was launched. He persuaded the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, to reduce ministerial access to economic statistics in advance of publication and to permit statistics to be released independently of ministers. He produced the Official Statistics Code of Practice, first published in April 1995, which set good practice and principles for statisticians producing official statistics with the aim of promoting high standards and maintaining public confidence in official statistics. He led the CSO through its early years as a 'Next Steps Agency' with demanding and quantified targets for the accuracy of statistics.   == United Nations Statistical CommissionEdit == McLennan was Chairman of the United Nations Statistical Commission from 1994 to 1995.   == Australian StatisticianEdit == McLennan became the Australian Statistician and head of the Australian Bureau of Statistics from 1995. During this period, he developed the work and direction of the ABS; placed great emphasis on the professional development of the staff; and provided a focus for the international activities of the Bureau, with a special emphasis on Asia. He retired on 30 June 2000.   == NotesEdit == ^ The Australian Bureau of Statistics Leading Edge Project Management Practices at a Board level, a Macquarie Graduate School of Management Case Study, September 2005 ^ The National Archives, Statistical Departments, Office for National Statistics ^ "Ministers economical with vital statistics?", New Scientist, 20 February 1993. ^ "Ministers curbed over sensitive statistics", New Scientist, 27 February 1993. ^ Official Statistics Code of Practice, an abstract. ^ McLennan, W. You Can Count on Us--With Confidence, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in Society), Vol. 158, No. 3 (1995), pp. 467-489. ^ Country Participation and Chairpersons, UN Statistical Commission ^ Official Hansard, House of Representatives, Thursday, 29 June 2000, pp 18634-18635   == ReferencesEdit == Australian Bureau of Statistics (2005), "Informing a Nation: The Evolution of the Australian Bureau of Statistics 1905-2005", ISBN 0-642-47985-2.

Bogoljub Kočović (born 1920) is a Bosnian jurist and statistician, Yugoslav by ethnic affiliation. Kočović was born in Sarajevo; his father was a Serb and mother French by origin. He obtained a MA in economy at the Roosevelt University in Chicago, and a Ph. D. in law in Paris. Kočović was a research assistant in the French National Center of Scientific Research (CNRS) from 1947 to 1952 and worked in the USA for ten years. In the 1960s, he returned to France, where he lives today. His best known work is perhaps the book WWII Victims in Yugoslavia, published in London in 1985 in Sebo-Croatian. Kočović compared the censuses from 1921, 1931 and 1948, and, assuming the possible population growth at 1.1% and emigration in that period, obtained the demographic and actual losses of Yugoslavia during the World War II. He clearly stated that his estimates depended on these assumptions, and that if other population growth were assumed, different results would have been obtained. He calculated that the actual losses were around 1,014,000 and the demographic losses around 1,925,000. He allowed for a margin of error of 250,000. However, the official number upheld by the Yugoslav communist regime was 1,706,000. Though Kočovic's estimate was rough, it indicated that the official figure was possibly too high. Kočović's book was ignored in his homeland until the breakup of Yugoslavia, when it was reprinted in Sarajevo in 1990. In the 1980s, independently from Kočović, Vladimir Žerjavić in Zagreb, Croatia, used a similar method and obtained similar results. Both had lower figures for their own ethnicity (Kočović was assumed to be inclined to the Serbs) which was seen as a proof of their objectivity. Although his calculations of WWII victims in Yugoslavia are even lower than those of Žerjavić, he has never been called a Holocaust denier like Žerjavić. However, Žerjavić gave a much more detailed account of numbers and nationalities of dead, and did not express caution in interpretation of the results the way Kočović did. However, Kočović has expressly confirmed that he considered his work in the field scientifically valid and, ultimately, accurate. He went so far as to write a new book, published in 1997, with the aim of refuting the Serbian statistician Đorđević's efforts to "reinstate" the "great numbers" victims figures dominant during Communist Yugoslavia period. Kočović was one of the founders of the Oslobođenje union in Geneva and Paris, a contributor and one of the editors of Naša reč, and founder, with Dr. Dragan Pavlovic, of Parisian quarterly Dialogue. He is a member of the Association of Serbian Writers and Artists, as well as the Action Committee for the Democratic Alternative.   == Works == Žrtve drugog svetskog rata u Jugoslaviji (Casualties of WWII in Yugoslavia; Biddles of Guilford for Veritas Foundation Press, London, 1985.) Nauka, nacionalizam i propaganda (Science, Nationalism and Propaganda; Paris, 1998)   == References ==   == Sources == Tomasevich, Jozo. War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941-1945: Occupation and Collaboration. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-8047-3615-4 In Cap.17 Alleged and True Population Losses there is a detailed account of the controversies related to Yugoslav war losses.   == External links == Victims of War between Science and Propaganda (Serbian)

Brian David Ripley FRSE (born 29 April 1952) is a British statistician. From 1990, he was professor of applied statistics at the University of Oxford and is also a professorial fellow at St Peter's College. He retired August 2014 due to ill health. Ripley has made contributions to the fields of spatial statistics and pattern recognition. His work on artificial neural networks in the 1990s helped to bring aspects of machine learning and data mining to the attention of statistical audiences. He emphasised the value of robust statistics in his books Modern Applied Statistics with S and Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Ripley helped develop the S programming language and its implementations: S-PLUS and R. He co-authored two books based on S, Modern Applied Statistics with S and S Programming. He was educated at the University of Cambridge, where he was awarded both the Smith's Prize and the Rollo Davidson Prize. The university also awarded him the Adams Prize in 1987 for an essay entitled Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes, later published as a book. He served on the faculty of Imperial College, London from 1976 until 1983, at which point he moved to the University of Strathclyde.   == Authored books == Ripley, B. D. (1981) Spatial Statistics. Wiley, 252pp. Ripley, B. D. (1983) Stochastic Simulation. Wiley, ISBN 0-471-81884-4. Ripley, B. D. (1988). Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-35234-7.  Ripley, B. D. (1996) Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge University Press. 403 pages. ISBN 0-521-46086-7. Venables, W. N. and Ripley, B. D. (2000) S Programming. Springer, 264pp. ISBN 978-0-387-98966-2. Venables, W. N. and Ripley, B. D. (2002) Modern Applied Statistics with S (Fourth Edition; previous editions published as Modern Applied Statistics with S-PLUS in 1994, 1997 & 1999). Springer, 462pp. ISBN 978-0-387-95457-8.   == References == ^ Professor Ripley's Homepage at Oxford University. Accessed 2015-05-10. ^ For instance, his book Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks was reviewed in the Journal of the American Statistical Association: Lange, Nicholas (December 1997), "Reviewed Works: Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition by C. M. Bishop; Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks by B. D. Ripley", Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (440): 1642–1645, JSTOR 2965437 . ^ Ripley, B. D. (1988). Statistical Inference for Spatial Processes. Cambridge University Press. pp. iv, vii. ISBN 0-521-35234-7.  ^ Profile of Professor Brian D Ripley (Last edited 1 October 1999 by Brian Ripley). Accessed 2010-12-28.   == External links == Brian Ripley's home page at the University of Oxford

Bruno de Finetti (13 June 1906 – 20 July 1985) was an Italian probabilist, statistician and actuary, noted for the "operational subjective" conception of probability. The classic exposition of his distinctive theory is the 1937 "La prévision: ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives," which discussed probability founded on the coherence of betting odds and the consequences of exchangeability.   == LifeEdit == De Finetti was born in Innsbruck, Austria and studied mathematics at Politecnico di Milano. He graduated in 1927 writing his thesis under the supervision of Giulio Vivanti. After graduation, he worked as an actuary and a statistician at Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (National Institute of Statistics) in Rome and, from 1931, the Trieste insurance company Assicurazioni Generali. He published extensively (17 papers in 1930 alone, according to Lindley) and acquired an international reputation in the small world of probability mathematicians. He taught mathematical analysis in Padua and then won a chair in Financial Mathematics at Trieste University (1939). In 1954 he moved to the Sapienza University of Rome, first to another chair in Financial Mathematics and then, from 1961 to 1976, one in the Calculus of Probabilities. De Finetti developed his ideas on subjective probability in the 1920s independently of Frank P. Ramsey. Still, according to the preface of his Theory of Probability, he drew on ideas of Harold Jeffreys, I. J. Good and B.O. Koopman. He only became known in the Anglo-American statistical world in the 1950s when L. J. Savage, who had independently adopted subjectivism, drew him into it; another great champion was Dennis Lindley. De Finetti died in Rome.   == WorkEdit == De Finetti emphasized a predictive inference approach to statistics; he proposed a thought experiment along the following lines (described in greater detail at coherence (philosophical gambling strategy)): You must set the price of a promise to pay $1 if there was life on Mars 1 billion years ago, and $0 if there was not, and tomorrow the answer will be revealed. You know that your opponent will be able to choose either to buy such a promise from you at the price you have set, or require you to buy such a promise from your opponent, still at the same price. In other words: you set the odds, but your opponent decides which side of the bet will be yours. The price you set is the "operational subjective probability" that you assign to the proposition on which you are betting. This price has to obey the probability axioms if you are not to face certain loss, as you would if you set a price above $1 (or a negative price). By considering bets on more than one event de Finetti could justify additivity. Prices, or equivalently odds, that do not expose you to certain loss through a Dutch book are called coherent. De Finetti is also noted for de Finetti's theorem on exchangeable sequences of random variables. De Finetti was not the first to study exchangeability but he brought the subject to greater visibility. He started publishing on exchangeability in the late 1920s but the 1937 article is his most famous treatment. In 1929, de Finetti introduced the concept of infinitely divisible probability distributions. He also introduced de Finetti diagrams for graphing genotype frequencies. The 1974 English translation of his book is credited with reviving interest in predictive inference in the Anglophone world, and bringing the idea of exchangeability to its attention. The de Finetti Award, presented annually by the European Association for Decision Making, is named after him.   == BibliographyEdit == See Works on Bruno de Finetti website   === de Finetti in EnglishEdit === (The following are translations of works originally published in Italian or French.) "Probabilism: A Critical Essay on the Theory of Probability and on the Value of Science," (translation of 1931 article) in Erkenntnis, volume 31, September 1989. The entire double issue is devoted to de Finetti's philosophy of probability. 1937, “La Prévision: ses lois logiques, ses sources subjectives,” Annales de l'Institut Henri Poincaré, - "Foresight: its Logical Laws, Its Subjective Sources," (translation of the 1937 article in French) in H. E. Kyburg and H. E. Smokler (eds), Studies in Subjective Probability, New York: Wiley, 1964. Theory of Probability, (translation by A Machi and AFM Smith of 1970 book) 2 volumes, New York: Wiley, 1974-5.   === DiscussionsEdit === D. V. Lindley, "Bruno de Finetti, 1906-1985 (Obituary)" Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 149, p. 252 (1986). The following books have a chapter on de Finetti and references to further literature. Jan von Plato, Creating Modern Probability : Its Mathematics, Physics, and Philosophy in Historical Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994 Donald Gillies, Philosophical Theories of Probability, London: Routledge, 2000.   == See alsoEdit == Coherence (philosophical gambling strategy) De Finetti diagram De Finetti's theorem Exchangeability Infinitely divisible probability distributions Predictive inference Quasiconvex function   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Probabilità e induzione, Bologna, 1993. (Italian) Bruno de Finetti website Generate finetti diagrams online MacTutor: Bruno de Finetti Bruno de Finetti's Papers [1](Bruno de Finetti Papers, 1924-2000, ASP.1992.01, Archives of Scientific Philosophy, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh) De Finetti on the Portraits of Statisticians page. Interpretations of Probability from the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. De Finetti's views are discussed in Section 3.5 of this article. Bruno de Finetti e la geometria del benessere by Rosaria Adriani (Italian)

Ching Chun Li (李景均; pinyin: Lǐ Jǐngjūn; 27 October 1912 in Tianjin, China; 20 October 2003 in Mt. Lebanon, United States) was a respectable American population geneticist and human geneticist. Li was best known for his book An Introduction to Population Genetics and his teaching in human genetics.   == Biography == Ching Chun Li was born on October 27, 1912, in Taku, Tianjin, China. He received his B.S. degree in agronomy from the University of Nanking in 1936 and a Ph.D. in plant breeding and genetics from Cornell University in 1940. He worked as post-doctorate fellows at Columbia University and North Carolina State University from 1940 to 1941. Li returned to China at the age of 30 and became the Professor of Genetics and Biometry at University of Nanking, his alma mater, in 1943. After World War II, he moved to Beijing for a Professorship of Agronomy at Peking University in 1946, where he finished An Introduction to Population Genetics in 1948. The book was the first notable publication where a combination of the ideas of Ronald Fisher, Sewall Wright, and J. B. S. Haldane about population genetics was brought to and made understandable to the academia. Li became persona non grata for publishing and teaching theory of genes following the 1949 establishment of a Communist government in Mainland China. In 1950, Li fled with his family to Hong Kong, where he was trapped without a documentation of citizenship and unable to obtain a visa. Friends and colleagues, particularly Nobel laureate H. J. Muller and sixth Surgeon General of the United States T. Parran assisted Dr. Li's emigration to US. Li joined newly founded Pitt's School of Public Health (GSPH) in 1951, became the professor of biometry in 1960, and headed the biostatistics department of GSPH from 1969 to 1975. He also served as the president of the American Society of Human Genetics in 1960. After his official retirement in 1982, he still published another 25 papers and continued to go to his office every day until a few months before his death in 2003.   == Bibliography ==   === Original Reports === Li, C.C.: On an equation specifying equilibrium populations. Science 1953; 117:378-379. Li, C.C.: Some general properties of recessive inheritance. Am J Hum Genet 1953; 5:269-279. Li, C.C.: An introduction to genetic statistics. Am J Hum Genet 1958; 10:72-75. Li, C.C.: McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology. Biometrics 1960; 1:223-232. Li, C.C.: Methodology in human genetics. Science 1962; 138:807-808. Li, C.C.: Environment changes: The implications for health from the viewpoint of a geneticist. National Health Forum 1964; 79-83.   === Books === Li, C.C.: Introduction to Population Genetics National Peking University Press. 1948. Li, C.C.: Population Genetics University of Chicago Press. 1955. Li, C.C.: Human Genetics Principles and Methods McGraw-Hill Book Co. 1961.   == References ==   == External links == Partha P. Majumder, "C. C. Li (1912–2003): his science and his spirit", in Journal of Genetics, Vol. 83, No. 1, April 2004, pp. 101-105. Pittsburgh Gazette obituary

Chien-Fu Jeff Wu (born January 15, 1949) is the Coca-Cola Chair in Engineering Statistics and Professor in the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He is known for his work on the convergence of the EM algorithm, resampling methods such as the bootstrap and jackknife, and industrial statistics, including design of experiments, and robust parameter design (Taguchi methods). Born in Taiwan, Wu earned a B.Sc. in Mathematics from National Taiwan University in 1971, and a Ph.D. in Statistics from University of California, Berkeley in 1976. He has been a faculty member at the University of Wisconsin, Madison (1977-1988), the University of Waterloo (1988-1993; GM-NSERC chair in quality and productivity), the University of Michigan (1995-2003; chair of Department of Statistics 1995-98; H.C. Carver professor of statistics, 1997-2003) and currently the Georgia Institute of Technology. He has supervised 40 Ph.D. students and published around 160 peer-reviewed articles and two books.   He has received several awards, including the COPSS Presidents' Award in 1987, the Shewhart Medal in 2008, the COPSS R. A. Fisher Lectureship in 2011, and the Deming Lecturer Award in 2012. He has been elected as a fellow of the American Statistical Association, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the American Society for Quality and the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences. In 2000 he was elected as a member of Academia Sinica. In 2004, he was elected as a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He received the Shewhart Medal of the American Society for Quality and an honorary degree from the University of Waterloo in 2008.  In November 1997, he gave the inaugural lecture entitled "Statistics = Data Science?" for his appointment to the H. C. Carver Professorship at the University of Michigan. He popularized the term "data science" and advocated that statistics be renamed data science and statisticians data scientists. Later, he presented his lecture entitled "Statistics = Data Science?" as the first of his 1998 P.C. Mahalanobis Memorial Lectures. These lectures honor Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis, an Indian scientist and statistician and founder of the Indian Statistical Institute. In Mile, Yunnan, China, a conference was held in July 2014 celebrating Professor Wu's 65th birthday. In 2014 he gave the Bradley Lecture at the University of Georgia.   == References ==   == External links == Interview with Jeff Wu, ICSA Bulletin (pages 36–45) Convergence of the EM algorithm Personal page at Georgia Tech Recognition of Jeff Wu by Academia Sinica

Carl O. Nordling (1919 – February 15, 2007) was a Finnish born architect, urban planner and amateur historian. He graduated as an architect from the Helsinki University of Technology in 1939 and immigrated to Sweden after the end of the Continuation War in 1944. Nordling published an article on the Holocaust, How Many Jews Died in the German Concentration Camps?, in the Holocaust denial publication Journal of Historical Review. Nordling has also published an article entitled Did Stalin deliver his alleged speech of 19 August 1939? in the Journal of Slavic Military Studies. As a statistician, he applied statistical methods to a number of scientific problems and published a large number of articles, mainly in his native Swedish. His most notable work is in scientific disciplines outside his professional expertise. Internationally he is best known for the small number of papers he published in English language peer reviewed scientific journals. In 1953, in a paper published in the British Journal of Cancer, he first proposed the multi-mutation theory on cancer, today generally known as Knudson hypothesis after Alfred G. Knudson's work from 1971. In his later years he wrote mainly about issues in Nordic and Germanic history, contributing among other to the debate on Shakespeare's identity    == Publications ==   === Books === Gåtorna kring Birger jarl, Ösel och Borgå: Omvärdering av historiska teorier rörande svensk östpolitik och finsk och estnisk kolonisation under tidig medeltid Faktainformation (1976) ISBN 978-91-85494-00-2 Den svenske Runeberg Ekenäs tryckeri aktiebolags förlag (1988) ISBN 978-951-9001-20-3   === Journals === A New Theory on the Cancer-inducing Mechanism, The British Journal of Cancer, 1953, Vol. VII, p. 68-72. The Jewish Establishment Under Nazi Threat and Domination 1938-1945 - The Journal of Historical Review, volume 10 no. 2 (Summer 1990), p. 195. How Many Jews Died in the German Concentration Camps? - The Journal of Historical Review, volume 11 no. 3 (Fall 1991), p. 335. The Location of the "Birca" - The Missionary Station of Bishop Ansgar - in the Scandinavian Journal of History, Volume 23 Number 1/2 1998 The Death of Karl XII.(18th-century Swedish king) - in Scandinavian Studies, Volume 71 Number 1; Spring 1999 Was There a Finnish Settlement in Uusimaa before the Swedish One? at Linguistica Uralica (2/2004) Did Stalin deliver his alleged speech of 19 August 1939?, in Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 19:93-106, 2006.   == References == ^ Who is Carl O. Nordling? (Who’s Who in the World) ^ Carl O. Nordling at Revisionists.com ^ Milestone 9: (1953) Two-hit hypothesis - It takes (at least) two to tango - at nature.com ^ Shakespeare: Who wrote Hamlet and why?   == External links == Personal home page Blog at blogspot.com

Charles "Chip" Lawrence is an American bioinformatician and mathematician, who is the pioneer in developing novel statistical approaches to biological sequence analysis. After his PhD graduation, Lawrence became the assistant professor in Systems Engineering and Operations Research and Statistics, in Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. In the same time period of time (1971–1975), Lawrence worked as the consultant to the Ministry of Maternal and Child Health in Dominican Republic. From 1975 to 1981, he worked in the New York State Department of Health as the Director of Operations Research and Statistics, in the Division of Epidemiology. Now, he is the Professor of Applied Mathematics and Center for computational Molecular Biology, at Brown University. From 2004 to 2006, he was the director of the Center for Computational Biology. Now he is the director of the Statistical Molecular Biology Group (SMBG), at Brown University. Lawrence’s key scientific works to date are focusing on algorithmic approaches to biological sequence analysis. In fact, he was one of the first to recognize that the inherent statistical nature of genomic processes and the immense data resulting from genomic sequencing projects could only be fully analyzed by using statistical algorithms.   == Early life and education == Lawrence got his Bachelor’s degree in 1967, in Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, majoring in physics. After the graduation from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, he pursued further education in Cornell University and moved to another research field: Applied Operation Research and Statistics in Environmental Engineering. He finished his PhD in 1971. His dissertation topic is population dynamics. Lawrence did not switch to bioinoformatics until he finished his PhD study.   == Research interests and contributions == Since the 1980s, Lawrence started the research in the field of computational biology. focusing on algorithmic approaches, he was a pioneer in developing novel statistical approaches to biological sequence analysis.   === Gibbs sampling in motif finding === Lawrence has particular contributions in the development of sequence alignment algorithms, which is approaching the modif finding problem by integrating the Bayesian statistics and Gibbs sampling strategy. In his seminal paper published in Science in 1993, the first application of the statistical technique Gibbs sampling to the problem of multiple sequence alignment was described and clearly illustrated. Besides, Lawrence collaborated with others to further develop the Bayesian statistical approaches to RNA secondary structure prediction, which greatly facilitate the predictions on the full ensemble of probable structures that an RNA molecule may adopt. Lawrence researches the application of Bayesian algorithms, specifically in the statistical approaches for the understanding of biological problems, with particular interest in transcription regulation and identification of regulatory motifs in sequences, antisense oligonucleotide and siRNA design, comparative genomics, the composition of nucleotide sequences and detailed analyses of several protein families.   === Software and platforms === In the past several years, based on the statistical algorithm development by Lawrence and his collaborators, several programs have also been publicly available and widely used, such as the Gibbs Motif Sampler, the Bayes aligner, Sfold, BALSA, Gibbs Gaussian Clustering, and Bayesian Motif Clustering. His work in Bayesian Statistics won the Mitchell Prize for outstanding applied Bayesian statistics paper in 2000.   === Chip Lawrence Lab === Lawrence became the director of Chip Lawrence Lab at Brown University. Their work is more focused on the applications of the high-D inferences in the biological problems such as the regulatory motif finding, RNAsecondary structure prediction, and genome wide studies of epigenetics; besides, his research interests also expanded into the geoscience areas of change point estimators of paleoclimate records and probabilistic alignment of geological stratigraphic sequences. The application models of stochastic grammars is also studied in Chip Lawrence Lab.   == Teaching and traineeship == Lawrence has also devoted time to education. He developed a tutorial on Bayesian statistics and Gibbs sampling, as well as the introduction courses in Bayesian statistics at Brown University. Lawrence has mentored several young investigators before he took the job at Brown University. From 1981 to 2003, his worked as the Chief in Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of Health, many young bioinformaticians were trained by him, such as Stephen Bryant. Dr. Bryant now is the senior Investigator in National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, and National Institutes of Health, working in the branch of computational biology. His focus is in the area of structural bioinformatics. Dr. Bryant also leads NCBI information resource teams in protein structure, protein family classification, and cheminformatics. These teams maintain NCBI’s macromolecular structure database and Cn3D visualization tool, the Conserved Domain Database and CDTree analysis tool, and most recently the PubChem cheminformatics database and associated analysis tools.   == Career summary == 1971–1975: Assistant Professor, Systems Engineering and Operations Research and Statistics, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 1971–1975: Consultant to the Ministry of Maternal and Child Health, Dominican Republic. 1975–1981: Director of Operations Research and Statistics, Division of Epidemiology, New York State Department of Health. 1981–2003: Chief of the Biometrics/Bioinformatics Laboratory, Wadsworth Center for Laboratories and Research, New York State Department of Health. 1985–1992: Statistical Consultant, Harrison Radiator Division General Motors Corp. 1992–1996: Visiting Scientist, National Center for Biotechnology Information, NLM-NIH. 2000–2003: Research Professor, Computer Science Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (one day per week). 2004–2006: Director of the Center for Computational Molecular Biology, and Professor of Applied Mathematics, Brown University. 2004–present: Professor of Applied Mathematics and Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University.   == References ==   == External links == Faculty page at Brown University

Charles Patrick Neill (1865–1942) was an American civil servant who raised in Austin, Texas after his family emigrated from Ireland in 1850. Neill graduated from Johns Hopkins University in 1897 with a doctorate in economics and politics. He was appointed the United States Commissioner of Labor in 1906 by President Theodore Roosevelt. As Commissioner of Labor he helped inspect the Meat Packing industries, and reported women and child labor injustices. He also mediated labor disputes between workers and employers in the coal, railroad, and steel corporations.   == Early years == Charles P. Neill was born on December 12, 1865 at Rock Island, Illinois. His parents James and Julia Neill had emigrated from Ireland in 1850. The family moved to Austin, Texas in 1871, where Charles' father, James, practiced law. Charles was employed as a bank messenger from 1876 to 1885. He attended the University of Notre Dame from 1885 to 1888 where he enjoyed his youth playing with snowballs. He then attended the University of Texas at Austin from 1888 to 1889 and finally graduated from Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. in 1891. He later taught at Notre Dame from 1891 to 1894. He studied at Johns Hopkins University from 1894 to 1897 and earned a doctorate in economics and politics. He then decided to continue teaching at the Catholic University of America, where he taught as an economics professor from 1896 to 1905 along with his peer Carroll D. Wright. He married Esther Waggaman of Washington, D.C., in 1901. In 1902, Charles was appointed by President Roosevelt to serve as assistant recorder of the Anthracite Coal Strike Commission and his work received recognition. In 1904 the board of arbitration was appointed to defuse a threatened coal strike in Alabama and one of the members, Judge George Gray of Delaware, made his participation dependent upon Charles serving as the recorder, which allowed for Charles to become better known in his field. Shortly after, in 1905, Roosevelt selected Neill to succeed Carroll D. Wright, who had also taught economics at Catholic University, as United States Commissioner of Labor from 1905 to 1913.   == Work == President William Howard Taft reappointed Charles in 1909. Woodrow Wilson appointed him Commissioner of Labor Statistics in 1913 when the Department of Commerce and Labor was divided and the Bureau of Labor Statistics was established in the new Department of Labor. Neill provided federal mediation services in railroad labor disputes and he drafted the Newlands Labor Act in 1913. When Upton Sinclair wrote his book The Jungle, Roosevelt sent Neill to Chicago investigate the meat packing industry, when Neill returned he described the packing industries as being "revolting". This caused much controversy in society as the terrible unsanitary conditions were of meat products were being publicized. The Neill-Reynolds Report (which is what the investigation report was named) led to the Meat Inspection Act of 1906. The Pure Food and Drug Act, enacted on the same day in 1906, also gave the government broad jurisdiction over food in interstate commerce. In addition, his detailed report on child labor provided a basis for congressional legislation. his child labor report showed the injustices of the working condition for children as well as women. Many employers believed that getting women and children out of the farm and working in mills was actually better for them. However, this was proved untrue, as reports were publicized about the bad ventilation in these factories and the unsanitary conditions in which they were put to work. Also, it was noted that they did not receive the same benefits as men and were often used as cheap labor. As a result, Charles helped pass an 8-hour maximum work day. Charles P. Neill also exposed the shocking working hours and conditions in the Bethlehem Steel Works company, as well as writing a report on the strike of textile workers in Lawrence, Massachusetts in 1912. What Roosevelt has said about his work with Charles P. Neill:  Unfortunately, thoroughly efficient government servants often proved to be the prime offenders so far as the enforcement of the eight-hour law was concerned, because in their zeal to get good work done for the Government they became harsh taskmasters, and declined to consider the needs of their fellow-employees who served under them. The more I had studied the subject the more strongly I had become convinced that an eight-hour day under the conditions of labor in the United States was all that could, with wisdom and propriety, be required either by the Government or by private employers; that more than this meant, on the average, a decrease in the qualities that tell for good citizenship. I finally solved the problem, as far as Government employees were concerned, by calling in Charles P. Neill, the head of the Labor Bureau; and, acting on his advice, I speedily made the eight-hour law really effective. Any man who shirked his work, who dawdled and idled, received no mercy; slackness is even worse than harshness; for exactly as in battle mercy to the coward is cruelty to the brave man, so in civil life slackness towards the vicious and idle is harshness towards the honest and hard-working. We passed a good law protecting the lives and health of miners in the Territories, and other laws providing for the supervision of employment agencies in the District of Columbia, and protecting the health of motormen and conductors on street railways in the District. We practically started the Bureau of Mines. We provided for safeguarding factory employees in the District against accidents, and for the restriction of child labor therein. We passed a workmen's compensation law for the protection of Government employees; a law which did not go as far as I wished, but which was the best I could get, and which committed the Government to the right policy. We provided for an investigation of woman and child labor in the United States. We incorporated the National Child Labor Committee. Where we had most difficulty was with the railway companies engaged in inter-State business. We passed an act improving safety appliances on railway trains without much opposition, but we had more trouble with acts regulating the hours of labor of railway employees and making those railways that were engaged in inter-State commerce liable for injuries to or the death of their employees while on duty.    == Later years == After his departure from the Department of Labor later in 1913, the skilled arbitrator was employed by Southeastern Railways from 1915 to 1939 to handle labor issues. He also served on the United States Railroad Board of Adjustments from 1919 to 1921. He was interested in industrial safety and workmen's compensation laws. Some of his charitable work included the Girls' Reform School, and the Board of Charities of the District of Columbia. He had numerous memberships and positions of leadership in several professional societies, including the American Statistical Association. He was honored by Notre Dame with the Laetare Medal in 1922. Charles Patrick Neill died in Washington, D.C., on 3 October 1942.   == Charles P. Neill papers == The Charles Patrick Neill Papers consist of seven manuscript boxes and one reel of microfilm from the years 1893–1956. His personal papers include correspondence, tax information (1940–1946), clippings and a scrapbook (1893–1903). Neill's professional papers contain correspondence (1904–1942) written while performing one of his various positions as professor, arbitrator, labor commissioner and so on. Included with these papers are: Class notes and publications from his teaching career at the University of Notre Dame and the Catholic University of America Legal papers regarding various grievances brought by workmen against their bosses and the charges brought against Neill when he became Commissioner of Labor Statistics News clippings and other printed material dealing with his work for the Department of Labor Scrapbooks on microfilm concerning his Labor Department activities and his membership on the Railway Commission However, Richard G. Balfe, notes that Neill destroyed most of his personal papers during the last year of his life; little remains apart from some press clippings and letters of congratulations from friends.   == Books == The beginnings of child labor legislation in certain states: a comparative study (1910) Some ethical aspects of the labor movement (1908)   == References == Black Studies in the Department of Labor, 1897-1907 at U.S. Department of Labor web site

Charles Sanders Peirce (/ˈpɜrs/, like "purse", September 10, 1839 – April 19, 1914) was an American philosopher, logician, mathematician, and scientist who is sometimes known as "the father of pragmatism". He was educated as a chemist and employed as a scientist for 30 years. Today he is appreciated largely for his contributions to logic, mathematics, philosophy, scientific methodology, and semiotics, and for his founding of pragmatism. An innovator in mathematics, statistics, philosophy, research methodology, and various sciences, Peirce considered himself, first and foremost, a logician. He made major contributions to logic, but logic for him encompassed much of that which is now called epistemology and philosophy of science. He saw logic as the formal branch of semiotics, of which he is a founder, and which foreshadowed the debate among logical positivists and proponents of philosophy of language that dominated 20th century Western philosophy; additionally, he defined the concept of abductive reasoning, as well as rigorously formulated mathematical induction and deductive reasoning. As early as 1886 he saw that logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits; the same idea was used decades later to produce digital computers. In 1934, the philosopher Paul Weiss called Peirce "the most original and versatile of American philosophers and America's greatest logician". Webster's Biographical Dictionary said in 1943 that Peirce was "now regarded as the most original thinker and greatest logician of his time." Keith Devlin similarly referred to Peirce as one of the greatest philosophers ever.   == LifeEdit ==  Peirce was born at 3 Phillips Place in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He was the son of Sarah Hunt Mills and Benjamin Peirce, himself a professor of astronomy and mathematics at Harvard University and perhaps the first serious research mathematician in America. At age 12, Charles read his older brother's copy of Richard Whately's Elements of Logic, then the leading English-language text on the subject. So began his lifelong fascination with logic and reasoning. He went on to earn the A.B. and A.M. from Harvard; in 1863 the Lawrence Scientific School awarded him a B.Sc. that was Harvard's first summa cum laude chemistry degree; and otherwise his academic record was undistinguished. At Harvard, he began lifelong friendships with Francis Ellingwood Abbot, Chauncey Wright, and William James. One of his Harvard instructors, Charles William Eliot, formed an unfavorable opinion of Peirce. This opinion proved fateful, because Eliot, while President of Harvard 1869–1909—a period encompassing nearly all of Peirce's working life—repeatedly vetoed Harvard's employing Peirce in any capacity. Peirce suffered from his late teens onward from a nervous condition then known as "facial neuralgia", which would today be diagnosed as trigeminal neuralgia. Brent says that when in the throes of its pain "he was, at first, almost stupefied, and then aloof, cold, depressed, extremely suspicious, impatient of the slightest crossing, and subject to violent outbursts of temper". Its consequences may have led to the social isolation which made his life's later years so tragic.   === Early employmentEdit === Between 1859 and 1891, Peirce was intermittently employed in various scientific capacities by the United States Coast Survey and its successor, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, where he enjoyed his highly influential father's protection until the latter's death in 1880. That employment exempted Peirce from having to take part in the Civil War; it would have been very awkward for him to do so, as the Boston Brahmin Peirces sympathized with the Confederacy. At the Survey, he worked mainly in geodesy and gravimetry, refining the use of pendulums to determine small local variations in the Earth's gravity. He was elected a resident fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in January 1867. The Survey sent him to Europe five times, first in 1871 as part of a group sent to observe a solar eclipse; there, he sought out Augustus De Morgan, William Stanley Jevons, and William Kingdon Clifford, British mathematicians and logicians whose turn of mind resembled his own. From 1869 to 1872, he was employed as an Assistant in Harvard's astronomical observatory, doing important work on determining the brightness of stars and the shape of the Milky Way. On April 20, 1877 he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences. Also in 1877, he proposed measuring the meter as so many wavelengths of light of a certain frequency, the kind of definition employed from 1960 to 1983. During the 1880s, Peirce's indifference to bureaucratic detail waxed while his Survey work's quality and timeliness waned. Peirce took years to write reports that he should have completed in months. Meanwhile, he wrote entries, ultimately thousands during 1883–1909, on philosophy, logic, science, and other subjects for the encyclopedic Century Dictionary. In 1885, an investigation by the Allison Commission exonerated Peirce, but led to the dismissal of Superintendent Julius Hilgard and several other Coast Survey employees for misuse of public funds. In 1891, Peirce resigned from the Coast Survey at Superintendent Thomas Corwin Mendenhall's request. He never again held regular employment.   === Johns Hopkins UniversityEdit === In 1879, Peirce was appointed Lecturer in logic at the new Johns Hopkins University, which had strong departments in a number of areas that interested him, such as philosophy (Royce and Dewey completed their PhDs at Hopkins), psychology (taught by G. Stanley Hall and studied by Joseph Jastrow, who coauthored a landmark empirical study with Peirce), and mathematics (taught by J. J. Sylvester, who came to admire Peirce's work on mathematics and logic). 1883 saw publication of his Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University containing works by himself and Allan Marquand, Christine Ladd, Benjamin Ives Gilman, and Oscar Howard Mitchell, several of whom were his graduate students. Peirce's nontenured position at Hopkins was the only academic appointment he ever held. Brent documents something Peirce never suspected, namely that his efforts to obtain academic employment, grants, and scientific respectability were repeatedly frustrated by the covert opposition of a major Canadian-American scientist of the day, Simon Newcomb. Peirce's efforts may also have been hampered by a difficult personality; Brent conjectures as to further psychological difficulty. Conversely, Keith Devlin believes that Peirce's work was too far ahead of his time to be appreciated by the academic establishment of the day and that this played a large role in Peirce's inability to obtain a tenured position. Peirce's personal life worked against his professional success. After his first wife, Harriet Melusina Fay ("Zina"), left him in 1875, Peirce, while still legally married, became involved with Juliette, whose name, given variously as Froissy and Pourtalai and nationality (she spoke French) remain uncertain. When his divorce from Zina became final in 1883, he married Juliette. That year, Newcomb pointed out to a Johns Hopkins trustee that Peirce, while a Hopkins employee, had lived and traveled with a woman to whom he was not married; the ensuing scandal led to his dismissal in January 1884. Over the years Peirce sought academic employment at various universities without success. He had no children by either marriage.   === PovertyEdit === In 1887 Peirce spent part of his inheritance from his parents to buy 2,000 acres (8 km2) of rural land near Milford, Pennsylvania, which never yielded an economic return. There he had an 1854 farmhouse remodeled to his design. The Peirces named the property "Arisbe". There they lived with few interruptions for the rest of their lives, Charles writing prolifically, much of it unpublished to this day (see Works). Living beyond their means soon led to grave financial and legal difficulties. He spent much of his last two decades unable to afford heat in winter and subsisting on old bread donated by the local baker. Unable to afford new stationery, he wrote on the verso side of old manuscripts. An outstanding warrant for assault and unpaid debts led to his being a fugitive in New York City for a while. Several people, including his brother James Mills Peirce and his neighbors, relatives of Gifford Pinchot, settled his debts and paid his property taxes and mortgage. Peirce did some scientific and engineering consulting and wrote much for meager pay, mainly encyclopedic dictionary entries, and reviews for The Nation (with whose editor, Wendell Phillips Garrison, he became friendly). He did translations for the Smithsonian Institution, at its director Samuel Langley's instigation. Peirce also did substantial mathematical calculations for Langley's research on powered flight. Hoping to make money, Peirce tried inventing. He began but did not complete a number of books. In 1888, President Grover Cleveland appointed him to the Assay Commission.  From 1890 on, he had a friend and admirer in Judge Francis C. Russell of Chicago, who introduced Peirce to editor Paul Carus and owner Edward C. Hegeler of the pioneering American philosophy journal The Monist, which eventually published at least 14 articles by Peirce. He wrote many texts in James Mark Baldwin's Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901–5); half of those credited to him appear to have been written actually by Christine Ladd-Franklin under his supervision. He applied in 1902 to the newly formed Carnegie Institution for a grant to write a systematic book of his life's work. The application was doomed; his nemesis Newcomb served on the Institution's executive committee, and its President had been the President of Johns Hopkins at the time of Peirce's dismissal. The one who did the most to help Peirce in these desperate times was his old friend William James, dedicating his Will to Believe (1897) to Peirce, and arranging for Peirce to be paid to give two series of lectures at or near Harvard (1898 and 1903). Most important, each year from 1907 until James's death in 1910, James wrote to his friends in the Boston intelligentsia to request financial aid for Peirce; the fund continued even after James died. Peirce reciprocated by designating James's eldest son as his heir should Juliette predecease him. It has been believed that this was also why Peirce used "Santiago" ("St. James" in English) as a middle name, but he appeared in print as early as 1890 as Charles Santiago Peirce. (See Charles Santiago Sanders Peirce for discussion and references). Peirce died destitute in Milford, Pennsylvania, twenty years before his widow.   === Slavery, the Civil War and racismEdit === Peirce grew up in a home where the supremacy of the white Anglo-Saxon male was taken for granted, Irish immigrants were considered inferior and Negro slavery was considered natural. Until the outbreak of the Civil War his father described himself as a secessionist, but after the outbreak of the war, this stopped and he became a Union partisan, supporting with donations the Sanitary Commission, the leading Northern war charity. No members of the Peirce family volunteered or enlisted. Peirce shared his father's views and liked to use the syllogism     All Men are equal in their political rights,    Negroes are Men    -  Negroes are equal in political rights to whites  to illustrate the unreliability of traditional forms of logic. See: Peirce's law#Other proofs of Peirce's law   == ReceptionEdit == Bertrand Russell (1959) wrote, "Beyond doubt [...] he was one of the most original minds of the later nineteenth century, and certainly the greatest American thinker ever." (Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, published from 1910 to 1913, does not mention Peirce; Peirce's work was not widely known until later.) A. N. Whitehead, while reading some of Peirce's unpublished manuscripts soon after arriving at Harvard in 1924, was struck by how Peirce had anticipated his own "process" thinking. (On Peirce and process metaphysics, see Lowe 1964.) Karl Popper viewed Peirce as "one of the greatest philosophers of all times". Yet Peirce's achievements were not immediately recognized. His imposing contemporaries William James and Josiah Royce admired him, and Cassius Jackson Keyser at Columbia and C. K. Ogden wrote about Peirce with respect, but to no immediate effect. The first scholar to give Peirce his considered professional attention was Royce's student Morris Raphael Cohen, the editor of an anthology of Peirce's writings titled Chance, Love, and Logic (1923) and the author of the first bibliography of Peirce's scattered writings. John Dewey studied under Peirce at Johns Hopkins and, from 1916 onwards, Dewey's writings repeatedly mention Peirce with deference. His 1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry is much influenced by Peirce. The publication of the first six volumes of the Collected Papers (1931–35), the most important event to date in Peirce studies and one that Cohen made possible by raising the needed funds, did not prompt an outpouring of secondary studies. The editors of those volumes, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, did not become Peirce specialists. Early landmarks of the secondary literature include the monographs by Buchler (1939), Feibleman (1946), and Goudge (1950), the 1941 Ph.D. thesis by Arthur W. Burks (who went on to edit volumes 7 and 8), and the studies edited by Wiener and Young (1952). The Charles S. Peirce Society was founded in 1946. Its Transactions, an academic quarterly specializing in Peirce, pragmatism, and American philosophy, has appeared since 1965. In 1949, while doing unrelated archival work, the historian of mathematics Carolyn Eisele (1902–2000) chanced on an autograph letter by Peirce. So began her 40 years of research on Peirce the mathematician and scientist, culminating in Eisele (1976, 1979, 1985). Beginning around 1960, the philosopher and historian of ideas Max Fisch (1900–1995) emerged as an authority on Peirce; Fisch (1986) includes many of his relevant articles, including a wide-ranging survey (Fisch 1986: 422–48) of the impact of Peirce's thought through 1983. Peirce has gained a significant international following, marked by university research centers devoted to Peirce studies and pragmatism in Brazil (CeneP/CIEP), Finland (HPRC, including Commens), Germany (Wirth's group, Hoffman's and Otte's group, and Deuser's and Härle's group), France (L'I.R.S.C.E.), Spain (GEP), and Italy (CSP). His writings have been translated into several languages, including German, French, Finnish, Spanish, and Swedish. Since 1950, there have been French, Italian, Spanish, British, and Brazilian Peirceans of note. For many years, the North American philosophy department most devoted to Peirce was the University of Toronto's, thanks in good part to the leadership of Thomas Goudge and David Savan. In recent years, U.S. Peirce scholars have clustered at Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, home of the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), and the Pennsylvania State University.  Currently, considerable interest is being taken in Peirce's ideas by researchers wholly outside the arena of academic philosophy. The interest comes from industry, business, technology, intelligence organizations, and the military; and it has resulted in the existence of a substantial number of agencies, institutes, businesses, and laboratories in which ongoing research into and development of Peircean concepts are being vigorously undertaken.  In recent years, Peirce's trichotomy of signs is exploited by a growing number of practitioners for marketing and design tasks.   == WorksEdit == Peirce's reputation rests largely on a number of academic papers published in American scientific and scholarly journals such as Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Journal of Speculative Philosophy, The Monist, Popular Science Monthly, the American Journal of Mathematics, Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, The Nation, and others. See Articles by Peirce, published in his lifetime for an extensive list with links to them online. The only full-length book (neither extract nor pamphlet) that Peirce authored and saw published in his lifetime was Photometric Researches (1878), a 181-page monograph on the applications of spectrographic methods to astronomy. While at Johns Hopkins, he edited Studies in Logic (1883), containing chapters by himself and his graduate students. Besides lectures during his years (1879–1884) as Lecturer in Logic at Johns Hopkins, he gave at least nine series of lectures, many now published; see Lectures by Peirce. Harvard University obtained from Peirce's widow soon after his death the papers found in his study, but did not microfilm them until 1964. Only after Richard Robin (1967) catalogued this Nachlass did it become clear that Peirce had left approximately 1650 unpublished manuscripts, totaling over 100,000 pages, mostly still unpublished except on microfilm. On the vicissitudes of Peirce's papers, see Houser (1989). Reportedly the papers remain in unsatisfactory condition. The first published anthology of Peirce's articles was the one-volume Chance, Love and Logic: Philosophical Essays, edited by Morris Raphael Cohen, 1923, still in print. Other one-volume anthologies were published in 1940, 1957, 1958, 1972, 1994, and 2009, most still in print. The main posthumous editions of Peirce's works in their long trek to light, often multi-volume, and some still in print, have included: 1931–58: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (CP), 8 volumes, includes many published works, along with a selection of previously unpublished work and a smattering of his correspondence. This long-time standard edition drawn from Peirce's work from the 1860s to 1913 remains the most comprehensive survey of his prolific output from 1893 to 1913. It is organized thematically, but texts (including lecture series) are often split up across volumes, while texts from various stages in Peirce's development are often combined, requiring frequent visits to editors' notes. Edited (1–6) by Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss and (7–8) by Arthur Burks, in print and online. 1975–87: Charles Sanders Peirce: Contributions to The Nation, 4 volumes, includes Peirce's more than 300 reviews and articles published 1869–1908 in The Nation. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner and James Edward Cook, online. 1976: The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, 4 volumes in 5, included many previously unpublished Peirce manuscripts on mathematical subjects, along with Peirce's important published mathematical articles. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1977: Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence between C. S. Peirce and Victoria Lady Welby (2nd edition 2001), included Peirce's entire correspondence (1903–1912) with Victoria, Lady Welby. Peirce's other published correspondence is largely limited to the 14 letters included in volume 8 of the Collected Papers, and the 20-odd pre-1890 items included so far in the Writings. Edited by Charles S. Hardwick with James Cook, out of print. 1982–now: Writings of Charles S. Peirce, A Chronological Edition (W), Volumes 1–6 & 8, of a projected 30. The limited coverage, and defective editing and organization, of the Collected Papers led Max Fisch and others in the 1970s to found the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), whose mission is to prepare a more complete critical chronological edition. Only seven volumes have appeared to date, but they cover the period from 1859–1892, when Peirce carried out much of his best-known work. W 8 was published in November 2010; and work continues on W 7, 9, and 11. In print and online. 1985: Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic of Science: A History of Science, 2 volumes. Auspitz has said, "The extent of Peirce's immersion in the science of his day is evident in his reviews in the Nation [...] and in his papers, grant applications, and publishers' prospectuses in the history and practice of science", referring latterly to Historical Perspectives. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1992: Reasoning and the Logic of Things collects in one place Peirce's 1898 series of lectures invited by William James. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner, with commentary by Hilary Putnam, in print. 1992–98: The Essential Peirce (EP), 2 volumes, is an important recent sampler of Peirce's philosophical writings. Edited (1) by Nathan Hauser and Christian Kloesel and (2) by PEP editors, in print. 1997: Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking collects Peirce's 1903 Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" in a study edition, including drafts, of Peirce's lecture manuscripts, which had been previously published in abridged form; the lectures now also appear in EP 2. Edited by Patricia Ann Turisi, in print. 2010: Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Writings collects important writings by Peirce on the subject, many not previously in print. Edited by Matthew E. Moore, in print.   == MathematicsEdit ==  Peirce's most important work in pure mathematics was in logical and foundational areas. He also worked on linear algebra, matrices, various geometries, topology and Listing numbers, Bell numbers, graphs, the four-color problem, and the nature of continuity. He worked on applied mathematics in economics, engineering, and map projections (such as the Peirce quincuncial projection), and was especially active in probability and statistics. Discoveries Peirce made a number of striking discoveries in formal logic and foundational mathematics, nearly all of which came to be appreciated only long after he died: In 1860 he suggested a cardinal arithmetic for infinite numbers, years before any work by Georg Cantor (who completed his dissertation in 1867) and without access to Bernard Bolzano's 1851 (posthumous) Paradoxien des Unendlichen.  In 1880–81 he showed how Boolean algebra could be done via a repeated sufficient single binary operation (logical NOR), anticipating Henry M. Sheffer by 33 years. (See also De Morgan's Laws). In 1881 he set out the axiomatization of natural number arithmetic, a few years before Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano. In the same paper Peirce gave, years before Dedekind, the first purely cardinal definition of a finite set in the sense now known as "Dedekind-finite", and implied by the same stroke an important formal definition of an infinite set (Dedekind-infinite), as a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with one of its proper subsets. In 1885 he distinguished between first-order and second-order quantification. In the same paper he set out what can be read as the first (primitive) axiomatic set theory, anticipating Zermelo by about two decades (Brady 2000, pp. 132–3). In 1886 he saw that Boolean calculations could be carried out via electrical switches, anticipating Claude Shannon by more than 50 years.  By the later 1890s he was devising existential graphs, a diagrammatic notation for the predicate calculus. Based on them are John F. Sowa's conceptual graphs and Sun-Joo Shin's diagrammatic reasoning. The New Elements of Mathematics Peirce wrote drafts for an introductory textbook, with the working title The New Elements of Mathematics, that presented mathematics from an original standpoint. Those drafts and many other of his previously unpublished mathematical manuscripts finally appeared in The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce (1976), edited by mathematician Carolyn Eisele. Nature of mathematics Peirce agreed with Auguste Comte in regarding mathematics as more basic than philosophy and the special sciences (of nature and mind). Peirce classified mathematics into three subareas: (1) mathematics of logic, (2) discrete series, and (3) pseudo-continua (as he called them, including the real numbers) and continua. Influenced by his father Benjamin, Peirce argued that mathematics studies purely hypothetical objects and is not just the science of quantity but is more broadly the science which draws necessary conclusions; that mathematics aids logic, not vice versa; and that logic itself is part of philosophy and is the science about drawing conclusions necessary and otherwise.   === Mathematics of logicEdit ===  Beginning with his first paper on the "Logic of Relatives" (1870), Peirce extended the theory of relations that Augustus De Morgan had just recently awakened from its Cinderella slumbers. Much of the mathematics of relations now taken for granted was "borrowed" from Peirce, not always with all due credit; on that and on how the young Bertrand Russell, especially his Principles of Mathematics and Principia Mathematica, did not do Peirce justice, see Anellis (1995). In 1918 the logician C. I. Lewis wrote, "The contributions of C.S. Peirce to symbolic logic are more numerous and varied than those of any other writer — at least in the nineteenth century." Beginning in 1940, Alfred Tarski and his students rediscovered aspects of Peirce's larger vision of relational logic, developing the perspective of relation algebra. Relational logic gained applications. In mathematics, it influenced the abstract analysis of E. H. Moore and the lattice theory of Garrett Birkhoff. In computer science, the relational model for databases was developed with Peircean ideas in work of Edgar F. Codd, who was a doctoral student of Arthur W. Burks, a Peirce scholar. In economics, relational logic was used by Frank P. Ramsey, John von Neumann, and Paul Samuelson to study preferences and utility and by Kenneth J. Arrow in Social Choice and Individual Values, following Arrow's association with Tarski at City College of New York. On Peirce and his contemporaries Ernst Schröder and Gottlob Frege, Hilary Putnam (1982) documented that Frege's work on the logic of quantifiers had little influence on his contemporaries, although it was published four years before the work of Peirce and his student Oscar Howard Mitchell. Putnam found that mathematicians and logicians learned about the logic of quantifiers through the independent work of Peirce and Mitchell, particularly through Peirce's "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation" (1885), published in the premier American mathematical journal of the day, and cited by Peano and Schröder, among others, who ignored Frege. They also adopted and modified Peirce's notations, typographical variants of those now used. Peirce apparently was ignorant of Frege's work, despite their overlapping achievements in logic, philosophy of language, and the foundations of mathematics. Peirce's work on formal logic had admirers besides Ernst Schröder: Philosophical algebraist William Kingdon Clifford and logician William Ernest Johnson, both British; The Polish school of logic and foundational mathematics, including Alfred Tarski; Arthur Prior, who praised and studied Peirce's logical work in a 1964 paper and in Formal Logic (saying on page 4 that Peirce "perhaps had a keener eye for essentials than any other logician before or since."). A philosophy of logic, grounded in his categories and semiotic, can be extracted from Peirce's writings and, along with Peirce's logical work more generally, is exposited and defended in Hilary Putnam (1982); the Introduction in Nathan Houser et al. (1997); and Randall Dipert's chapter in Cheryl Misak (2004).   === ContinuaEdit === Continuity and synechism are central in Peirce's philosophy: "I did not at first suppose that it was, as I gradually came to find it, the master-Key of philosophy". From a mathematical point of view, he embraced infinitesimals and worked long on the mathematics of continua. He long held that the real numbers constitute a pseudo-continuum; that a true continuum is the real subject matter of analysis situs (topology); and that a true continuum of instants exceeds—and within any lapse of time has room for—any Aleph number (any infinite multitude as he called it) of instants. In 1908 Peirce wrote that he found that a true continuum might have or lack such room. Jérôme Havenel (2008): "It is on May 26, 1908, that Peirce finally gave up his idea that in every continuum there is room for whatever collection of any multitude. From now on, there are different kinds of continua, which have different properties."   === Probability and statisticsEdit === Peirce held that science achieves statistical probabilities, not certainties, and that spontaneity (absolute chance) is real (see Tychism on his view). Most of his statistical writings promote the frequency interpretation of probability (objective ratios of cases), and many of his writings express skepticism about (and criticize the use of) probability when such models are not based on objective randomization. Though Peirce was largely a frequentist, his possible world semantics introduced the "propensity" theory of probability before Karl Popper. Peirce (sometimes with Joseph Jastrow) investigated the probability judgments of experimental subjects, "perhaps the very first" elicitation and estimation of subjective probabilities in experimental psychology and (what came to be called) Bayesian statistics. Peirce was one of the founders of statistics. He formulated modern statistics in "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" (1877–8) and "A Theory of Probable Inference" (1883). With a repeated measures design, Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow introduced blinded, controlled randomized experiments in 1884 (Hacking 1990:205) (before Ronald A. Fisher). He invented optimal design for experiments on gravity, in which he "corrected the means". He used correlation and smoothing. Peirce extended the work on outliers by Benjamin Peirce, his father. He introduced terms "confidence" and "likelihood" (before Jerzy Neyman and Fisher). (See Stephen Stigler's historical books and Ian Hacking 1990).   == PhilosophyEdit ==  It is not sufficiently recognized that Peirce's career was that of a scientist, not a philosopher; and that during his lifetime he was known and valued chiefly as a scientist, only secondarily as a logician, and scarcely at all as a philosopher. Even his work in philosophy and logic will not be understood until this fact becomes a standing premise of Peircean studies.  Peirce was a working scientist for 30 years, and arguably was a professional philosopher only during the five years he lectured at Johns Hopkins. He learned philosophy mainly by reading, each day, a few pages of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, in the original German, while a Harvard undergraduate. His writings bear on a wide array of disciplines, including mathematics, logic, philosophy, statistics, astronomy, metrology, geodesy, experimental psychology, economics, linguistics, and the history and philosophy of science. This work has enjoyed renewed interest and approval, a revival inspired not only by his anticipations of recent scientific developments but also by his demonstration of how philosophy can be applied effectively to human problems. Peirce's philosophy includes (see below in related sections) a pervasive three-category system, belief that truth is immutable and is both independent from actual opinion (fallibilism) and discoverable (no radical skepticism), logic as formal semiotic on signs, on arguments, and on inquiry's ways—including philosophical pragmatism (which he founded), critical common-sensism, and scientific method—and, in metaphysics: Scholastic realism, e.g. John Duns Scotus, belief in God, freedom, and at least an attenuated immortality, objective idealism, and belief in the reality of continuity and of absolute chance, mechanical necessity, and creative love. In his work, fallibilism and pragmatism may seem to work somewhat like skepticism and positivism, respectively, in others' work. However, for Peirce, fallibilism is balanced by an anti-skepticism and is a basis for belief in the reality of absolute chance and of continuity, and pragmatism commits one to anti-nominalist belief in the reality of the general (CP 5.453–7). For Peirce, First Philosophy, which he also called cenoscopy, is less basic than mathematics and more basic than the special sciences (of nature and mind). It studies positive phenomena in general, phenomena available to any person at any waking moment, and does not settle questions by resorting to special experiences. He divided such philosophy into (1) phenomenology (which he also called phaneroscopy or categorics), (2) normative sciences (esthetics, ethics, and logic), and (3) metaphysics; his views on them are discussed in order below.   === Theory of categoriesEdit ===  On May 14, 1867, the 27-year-old Peirce presented a paper entitled "On a New List of Categories" to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which published it the following year. The paper outlined a theory of predication, involving three universal categories that Peirce developed in response to reading Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel, categories that Peirce applied throughout his work for the rest of his life. Peirce scholars generally regard the "New List" as foundational or breaking the ground for Peirce's "architectonic", his blueprint for a pragmatic philosophy. In the categories one will discern, concentrated, the pattern that one finds formed by the three grades of clearness in "How To Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878 paper foundational to pragmatism), and in numerous other trichotomies in his work. "On a New List of Categories" is cast as a Kantian deduction; it is short but dense and difficult to summarize. The following table is compiled from that and later works. In 1893, Peirce restated most of it for a less advanced audience.  *Note: An interpretant is an interpretation (human or otherwise) in the sense of the product of an interpretive process.   === Aesthetics and ethicsEdit === Peirce did not write extensively in aesthetics and ethics, but came by 1902 to hold that aesthetics, ethics, and logic, in that order, comprise the normative sciences. He characterized aesthetics as the study of the good (grasped as the admirable), and thus of the ends governing all conduct and thought.   == Philosophy: logic, or semioticEdit ==   === Logic as philosophicalEdit === Peirce regarded logic per se as a division of philosophy, as a normative science based on esthetics and ethics, as more basic than metaphysics, and as "the art of devising methods of research". More generally, as inference, "logic is rooted in the social principle", since inference depends on a standpoint that, in a sense, is unlimited. Peirce called (with no sense of deprecation) "mathematics of logic" much of the kind of thing which, in current research and applications, is called simply "logic". He was productive in both (philosophical) logic and logic's mathematics, which were connected deeply in his work and thought. Peirce argued that logic is formal semiotic, the formal study of signs in the broadest sense, not only signs that are artificial, linguistic, or symbolic, but also signs that are semblances or are indexical such as reactions. Peirce held that "all this universe is perfused with signs, if it is not composed exclusively of signs", along with their representational and inferential relations. He argued that, since all thought takes time, all thought is in signs and sign processes ("semiosis") such as the inquiry process. He divided logic into: (1) speculative grammar, or stechiology, on how signs can be meaningful and, in relation to that, what kinds of signs there are, how they combine, and how some embody or incorporate others; (2) logical critic, or logic proper, on the modes of inference; and (3) speculative or universal rhetoric, or methodeutic, the philosophical theory of inquiry, including pragmatism.   ==== Presuppositions of logicEdit ==== In his "F.R.L." [First Rule of Logic] (1899), Peirce states that the first, and "in one sense, the sole", rule of reason is that, to learn, one needs to desire to learn and desire it without resting satisfied with that which one is inclined to think. So, the first rule is, to wonder. Peirce proceeds to a critical theme in research practices and the shaping of theories: ...there follows one corollary which itself deserves to be inscribed upon every wall of the city of philosophy: Do not block the way of inquiry. Peirce adds, that method and economy are best in research but no outright sin inheres in trying any theory in the sense that the investigation via its trial adoption can proceed unimpeded and undiscouraged, and that "the one unpardonable offence" is a philosophical barricade against truth's advance, an offense to which "metaphysicians in all ages have shown themselves the most addicted". Peirce in many writings holds that logic precedes metaphysics (ontological, religious, and physical). Peirce goes on to list four common barriers to inquiry: (1) Assertion of absolute certainty; (2) maintaining that something is absolutely unknowable; (3) maintaining that something is absolutely inexplicable because absolutely basic or ultimate; (4) holding that perfect exactitude is possible, especially such as to quite preclude unusual and anomalous phenomena. To refuse absolute theoretical certainty is the heart of fallibilism, which Peirce unfolds into refusals to set up any of the listed barriers. Peirce elsewhere argues (1897) that logic's presupposition of fallibilism leads at length to the view that chance and continuity are very real (tychism and synechism). The First Rule of Logic pertains to the mind's presuppositions in undertaking reason and logic, presuppositions, for instance, that truth and the real do not depend on yours or my opinion of them but do depend on representational relation and consist in the destined end in investigation taken far enough (see below). He describes such ideas as, collectively, hopes which, in particular cases, one is unable seriously to doubt.   ==== Four incapacitiesEdit ====  In three articles in 1868–69, Peirce rejected mere verbal or hyperbolic doubt and first or ultimate principles, and argued that we have (as he numbered them): No power of Introspection. All knowledge of the internal world comes by hypothetical reasoning from known external facts. No power of Intuition (cognition without logical determination by previous cognitions). No cognitive stage is absolutely first in a process. All mental action has the form of inference. No power of thinking without signs. A cognition must be interpreted in a subsequent cognition in order to be a cognition at all. No conception of the absolutely incognizable. (The above sense of the term "intuition" is almost Kant's, said Peirce. It differs from the current looser sense that encompasses instinctive or anyway half-conscious inference.) Peirce argued that those incapacities imply the reality of the general and of the continuous, the validity of the modes of reasoning, and the falsity of philosophical Cartesianism (see below). Peirce rejected the conception (usually ascribed to Kant) of the unknowable thing-in-itself and later said that to "dismiss make-believes" is a prerequisite for pragmatism.   ==== Logic as formal semioticEdit ==== Peirce sought, through his wide-ranging studies through the decades, formal philosophical ways to articulate thought's processes, and also to explain the workings of science. These inextricably entangled questions of a dynamics of inquiry rooted in nature and nurture led him to develop his semiotic with very broadened conceptions of signs and inference, and, as its culmination, a theory of inquiry for the task of saying 'how science works' and devising research methods. This would be logic by the medieval definition taught for centuries: art of arts, science of sciences, having the way to the principles of all methods. Influences radiate from points on parallel lines of inquiry in Aristotle's work, in such loci as: the basic terminology of psychology in On the Soul; the founding description of sign relations in On Interpretation; and the differentiation of inference into three modes that are commonly translated into English as abduction, deduction, and induction, in the Prior Analytics, as well as inference by analogy (called paradeigma by Aristotle), which Peirce regarded as involving the other three modes. Peirce began writing on semiotic in the 1860s, around the time when he devised his system of three categories. He called it both semiotic and semeiotic. Both are current in singular and plural. He based it on the conception of a triadic sign relation, and defined semiosis as "action, or influence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative influence not being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs". As to signs in thought, Peirce emphasized the reverse:  To say, therefore, that thought cannot happen in an instant, but requires a time, is but another way of saying that every thought must be interpreted in another, or that all thought is in signs.  Peirce held that all thought is in signs, issuing in and from interpretation, where 'sign' is the word for the broadest variety of conceivable semblances, diagrams, metaphors, symptoms, signals, designations, symbols, texts, even mental concepts and ideas, all as determinations of a mind or quasi-mind, that which at least functions like a mind, as in the work of crystals or bees — the focus is on sign action in general rather than on psychology, linguistics, or social studies (fields which he also pursued). Inquiry is a kind of inference process, a manner of thinking and semiosis. Global divisions of ways for phenomena to stand as signs, and the subsumption of inquiry and thinking within inference as a sign process, enable the study of inquiry on semiotics' three levels: Conditions for meaningfulness. Study of significatory elements and combinations, their grammar. Validity, conditions for true representation. Critique of arguments in their various separate modes. Conditions for determining interpretations. Methodology of inquiry in its mutually interacting modes. Peirce uses examples often from common experience, but defines and discusses such things as assertion and interpretation in terms of philosophical logic. In a formal vein, Peirce said:  On the Definition of Logic. Logic is formal semiotic. A sign is something, A, which brings something, B, its interpretant sign, determined or created by it, into the same sort of correspondence (or a lower implied sort) with something, C, its object, as that in which itself stands to C. This definition no more involves any reference to human thought than does the definition of a line as the place within which a particle lies during a lapse of time. It is from this definition that I deduce the principles of logic by mathematical reasoning, and by mathematical reasoning that, I aver, will support criticism of Weierstrassian severity, and that is perfectly evident. The word "formal" in the definition is also defined.     —Peirce, "Carnegie Application", The New Elements of Mathematics v. 4, p. 54.   === SignsEdit ===  A list of noted writings by Peirce on signs and sign relations is at Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)#References and further reading.   ==== Sign relationEdit ==== Peirce's theory of signs is known to be one of the most complex semiotic theories due to its generalistic claim. Anything is a sign — not absolutely as itself, but instead in some relation or other. The sign relation is the key. It defines three roles encompassing (1) the sign, (2) the sign's subject matter, called its object, and (3) the sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of effect called its interpretant (a further sign, for example a translation). It is an irreducible triadic relation, according to Peirce. The roles are distinct even when the things that fill those roles are not. The roles are but three; a sign of an object leads to one or more interpretants, and, as signs, they lead to further interpretants. Extension × intension = information. Two traditional approaches to sign relation, necessary though insufficient, are the way of extension (a sign's objects, also called breadth, denotation, or application) and the way of intension (the objects' characteristics, qualities, attributes referenced by the sign, also called depth, comprehension, significance, or connotation). Peirce adds a third, the way of information, including change of information, to integrate the other two approaches into a unified whole. For example, because of the equation above, if a term's total amount of information stays the same, then the more that the term 'intends' or signifies about objects, the fewer are the objects to which the term 'extends' or applies. Determination. A sign depends on its object in such a way as to represent its object — the object enables and, in a sense, determines the sign. A physically causal sense of this stands out when a sign consists in an indicative reaction. The interpretant depends likewise on both the sign and the object — an object determines a sign to determine an interpretant. But this determination is not a succession of dyadic events, like a row of toppling dominoes; sign determination is triadic. For example, an interpretant does not merely represent something which represented an object; instead an interpretant represents something as a sign representing the object. The object (be it a quality or fact or law or even fictional) determines the sign to an interpretant through one's collateral experience with the object, in which the object is found or from which it is recalled, as when a sign consists in a chance semblance of an absent object. Peirce used the word "determine" not in a strictly deterministic sense, but in a sense of "specializes," bestimmt, involving variable amount, like an influence. Peirce came to define representation and interpretation in terms of (triadic) determination. The object determines the sign to determine another sign — the interpretant — to be related to the object as the sign is related to the object, hence the interpretant, fulfilling its function as sign of the object, determines a further interpretant sign. The process is logically structured to perpetuate itself, and is definitive of sign, object, and interpretant in general.   ==== Semiotic elementsEdit ==== Peirce held there are exactly three basic elements in semiosis (sign action): A sign (or representamen) represents, in the broadest possible sense of "represents". It is something interpretable as saying something about something. It is not necessarily symbolic, linguistic, or artificial—a cloud might be a sign of rain for instance, or ruins the sign of ancient civilization. As Peirce sometimes put it (he defined sign at least 76 times), the sign stands for the object to the interpretant. A sign represents its object in some respect, which respect is the sign's ground. An object (or semiotic object) is a subject matter of a sign and an interpretant. It can be anything thinkable, a quality, an occurrence, a rule, etc., even fictional, such as Prince Hamlet. All of those are special or partial objects. The object most accurately is the universe of discourse to which the partial or special object belongs. For instance, a perturbation of Pluto's orbit is a sign about Pluto but ultimately not only about Pluto. An object either (i) is immediate to a sign and is the object as represented in the sign or (ii) is a dynamic object, the object as it really is, on which the immediate object is founded "as on bedrock". An interpretant (or interpretant sign) is a sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of idea or effect, an interpretation, human or otherwise. An interpretant is a sign (a) of the object and (b) of the interpretant's "predecessor" (the interpreted sign) as a sign of the same object. An interpretant either (i) is immediate to a sign and is a kind of quality or possibility such as a word's usual meaning, or (ii) is a dynamic interpretant, such as a state of agitation, or (iii) is a final or normal interpretant, a sum of the lessons which a sufficiently considered sign would have as effects on practice, and with which an actual interpretant may at most coincide. Some of the understanding needed by the mind depends on familiarity with the object. To know what a given sign denotes, the mind needs some experience of that sign's object, experience outside of, and collateral to, that sign or sign system. In that context Peirce speaks of collateral experience, collateral observation, collateral acquaintance, all in much the same terms.   ==== Classes of signsEdit ==== Among Peirce's many sign typologies, three stand out, interlocked. The first typology depends on the sign itself, the second on how the sign stands for its denoted object, and the third on how the sign stands for its object to its interpretant. Also, each of the three typologies is a three-way division, a trichotomy, via Peirce's three phenomenological categories: (1) quality of feeling, (2) reaction, resistance, and (3) representation, mediation. I. Qualisign, sinsign, legisign (also called tone, token, type, and also called potisign, actisign, famisign): This typology classifies every sign according to the sign's own phenomenological category—the qualisign is a quality, a possibility, a "First"; the sinsign is a reaction or resistance, a singular object, an actual event or fact, a "Second"; and the legisign is a habit, a rule, a representational relation, a "Third". II. Icon, index, symbol: This typology, the best known one, classifies every sign according to the category of the sign's way of denoting its object—the icon (also called semblance or likeness) by a quality of its own, the index by factual connection to its object, and the symbol by a habit or rule for its interpretant. III. Rheme, dicisign, argument (also called sumisign, dicisign, suadisign, also seme, pheme, delome, and regarded as very broadened versions of the traditional term, proposition, argument): This typology classifies every sign according to the category which the interpretant attributes to the sign's way of denoting its object—the rheme, for example a term, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of quality; the dicisign, for example a proposition, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of fact; and the argument is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of habit or law. This is the culminating typology of the three, where the sign is understood as a structural element of inference. Every sign belongs to one class or another within (I) and within (II) and within (III). Thus each of the three typologies is a three-valued parameter for every sign. The three parameters are not independent of each other; many co-classifications are absent, for reasons pertaining to the lack of either habit-taking or singular reaction in a quality, and the lack of habit-taking in a singular reaction. The result is not 27 but instead ten classes of signs fully specified at this level of analysis.   === Modes of inferenceEdit ===  Borrowing a brace of concepts from Aristotle, Peirce examined three basic modes of inference — abduction, deduction, and induction — in his "critique of arguments" or "logic proper". Peirce also called abduction "retroduction", "presumption", and, earliest of all, "hypothesis". He characterized it as guessing and as inference to an explanatory hypothesis. He sometimes expounded the modes of inference by transformations of the categorical syllogism Barbara (AAA), for example in "Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis" (1878). He does this by rearranging the rule (Barbara's major premise), the case (Barbara's minor premise), and the result (Barbara's conclusion): Peirce 1883 in "A Theory of Probable Inference" (Studies in Logic) equated hypothetical inference with the induction of characters of objects (as he had done in effect before). Eventually dissatisfied, by 1900 he distinguished them once and for all and also wrote that he now took the syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical extension and comprehension as being less basic than he had thought. In 1903 he presented the following logical form for abductive inference:  The surprising fact, C, is observed; But if A were true, C would be a matter of course, Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.  The logical form does not also cover induction, since induction neither depends on surprise nor proposes a new idea for its conclusion. Induction seeks facts to test a hypothesis; abduction seeks a hypothesis to account for facts. "Deduction proves that something must be; Induction shows that something actually is operative; Abduction merely suggests that something may be." Peirce did not remain quite convinced that one logical form covers all abduction. In his methodeutic or theory of inquiry (see below), he portrayed abduction as an economic initiative to further inference and study, and portrayed all three modes as clarified by their coordination in essential roles in inquiry: hypothetical explanation, deductive prediction, inductive testing.   === PragmatismEdit ===  Peirce's recipe for pragmatic thinking, which he called pragmatism and, later, pragmaticism, is recapitulated in several versions of the so-called pragmatic maxim. Here is one of his more emphatic reiterations of it:  Consider what effects that might conceivably have practical bearings you conceive the objects of your conception to have. Then, your conception of those effects is the whole of your conception of the object.  As a movement, pragmatism began in the early 1870s in discussions among Peirce, William James, and others in the Metaphysical Club. James among others regarded some articles by Peirce such as "The Fixation of Belief" (1877) and especially "How to Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878) as foundational to pragmatism. Peirce (CP 5.11–12), like James (Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, 1907), saw pragmatism as embodying familiar attitudes, in philosophy and elsewhere, elaborated into a new deliberate method for fruitful thinking about problems. Peirce differed from James and the early John Dewey, in some of their tangential enthusiasms, in being decidedly more rationalistic and realistic, in several senses of those terms, throughout the preponderance of his own philosophical moods. In 1905 Peirce coined the new name pragmaticism "for the precise purpose of expressing the original definition", saying that "all went happily" with James's and F.C.S. Schiller's variant uses of the old name "pragmatism" and that he coined the new name because of the old name's growing use in "literary journals, where it gets abused". Yet he cited as causes, in a 1906 manuscript, his differences with James and Schiller and, in a 1908 publication, his differences with James as well as literary author Giovanni Papini's declaration of pragmatism's indefinability. Peirce in any case regarded his views that truth is immutable and infinity is real, as being opposed by the other pragmatists, but he remained allied with them on other issues. Pragmatism begins with the idea that belief is that on which one is prepared to act. Peirce's pragmatism is a method of clarification of conceptions of objects. It equates any conception of an object to a conception of that object's effects to a general extent of the effects' conceivable implications for informed practice. It is a method of sorting out conceptual confusions occasioned, for example, by distinctions that make (sometimes needed) formal yet not practical differences. He formulated both pragmatism and statistical principles as aspects of scientific logic, in his "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" series of articles. In the second one, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear", Peirce discussed three grades of clearness of conception: Clearness of a conception familiar and readily used, even if unanalyzed and undeveloped. Clearness of a conception in virtue of clearness of its parts, in virtue of which logicians called an idea "distinct", that is, clarified by analysis of just what makes it applicable. Elsewhere, echoing Kant, Peirce called a likewise distinct definition "nominal" (CP 5.553). Clearness in virtue of clearness of conceivable practical implications of the object's conceived effects, such as fosters fruitful reasoning, especially on difficult problems. Here he introduced that which he later called the pragmatic maxim. By way of example of how to clarify conceptions, he addressed conceptions about truth and the real as questions of the presuppositions of reasoning in general. In clearness's second grade (the "nominal" grade), he defined truth as a sign's correspondence to its object, and the real as the object of such correspondence, such that truth and the real are independent of that which you or I or any actual, definite community of inquirers think. After that needful but confined step, next in clearness's third grade (the pragmatic, practice-oriented grade) he defined truth as that opinion which would be reached, sooner or later but still inevitably, by research taken far enough, such that the real does depend on that ideal final opinion—a dependence to which he appeals in theoretical arguments elsewhere, for instance for the long-run validity of the rule of induction. Peirce argued that even to argue against the independence and discoverability of truth and the real is to presuppose that there is, about that very question under argument, a truth with just such independence and discoverability. Peirce said that a conception's meaning consists in "all general modes of rational conduct" implied by "acceptance" of the conception—that is, if one were to accept, first of all, the conception as true, then what could one conceive to be consequent general modes of rational conduct by all who accept the conception as true?—the whole of such consequent general modes is the whole meaning. His pragmatism does not equate a conception's meaning, its intellectual purport, with the conceived benefit or cost of the conception itself, like a meme (or, say, propaganda), outside the perspective of its being true, nor, since a conception is general, is its meaning equated with any definite set of actual consequences or upshots corroborating or undermining the conception or its worth. His pragmatism also bears no resemblance to "vulgar" pragmatism, which misleadingly connotes a ruthless and Machiavellian search for mercenary or political advantage. Instead the pragmatic maxim is the heart of his pragmatism as a method of experimentational mental reflection arriving at conceptions in terms of conceivable confirmatory and disconfirmatory circumstances—a method hospitable to the formation of explanatory hypotheses, and conducive to the use and improvement of verification. Peirce's pragmatism, as method and theory of definitions and conceptual clearness, is part of his theory of inquiry, which he variously called speculative, general, formal or universal rhetoric or simply methodeutic. He applied his pragmatism as a method throughout his work.   ==== Theory of inquiryEdit ====   ===== Critical common-sensismEdit ===== Critical common-sensism, treated by Peirce as a consequence of his pragmatism, is his combination of Thomas Reid's common-sense philosophy with a fallibilism that recognizes that propositions of our more or less vague common sense now indubitable may later come into question, for example because of transformations of our world through science. It includes efforts to work up in tests genuine doubts for a core group of common indubitables that vary slowly if at all.   ===== Rival methods of inquiryEdit ===== In The Fixation of Belief (1877), Peirce described inquiry in general not as the pursuit of truth per se but as the struggle to move from irritating, inhibitory doubt born of surprise, disagreement, and the like, and to reach a secure belief, belief being that on which one is prepared to act. That let Peirce frame scientific inquiry as part of a broader spectrum and as spurred, like inquiry generally, by actual doubt, not mere verbal, quarrelsome, or hyperbolic doubt, which he held to be fruitless. Peirce sketched four methods of settling opinion, ordered from least to most successful: The method of tenacity (policy of sticking to initial belief) — which brings comforts and decisiveness but leads to trying to ignore contrary information and others' views as if truth were intrinsically private, not public. The method goes against the social impulse and easily falters since one may well notice when another's opinion seems as good as one's own initial opinion. Its successes can be brilliant but tend to be transitory. The method of authority — which overcomes disagreements but sometimes brutally. Its successes can be majestic and long-lasting, but it cannot regulate people thoroughly enough to withstand doubts indefinitely, especially when people learn about other societies present and past. The method of the a priori — which promotes conformity less brutally but fosters opinions as something like tastes, arising in conversation and comparisons of perspectives in terms of "what is agreeable to reason." Thereby it depends on fashion in paradigms and goes in circles over time. It is more intellectual and respectable but, like the first two methods, sustains accidental and capricious beliefs, destining some minds to doubt it. The method of science — wherein inquiry supposes that the real is discoverable but independent of particular opinion, such that, unlike in the other methods, inquiry can, by its own account, go wrong (fallibilism), not only right, and thus purposely tests itself and criticizes, corrects, and improves itself. Peirce held that, in practical affairs, slow and stumbling ratiocination is often dangerously inferior to instinct and traditional sentiment, and that the scientific method is best suited to theoretical research, which in turn should not be trammeled by the other methods and practical ends; reason's "first rule" is that, in order to learn, one must desire to learn and, as a corollary, must not block the way of inquiry. Scientific method excels the others finally by being deliberately designed to arrive — eventually — at the most secure beliefs, upon which the most successful practices can be based. Starting from the idea that people seek not truth per se but instead to subdue irritating, inhibitory doubt, Peirce showed how, through the struggle, some can come to submit to truth for the sake of belief's integrity, seek as truth the guidance of potential conduct correctly to its given goal, and wed themselves to the scientific method.   ===== Scientific methodEdit ===== Insofar as clarification by pragmatic reflection suits explanatory hypotheses and fosters predictions and testing, pragmatism points beyond the usual duo of foundational alternatives: deduction from self-evident truths, or rationalism; and induction from experiential phenomena, or empiricism. Based on his critique of three modes of argument and different from either foundationalism or coherentism, Peirce's approach seeks to justify claims by a three-phase dynamic of inquiry: Active, abductive genesis of theory, with no prior assurance of truth; Deductive application of the contingent theory so as to clarify its practical implications; Inductive testing and evaluation of the utility of the provisional theory in anticipation of future experience, in both senses: prediction and control. Thereby, Peirce devised an approach to inquiry far more solid than the flatter image of inductive generalization simpliciter, which is a mere re-labeling of phenomenological patterns. Peirce's pragmatism was the first time the scientific method was proposed as an epistemology for philosophical questions. A theory that succeeds better than its rivals in predicting and controlling our world is said to be nearer the truth. This is an operational notion of truth used by scientists. Peirce extracted the pragmatic model or theory of inquiry from its raw materials in classical logic and refined it in parallel with the early development of symbolic logic to address problems about the nature of scientific reasoning. Abduction, deduction, and induction make incomplete sense in isolation from one another but comprise a cycle understandable as a whole insofar as they collaborate toward the common end of inquiry. In the pragmatic way of thinking about conceivable practical implications, every thing has a purpose, and, as possible, its purpose should first be denoted. Abduction hypothesizes an explanation for deduction to clarify into implications to be tested so that induction can evaluate the hypothesis, in the struggle to move from troublesome uncertainty to more secure belief. No matter how traditional and needful it is to study the modes of inference in abstraction from one another, the integrity of inquiry strongly limits the effective modularity of its principal components. Peirce's outline of the scientific method in §III–IV of "A Neglected Argument" is summarized below (except as otherwise noted). There he also reviewed plausibility and inductive precision (issues of critique of arguments). 1. Abductive (or retroductive) phase. Guessing, inference to explanatory hypotheses for selection of those best worth trying. From abduction, Peirce distinguishes induction as inferring, on the basis of tests, the proportion of truth in the hypothesis. Every inquiry, whether into ideas, brute facts, or norms and laws, arises from surprising observations in one or more of those realms (and for example at any stage of an inquiry already underway). All explanatory content of theories comes from abduction, which guesses a new or outside idea so as to account in a simple, economical way for a surprising or complicated phenomenon. The modicum of success in our guesses far exceeds that of random luck, and seems born of attunement to nature by developed or inherent instincts, especially insofar as best guesses are optimally plausible and simple in the sense of the "facile and natural", as by Galileo's natural light of reason and as distinct from "logical simplicity". Abduction is the most fertile but least secure mode of inference. Its general rationale is inductive: it succeeds often enough and it has no substitute in expediting us toward new truths. In 1903, Peirce called pragmatism "the logic of abduction". Coordinative method leads from abducting a plausible hypothesis to judging it for its testability and for how its trial would economize inquiry itself. The hypothesis, being insecure, needs to have practical implications leading at least to mental tests and, in science, lending themselves to scientific tests. A simple but unlikely guess, if not costly to test for falsity, may belong first in line for testing. A guess is intrinsically worth testing if it has plausibility or reasonably objective probability, while subjective likelihood, though reasoned, can be misleadingly seductive. Guesses can be selected for trial strategically, for their caution (for which Peirce gave as example the game of Twenty Questions), breadth, or incomplexity. One can discover only that which would be revealed through their sufficient experience anyway, and so the point is to expedite it; economy of research demands the leap, so to speak, of abduction and governs its art. 2. Deductive phase. Two stages: i. Explication. Not clearly premised, but a deductive analysis of the hypothesis so as to render its parts as clear as possible. ii. Demonstration: Deductive Argumentation, Euclidean in procedure. Explicit deduction of consequences of the hypothesis as predictions about evidence to be found. Corollarial or, if needed, Theorematic. 3. Inductive phase. Evaluation of the hypothesis, inferring from observational or experimental tests of its deduced consequences. The long-run validity of the rule of induction is deducible from the principle (presuppositional to reasoning in general) that the real "is only the object of the final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead"; in other words, anything excluding such a process would never be real. Induction involving the ongoing accumulation of evidence follows "a method which, sufficiently persisted in," will "diminish the error below any predesignate degree." Three stages: i. Classification. Not clearly premised, but an inductive classing of objects of experience under general ideas. ii. Probation: direct Inductive Argumentation. Crude or Gradual in procedure. Crude Induction, founded on experience in one mass (CP 2.759), presumes that future experience on a question will not differ utterly from all past experience (CP 2.756). Gradual Induction makes a new estimate of the proportion of truth in the hypothesis after each test, and is Qualitative or Quantitative. Qualitative Gradual Induction depends on estimating the relative evident weights of the various qualities of the subject class under investigation (CP 2.759; see also CP 7.114–20). Quantitative Gradual Induction depends on how often, in a fair sample of instances of S, S is found actually accompanied by P that was predicted for S (CP 2.758). It depends on measurements, or statistics, or counting. iii. Sentential Induction. "...which, by Inductive reasonings, appraises the different Probations singly, then their combinations, then makes self-appraisal of these very appraisals themselves, and passes final judgment on the whole result".   ===== Against CartesianismEdit ===== Peirce drew on the methodological implications of the four incapacities — no genuine introspection, no intuition in the sense of non-inferential cognition, no thought but in signs, and no conception of the absolutely incognizable — to attack philosophical Cartesianism, of which he said that: 1. "It teaches that philosophy must begin in universal doubt" — when, instead, we start with preconceptions, "prejudices [...] which it does not occur to us can be questioned", though we may find reason to question them later. "Let us not pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts." 2. "It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is...in the individual consciousness" — when, instead, in science a theory stays on probation till agreement is reached, then it has no actual doubters left. No lone individual can reasonably hope to fulfill philosophy's multi-generational dream. When "candid and disciplined minds" continue to disagree on a theoretical issue, even the theory's author should feel doubts about it. 3. It trusts to "a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous premisses" — when, instead, philosophy should, "like the successful sciences", proceed only from tangible, scrutinizable premisses and trust not to any one argument but instead to "the multitude and variety of its arguments" as forming, not a chain at least as weak as its weakest link, but "a cable whose fibers", soever "slender, are sufficiently numerous and intimately connected". 4. It renders many facts "absolutely inexplicable, unless to say that 'God makes them so' is to be regarded as an explanation" — when, instead, philosophy should avoid being "unidealistic", misbelieving that something real can defy or evade all possible ideas, and supposing, inevitably, "some absolutely inexplicable, unanalyzable ultimate", which explanatory surmise explains nothing and so is inadmissible.   == Philosophy: metaphysicsEdit ==  Peirce divided metaphysics into (1) ontology or general metaphysics, (2) psychical or religious metaphysics, and (3) physical metaphysics. Ontology. Peirce was a Scholastic Realist, declaring for the reality of generals as early as 1868. Regarding modalities (possibility, necessity, etc.), he came in later years to regard himself as having wavered earlier as to just how positively real the modalities are. In his 1897 "The Logic of Relatives" he wrote:  I formerly defined the possible as that which in a given state of information (real or feigned) we do not know not to be true. But this definition today seems to me only a twisted phrase which, by means of two negatives, conceals an anacoluthon. We know in advance of experience that certain things are not true, because we see they are impossible.  Peirce retained, as useful for some purposes, the definitions in terms of information states, but insisted that the pragmaticist is committed to a strong modal realism by conceiving of objects in terms of predictive general conditional propositions about how they would behave under certain circumstances. Psychical or religious metaphysics. Peirce believed in God, and characterized such belief as founded in an instinct explorable in musing over the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits — and it is a belief in God not as an actual or existent being (in Peirce's sense of those words), but all the same as a real being. In "A Neglected Argument for the Reality of God" (1908), Peirce sketches, for God's reality, an argument to a hypothesis of God as the Necessary Being, a hypothesis which he describes in terms of how it would tend to develop and become compelling in musement and inquiry by a normal person who is led, by the hypothesis, to consider as being purposed the features of the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits (for example scientific progress), such that the thought of such purposefulness will "stand or fall with the hypothesis"; meanwhile, according to Peirce, the hypothesis, in supposing an "infinitely incomprehensible" being, starts off at odds with its own nature as a purportively true conception, and so, no matter how much the hypothesis grows, it both (A) inevitably regards itself as partly true, partly vague, and as continuing to define itself without limit, and (B) inevitably has God appearing likewise vague but growing, though God as the Necessary Being is not vague or growing; but the hypothesis will hold it to be more false to say the opposite, that God is purposeless. Peirce also argued that the will is free and (see Synechism) that there is at least an attenuated kind of immortality. Physical metaphysics. Peirce held the view, which he called objective idealism, that "matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws". Peirce asserted the reality of (1) absolute chance (his tychist view), (2) mechanical necessity (anancist view), and (3) that which he called the law of love (agapist view), echoing his categories Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, respectively. He held that fortuitous variation (which he also called "sporting"), mechanical necessity, and creative love are the three modes of evolution (modes called "tychasm", "anancasm", and "agapasm") of the cosmos and its parts. He found his conception of agapasm embodied in Lamarckian evolution; the overall idea in any case is that of evolution tending toward an end or goal, and it could also be the evolution of a mind or a society; it is the kind of evolution which manifests workings of mind in some general sense. He said that overall he was a synechist, holding with reality of continuity, especially of space, time, and law.   == Science of reviewEdit ==  Peirce outlined two fields, "Cenoscopy" and "Science of Review", both of which he called philosophy. Both included philosophy about science. In 1903 he arranged them, from more to less theoretically basic, thus: Science of Discovery. Mathematics. Cenoscopy (philosophy as discussed earlier in this article—categorial, normative, metaphysical), as First Philosophy, concerns positive phenomena in general, does not rely on findings from special sciences, and includes the general study of inquiry and scientific method. Idioscopy, or the Special Sciences (of nature and mind).  Science of Review, as Ultimate Philosophy, arranges "...the results of discovery, beginning with digests, and going on to endeavor to form a philosophy of science". His examples included Humboldt's Cosmos, Comte's Philosophie positive, and Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy. Practical Science, or the Arts. Peirce placed, within Science of Review, the work and theory of classifying the sciences (including mathematics and philosophy). His classifications, on which he worked for many years, draw on argument and wide knowledge, and are of interest both as a map for navigating his philosophy and as an accomplished polymath's survey of research in his time.   == See alsoEdit == Contemporaries associated with Peirce   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography has external links throughout to such materials as biographical and overview articles on Peirce at encyclopedias, study sites, etc.; individual works by Peirce; and collections, bibliographies, and Peirce's definitions in the Baldwin dictionary. Other useful sets of links: Existential graph references and external links. Pragmatism external links. Semiotics external links. Peirce sites

Charles Edward Spearman, FRS (10 September 1863 – 17 September 1945) was an English psychologist known for work in statistics, as a pioneer of factor analysis, and for Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. He also did seminal work on models for human intelligence, including his theory that disparate cognitive test scores reflect a single General intelligence factor and coining the term g factor.   == Biography == Spearman had an unusual background for a psychologist. In his childhood he was ambitious to follow an academic career. He first joined the army as a regular officer of engineers in the British Army. After 15 years he resigned to study for a PhD in experimental psychology. In Britain, psychology was generally seen as a branch of philosophy and Spearman chose to study in Leipzig under Wilhelm Wundt, because Spearman had no conventional qualifications and Leipzig had liberal entrance requirements. There he met Krueger and Wirth, both of whom he admired. He started in 1897, and after some interruption (he was recalled to the army during the South African War) he obtained his degree in 1906. He had already published his seminal paper on the factor analysis of intelligence (1904). Spearman met and impressed the psychologist William McDougall who arranged for Spearman to replace him when he left his position at University College London. Spearman stayed at University College until he retired in 1931. Initially he was Reader and head of the small psychological laboratory. In 1911 he was promoted to the Grote professorship of the Philosophy of Mind and Logic. His title changed to Professor of Psychology in 1928 when a separate Department of Psychology was created. When Spearman was elected to the Royal Society in 1924  the citation read "Dr. Spearman has made many researches in experimental psychology. His many published papers cover a wide field, but he is especially distinguished by his pioneer work in the application of mathematical methods to the analysis of the human mind, and his original studies of correlation in this sphere. He has inspired and directed research work by many pupils." Chief amongst these achievements was the discovery of the general factor in human intelligence,  and his subsequent development of a theory of "g"  and synthesis of empirical work on ability. Spearman was strongly influenced by the work of Francis Galton. Galton did pioneering work in psychology and developed correlation, the main statistical tool used by Spearman. In statistics, Spearman developed rank correlation (1904), a non-parametric version of the conventional Pearson correlation, as well as both the widely used correction for attenuation (1907), and the earliest version of a 'factor analysis' (Lovie & Lovie, 1996, p. 81) . His statistical work was not appreciated by his University College colleague Karl Pearson and there was a long feud between them. Although Spearman achieved most recognition in his day for his statistical work, he regarded this work as subordinate to his quest for the fundamental laws of psychology, and he is now similarly renowned for both. Charles Spearman always insisted that his work be applied in psychiatry and urged so in his Maudsley lecture to the Royal Medico-Psychological Association. While some work has been made on these lines by pupils and associates of his, the development of factor analysis as a tool of psychiatry followed a different path than he had intended. Regardless his indirect contributions towards psychiatry were considerable. Spearman's life both began and ended in the city of London. He had three daughters along with one son, who died early on in 1941 in Crete.   == Theory of intelligence == A record of Spearman's views on g (and also those of Godfrey Thomson and Edward Thorndike) was made in the course of the Carnegie-sponsored International Examinations Inquiry Meetings. Here, Spearman gives a compact summary of his findings and theory of g: When asked what G is, one has to distinguish between the meanings of terms and the facts about things. G means a particular quantity derived from statistical operations. Under certain conditions the score of a person at a mental test can be divided into two factors, one of which is always the same in all tests, whereas the other varies from one test to another; the former is called the general factor or G, while the other is called the speciﬁc factor. This then is what the G term means, a score-factor and nothing more. But this meaning is sufﬁcient to render the term well deﬁned so that the underlying thing is susceptible to scientiﬁc investigation; we can proceed to ﬁnd out facts about this score-factor, or G factor. We can ascertain the kind of mental operations in which it plays a dominant part as compared with the other or speciﬁc factor. And so the discovery has been made that G is dominant in such operations as reasoning, or learning Latin; whereas it plays a very small part indeed in such operation (sic) as distinguishing one tone from another. . . G tends to dominate according as the performance involves the perceiving of relations, or as it requires that relations seen in one situation should be transferred to another. . . . On weighing the evidence, many of us used to say that this G appears to measure some form of mental energy. But in the ﬁrst place, such a suggestion is apt to invite needless controversy. This can be avoided by saying more cautiously that G behaves as if it measured an energy. In the second place, however, there seems to be good reason for changing the concept of energy to that of "power" (which, of course, is energy or work divided by time). In this way, one can talk about mind power in much the same manner as about horse power. . . . . . .G is in the normal course of events determined innately; a person can no more be trained to have it in higher degree than he can be trained to be taller. (pp. 156 –157). There was also another co-factor as proposed by Spearman that was special intelligence. The special intelligence was for individuals who accomplished high success results in the some tests. However, later Spearman introduced group factor that was particular to those correlations that were not a result of factor g or s. His ideas were in 1938 criticized on paper by Louis L. Thurstone a psychologist saying that his experiments show that the correlation of intelligence can be categorized in seven primary categories. These categories were numerical, reasoning, spatial, perceptual, memory, verbal fluency and verbal comprehension. However Raymond B. Cattell in 1963 agreed with the concept theorized by Spearman but put forth his findings about intelligence analyses. His analyses were that intelligence is further subdivided in two divisions known as fluid and crystallized intelligence. As time progressed, Spearman increasingly argued that g was not, from a psychological point of view, a single ability but composed of two very different abilities which normally worked closely together. These he called "eductive" ability and "reproductive" ability. The former term comes from the Latin root "educere" – which means to "draw out" and thus refers to the ability to make meaning out of confusion. He claimed that to understand these different abilities "in their trenchent contrast, their ubiquitous cooperation, and their genetic interlinkage" would, for the study of "individual differences – and even cognition itself" – be "the very beginning of wisdom.". Despite Spearman arguing that g was what emerged from a large battery of tests, i.e., that it was not measured perfectly by any single test, the fact that g-theory suggested that much of ability could be captured in a single factor, and his suggestion that "the eduction of relations and correlates" underlay this general factor led to the quest for tests of this general ability. Raven's Progressive Matrices might be regarded as one of these although Raven himself clearly stated that his tests should not be regarded as "intelligence" tests. While arguing consistently that g accounted for much of individual differences in "ability" (as measured by tests which had "no place in schools"), Spearman also acknowledged that "Every normal man, woman, and child is … a genius at something … It remains to discover at what …" He thought that detecting these areas of genius required procedures very different from "any of the testing procedures at present in current usage", though he felt these to be capable of "vast improvement". While, like Arthur Jensen after him, Spearman felt that though g could be detected in any broad set of cognitive measures, he felt that the tests from which his g had emerged "had no place in schools" because they "deflected" teachers', pupils', parents' and politicians' attention from the business of education which, as the Latin root of the word implies, should be concerned with "drawing out" whatever talents a student may have . Spearman's model was influential, but was also critiqued by many authors, such as Godfrey Thomson. In particular the move from a psychological g to a biological g – that is a unitary biological mechanism or mechanisms has remained a matter of active research.   == Factor analysis == Factor analysis is a statistical test that is used to find relationships between multiple correlated measures and Spearman played a clear part in its development. Spearman coined the term factor analysis and used it extensively in analyzing multiple measures of cognitive performance. It was factor analytic data which led Spearman to postulate his original general and specific factor models of ability. Spearman applied mathematical procedures to psychological phenomena, and molded the outcome of his analysis into a theory – which has greatly influenced modern psychology. Factor analysis and its modern relations confirmatory factor analysis and structural equation modelling underlie much of modern behaviour research.   == See also == Theory of multiple intelligences   == References == ^ a b c d Thomson, Godfrey (1947). "Charles Spearman. 1863-1945". Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society 5 (15): 373. doi:10.1098/rsbm.1947.0006.  ^ a b Lovie, P.; Lovie, A. D. (1996). "Charles Edward Spearman, F.R.S. (1863-1945)". Notes and Records of the Royal Society 50: 75. doi:10.1098/rsnr.1996.0007.  ^ a b Spearman, C. (1904). ""General Intelligence," Objectively Determined and Measured". The American Journal of Psychology 15 (2): 201–292. doi:10.2307/1412107. JSTOR 1412107.  ^ Lovie, Pat (2005). "Spearman, Charles Edward". Encyclopedia of Statistics in Behavioral Science. doi:10.1002/0470013192.bsa634. ISBN 0470860804.  ^ a b Thomson, Godfrey (1947). "Charles Spearman". The Royal Society. pp. 373–385.  ^ Ogden, R. M.; Spearman, C. (1925). "The Nature of 'Intelligence' and the Principles of Cognition, 1923". The American Journal of Psychology 36 (1): 140–145. doi:10.2307/1413513.  ^ a b Spearman, Charles B. (2005). The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurement. The Blackburn Press. ISBN 1-932846-10-7.  ^ "The Lancet" A Chair of Anatomy. October 1945. pg. 440 ^ Deary, I. J.; Lawn, M.; Bartholomew, D. J. (2008). ""A conversation between Charles Spearman, Godfrey Thomson, and Edward L. Thorndike: The International Examinations Inquiry Meetings 1931-1938": Correction to Deary, Lawn, and Bartholomew (2008)". History of Psychology 11 (3): 163. doi:10.1037/1093-4510.11.3.163.  ^ Edward Roy; Bernstein, Douglas A.; Penner, Louis A.; Clarke-Stewart, Alison (2007). Psychology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 0-618-87407-0.  ^ Spearman, C. (1925). "Some Issues in the Theory of "g" (including the Law of Diminishing Returns)". Nature 116 (2916): 436. doi:10.1038/116436a0.  ^ Williams, R. H., Zimmerman, D. W., Zumbo, B. D. & Ross, D. (2003). Charles Spearman: British Behavioral Scientist. Human Nature Review. 3: 114–118 ^ Spearman, C. (1950). Human Ability, Macmillan, London. ^ "The Chair of Anatomy". The Lancet 246 (6371): 440–440. October 1945. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(45)91700-4.    == Further reading == Spearman, C. (1987). "The proof and measurement of association between two things. By C. Spearman, 1904". The American journal of psychology 100 (3–4): 441–471. doi:10.2307/1422689. PMID 3322052.  Spearman, C. (2010). "The proof and measurement of association between two things". International Journal of Epidemiology 39 (5): 1137–1150. doi:10.1093/ije/dyq191. PMID 21051364.  Spearman, C. (1907). "Demonstration of Formulæ for True Measurement of Correlation". The American Journal of Psychology 18 (2): 161–169. doi:10.2307/1412408.  Gregory, Robert J. (2011). Psychological Testing: History, Principles, and Applications (Sixth ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. ISBN 978-0-205-78214-7. Lay summary (7 November 2010).  Mackintosh, N. J. (1998). IQ and Human Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-852367-3. Lay summary (9 August 2010).  Charles Spearman at Human Intelligence   == External links == There is a photograph of Spearman at Charles Spearman on the Portraits of Statisticians page.

Christopher Stewart "Chris" Wallace (26 October 1933 – 7 August 2004) was an Australian computer scientist (and physicist, who also contributed to a variety of other areas) notable for having devised: The minimum message length principle (Wallace and Boulton, 1968, WB1968) — an information-theoretic principle in statistics, econometrics, machine learning, inductive inference and knowledge discovery which can be seen both as a mathematical formalisation of Occam's Razor and as an invariant Bayesian method of model selection and point estimation, The Wallace tree multiplier (1964) (see multiplication ALU), a variety of random number generators, a theory in physics and philosophy that entropy is not the arrow of time, a refrigeration system (from the 1950s, whose design is still in use in 2010), hardware for detecting and counting cosmic rays, design of computer operating systems, the notion of universality probability in mathematical logic, and a vast range of other works - see, e.g., "Christopher Stewart WALLACE (1933-2004) memorial special issue". Computer Journal 51 (5): 523–607. 5 September 2008. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxm117.  and its ``Foreword re C. S. Wallace , pp 523-560. He was appointed Foundation Chair of Information Science at Monash University in 1968 at the age of 34 (before the Department was later re-named Computer Science), and Professor Emeritus in 1996. Wallace was a fellow of the Australian Computer Society and in 1995 he was appointed a fellow of the ACM "For research in a number of areas in Computer Science including fast multiplication algorithm, minimum message length principle and its applications, random number generation, computer architecture, numerical solution of ODE's, and contribution to Australian Computer Science."[1] Wallace received his PhD (in Physics) from the University of Sydney in 1959. He was married to Judy Ogilvie, the first operator of SILLIAC, one of Australia's first computers which was launched on the 12 of September 1956 at the University of Sydney [2]. He also engineered one of the world's first Local Area Networks in the mid-1960s [3].   == External links == Tribute to IT pioneer Chris Wallace — 13 October 2004 Remembering Emeritus Professor Chris Wallace (Information Technology), 2008 Innovative studios honour Monash pioneer — 2 November 2011 Christopher S. Wallace publications, and searchable publications database Wallace, C.S. (posthumous, 2005), Statistical and Inductive Inference by Minimum Message Length, Springer (Series: Information Science and Statistics), 2005, XVI, 432 pp., 22 illus., Hardcover, ISBN 0-387-23795-X. (Links to chapter headings, table of contents and sample pages.) "Christopher Stewart WALLACE (1933-2004) memorial special issue". Computer Journal 51 (5): 523–607. 5 September 2008. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxm117.  Dowe, D.L. (5 September 2008). "Foreword re C. S. Wallace". Computer Journal 51 (5): 523–560. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxm117.  (and here). (As far as we know, this cites and includes references to every paper which Chris Wallace ever wrote [and every thesis he ever supervised].) Chris Wallace Award for Outstanding Research Contribution — established by CORE (The Computing Research and Education Association of Australasia) - see also The Chris Wallace Award for Outstanding Research (for 2015) and CORE brief Chris Wallace bio'

Churchill Eisenhart (1913–1994) was a United States mathematician. He was Chief of the Statistical Engineering Laboratory (SEL), Applied Mathematics Division of the National Bureau of Standards (NBS). Eisenhart was the son of Luther Eisenhart, a prominent mathematician in his own right. Churchill Eisenhart was brought to the NBS from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1946 by Edward Condon, Director of the NBS, to establish a statistical consulting group to "substitute sound mathematical analysis for costly experimentation." He was allowed to recruit his own staff and, over the years, he brought many notable and accomplished statisticians to SEL. He served as its Chief from 1947 until his appointment as Senior Research Fellow in 1963. He retired in 1983 after which he formed the Standards Alumni Association, which he headed until his death in 1994. Over his career, Eisenhart was awarded the U.S. Department of Commerce Exceptional Service Award in 1957; the Rockefeller Public Service Award in 1958; and the Wildhack Award of the National Conference of Standards Laboratories in 1982. He was elected President of the American Statistical Association (ASA) in 1971 and received the Association's Wilks Memorial Medal in 1977. Eisenhart was honored with an Outstanding Achievements Award of the Princeton University Class of 1934 and with Fellowships in the ASA, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and the Institute of Mathematical Sciences. He was a long-time member of the Cosmos Club.   == References == NIST. "Realistic Evaluation of the Precision and Accuracy of Instrument Calibration Systems". Retrieved 2006-02-15.  Ingram Olkin (1992) A Conversation with Churchill Eisenhart. Statistical Science, 7, 512–530. Joseph M. Cameron; Joan R. Rosenblatt (1995) Churchill Eisenhart, 1913–1994, The American Statistician, 49, 243–244. Samuel S. Wilks Award Citation for 1977 An interview with Joseph Daly and Churchill Eisenhart about their experiences at Princeton 10 July 1984 An interview with Churchill Eisenhart about his experience at Princeton 10 July 1984 There is a photograph at Churchill Eisenhart on the page Portraits of Statisticians

Colin Peter McEvedy (6 June 1930 – 1 August 2005) was a British polymath scholar, psychiatrist, historian, demographer and non-fiction author.   == Early lifeEdit == Colin Peter McEvedy was born in Salford, Lancashire on the 6th of June 1930. He was the third son of Peter George McEvedy, a renowned surgeon, who was born in New Zealand. Colin was educated at Harrow School, where he was a scholar, and Magdalen College, Oxford.   == CareerEdit == McEvedy's profession was psychiatry, in which he had a distinguished career. He became perhaps better known, though, as a historian and demographer, and certainly so by the public at large. Between 1961 and 2002 he produced a number of historical atlases which, unlike most such atlases, feature fixed base-maps; in most cases, each atlas uses a single principal base-map, which is shown repeatedly, at many dates, as the atlas goes along, thus illustrating changes over the ages, from ancient down to modern, within the chosen area. The accompanying text, typically, is mostly a running commentary on what the maps of a given atlas show. Another feature of the atlases is McEvedy's witty and engaging writing-style, which he used on occasion to challenge established opinions among historians and demographers. Although he was not, strictly speaking, a professional in those fields, he became professionally respected in them, with his views making their way into standard textbooks. He died in London, committing suicide following a diagnosis of terminal leukaemia.   == Family lifeEdit == McEvedy had three daughters, Binky, Flora, and Allegra. Flora McEvedy is the author of The Step-Parents' Parachute, published by Piatkus Books in 2009. His youngest daughter, Allegra McEvedy, is a noted chef, co-founded the Leon Restaurants chain, and was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the 2008 Birthday Honours.   == PublicationsEdit == Penguin Historical Atlases The Penguin Atlas of Medieval History (1961) ISBN 0-14-070822-7 Revised as: The New Penguin Atlas of Medieval History (1992) ISBN 0-14-051249-7  The Penguin Atlas of Ancient History (1967) ISBN 0-14-051151-2 Revised as: The New Penguin Atlas of Ancient History (2002) ISBN 0-14-051348-5  The Penguin Atlas of Modern History (1972) ISBN 0-14-051153-9 The Penguin Atlas of Recent History (1982) ISBN 0-14-051154-7 Revised as: The New Penguin Atlas of Recent History (2002) ISBN 0-14-051504-6  The Penguin Atlas of North American History (1988) ISBN 0-14-051128-8 The Penguin Atlas of African History (1980, 2nd ed. 1995) ISBN 0-14-051321-3 The Penguin Historical Atlas of the Pacific (1998) ISBN 0-14-025428-5 The Atlas of World History (with Sarah McEvedy) From the Beginning to Alexander the Great (1970) ISBN 0-298-79125-0 The Classical World (1973) ISBN 0-298-79126-9 The Dark Ages (1972) ISBN 0-298-79127-7 Unpublished Volumes: The Medieval World The European Expansion Revolutions Colonial Empires The Modern Age Other Books The Atlas of World Population History (with Richard Jones) (1978) ISBN 0-14-051076-1 Rise of the World's Cities (1984) ISBN 0-87196-773-1 World History Factfinder (1984) ISBN 0-02-583190-9 Cities of the Classical World: An Atlas and Gazetteer of 120 Centres of Ancient Civilization, (posthumous; edited by Douglas Stuart Oles) (2011 November 3), ISBN 978-1-84614-427-1 (hardcover), Allen Lane (imprint of Penguin Books, UK), Penguin Press/Classics (US). Articles "The Bubonic Plague" Scientific American February 1988   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Obituary in The Independent Obituary in The Times Obituary in the British Medical Journal Colin McEvedy at Library of Congress Authorities, with 22 catalogue records

David John Finney FRS, CBE (born 3 January 1917), is a British statistician and Professor Emeritus of Statistics at the University of Edinburgh. He was Director of the Agricultural Research Council's Unit of Statistics from 1954 to 1984 and a former President of the Royal Statistical Society and of the Biometric Society. He was a pioneer in the development of systematic monitoring of drugs for detection of adverse reactions.   == Childhood and education == Finney was born in Latchford, Warrington. In his interview with MacNeill, Finney describes his background: "My family were never wealthy but never in want". His paternal grandfather was a schoolmaster, and his father was an accountant in the steel industry. David was the eldest child; he had no sisters. Finney was educated at the coeducational Lymm Grammar School and Manchester Grammar School, where he won a Cambridge scholarship. He read mathematics and statistics at Clare College, University of Cambridge from 1934 to 1938. He was awarded a postgraduate scholarship for statistical work in agriculture under Ronald Fisher at the Galton Laboratory, University College London, where he worked on statistical estimation for human genetics.   == Career == He became assistant to Frank Yates at Rothamsted Experimental Station in 1939, where there was great emphasis on increasing productivity of agriculture and he was involved in the design of field experiments and the interpretation of their results. In 1945, he joined the University of Oxford as the first holder of the post of Lecturer in the Design and Analysis of Scientific Experiment. He married in 1950 and with his wife and 9-month old daughter, left Oxford in 1952 for New Delhi where, for a year, he acted as a consultant to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation on the development of the Central Research Organisation in New Delhi. After returning from India, he moved to the University of Aberdeen where he became Reader in Statistics and also established a Unit of Statistics funded by the Agricultural Research Council, which was to provide a service for Scotland modelled on that provided by Rothamsted for England. The Agricultural Research Council moved the Unit of Statistics to the University of Edinburgh in 1966 and Finney, who moved to Edinburgh with it, became the first Professor of Statistics at the university and well as being the Director of the Unit of Statistics. He served as president of the Royal Statistical Society in 1973–4. He retired from his position at Edinburgh in 1984. During the 1960s he became involved in the field of drug safety, providing important advice both to the fledgling UK system of medicines safety and to efforts by WHO to create an international system of pharmacovigilance. In 2002 he returned to contact with the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, which published an anthology of his writings about statistical methods and drug safety. He was also involved with Bill Inman in the setting-up of the Drug Safety Research Unit.   == Works == Probit Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1947 Statistical methods in biological assay, Hafner, 1952; Griffin, 1971, ISBN 978-0-85264-014-2 Experimental design and its statistical basis, University of Chicago Press, 1955 Statistics for mathematicians: an introduction, Oliver & Boyd, 1968   == References ==  MacNeill, I. (1993). "A Conversation With David J. Finney". Statistical Science 8 (2): pp. 187–201. doi:10.1214/ss/1177011012. Retrieved 2007-09-22.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link) Joyce, H. (December 2005). "Experimental design and systematic monitoring". significance 2 (4): pp. 171–173. doi:10.1111/j.1740-9713.2005.00131.x. Retrieved 2007-09-22.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link) "David J.Finney" (HTML). Biographical Notes (1984). Instituto Vasco of Estadística (EUSTAT). Retrieved 2007-09-22.  D. J. Finney at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Darrell Huff (July 15, 1913 – June 27, 2001) was an American writer, and is best known as the author of How to Lie with Statistics (1954), the best-selling statistics book of the second half of the twentieth century. Huff was born in Gowrie, Iowa, and educated at the University of Iowa, (BA 1938, MA 1939). Before turning to full-time writing in 1946, Huff served as editor of Better Homes and Gardens and Liberty magazine. As a freelancer, Huff produced hundreds of "How to" feature articles and wrote at least sixteen books, most of which concerned household projects. One of his biggest projects was a prize-winning home in Carmel-by-the-Sea, California, where he lived until his death. Stanford historian Robert N. Proctor wrote that Huff "was paid to testify before Congress in the 1950s and then again in the 1960s, with the assigned task of ridiculing any notion of a cigarette-disease link. On March 22, 1965, Huff testified at hearings on cigarette labeling and advertising, accusing the recent Surgeon General's report of myriad failures and 'fallacies'." First and foremost, though, Huff is credited with introducing statistics to a generation of college and high-school students on a level that was meaningful, available, and practical, while still managing to teach complex mathematical concepts. His most famous text, How to Lie with Statistics, is still being translated into new languages. His books have been published in over 22 languages, and continue to be used in classrooms the world over.   == Selected bibliography ==   === Books === Huff, D. (1944). Pictures by Pete: A Career Story of a Young Commercial Photographer. Dodd, Mead, New York. Huff, D. (1945). Twenty Careers of Tomorrow. WhittleseyHouse, McGraw–Hill, New York. Huff, D. (1946). The Dog that Came True (illust. C. Moran and D. Thorne). Whittlesey House, McGraw–Hill, New York. (Adapted from a short story by Darrell Huff which appeared in Woman's Day.) Huff, D. (1954) How to Lie with Statistics (illust. I. Geis), Norton, New York, ISBN 0-393-31072-8 Huff, D. (1959). How to Take a Chance: The Laws of Probability (illust. I. Geis). Norton, New York. Huff, D. (1961). Score: The Strategy of Taking Tests (illust. C. Huff ). Appleton–Century Crofts, New York. Huff, D. (1964). Cycles in Your Life—The Rhythms of War, Wealth, Nature, and Human Behavior. Or Patterns in War, Wealth, Weather, Women, Men, and Nature (illust. A. Kovarsky). Norton, New York. Huff, D. (1968). How to Work With Concrete and Masonry (illust. C. and G. Kinsey). Popular Science Publishing, New York. Huff, D. (1972). How to Figure the Odds on Everything (illust. J. Huehnergarth). Dreyfus, New York. Huff, D. (1972). How to Save on the Home You Want (with F. Huff and the editors of Dreyfus Publications; illust. R. Doty). Dreyfus, New York. Huff, D. (1996). The Complete How to Figure It. Using Math in Everyday Life (illust. C. Kinsey; design K. M. Huff ). Norton, New York. Huff, D. and Corey, P. (1957). Home Workshop Furniture Projects. Fawcett, New York. Huff, D. and Huff, F. (1963). How to Lower Your Food Bills. Your Guide to the Battle of the Supermarket. Macfadden–Bartell, New York. Huff, D. and Huff, F. (1970). Complete Book of Home Improvement (illust. G. and C. Kinsey and Bray–Schaible Design, Inc.). Popular Science Publishing, New York.   === Articles === Huff, D. (1954). "How to Spot Statistical Jokers". The New York Times, August 22, 1954, p. SM13. Huff, D. (1962). "Living high on $6500 a year". The Saturday Evening Post 235 60–62. (Reprinted in Mother Earth News, January 1970) Huff, D. (1978). "Calcu-letter. News of pocket calculators—and how to have fun with them". Popular Science 212 (3), March 1978. p. 6   == See also == Exaggeration Lies, damned lies, and statistics   == Notes and references ==

David Bradley Allison (born 1963) is an American obesity researcher, biostatistician, and psychologist. He is Distinguished Professor, Quetelet Endowed Professor of Public Health, and Associate Dean for Science of the School of Public Health at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB).   == Career ==   === Education === 1985 – B.A., Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York 1987 – M.A., Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York 1990 – PhD., Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York 1991 – Post-Doc, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 1994 – Fellowship, Columbia University and St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center According to data analyzed by the journal Nature, Allison has ranked in the top 10 for most federally funded grants. Allison has been described as one of the leading skeptics regarding commonly issued nutrition advice. Author Judith Stern wrote "He is also known for challenging conventional ideas, exploring novel hypotheses, and holding himself and others to rigorous standards of evidence." Although Allison has had some critics regarding his stance on questioning the link between consuming any one particular food and obesity, he has been defended by others and praised for his strong adherence to solid scientific practice.  Allison is the founding Field Chief Editor of Frontiers in Genetics. He also serves as a frequent consultant and expert witness in the legal setting.   == Alleged conflicts of interest == In 2008, Allison resigned as president-elect of the Obesity Society after signing an affidavit opposing a law that would have required calorie counts to be listed on restaurant menus. The New York Times reported that Allison's affidavit "ran counter to the conventional thinking in his field" and provoked criticism from some members of the Society. In 2011, ABC News ran a story about Allison. The story quoted him as saying there was too little "solid evidence" to support a link between soft drink consumption and obesity. The article noted that "...critics say his skepticism stems from his financial ties to entities such as Coca-Cola, Pepsi and the American Beverage Association..." Allison was featured in the 2014 documentary film Fed Up, which criticized his research for being funded by food companies. Allison responded that "the film-makers’ behavior seems counter to thoughtful dialogue," although he added that he had not seen the film yet and so could not provide a detailed response.    == References ==   == External links == Full CV

David Harold Blackwell (April 24, 1919 – July 8, 2010) was Professor Emeritus of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley, and is one of the eponyms of the Rao–Blackwell theorem. Born in Centralia, Illinois, he was the first African American inducted into the National Academy of Sciences, and the first black tenured faculty member at UC Berkeley.   == Career == Blackwell entered the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign with the intent to teach elementary school mathematics. In 1938 he earned his bachelor's degree in mathematics, a master's degree in 1939, and was awarded a Ph.D. in mathematics in 1941 at the age of 22, all by the University of Illinois. He did a year of post-doctoral studies as a fellow at Institute for Advanced Study in 1941–42. At the Institute, he met John von Neumann and von Neumann asked Blackwell to discuss his Ph.D. thesis with him. Blackwell, who believed that von Neumann was just being polite and not genuinely interested in his work, did not approach him until von Neumann himself asked him again a few months later. According to Blackwell on this meeting, "He (von Neumann) listened to me talk about this rather obscure subject and in ten minutes he knew more about it than I did." He departed when he was prevented from attending lectures or undertaking research at nearby Princeton University, which the IAS has historically collaborated with in research and scholarship activities. Seeking a permanent position, he wrote letters of application to 105 Historically Black Colleges and Universities; he felt at the time that a black teacher would be limited to teaching only at black colleges. He also sought a position at the University of California, Berkeley, and was interviewed by statistician Jerzy Neyman. While Neyman supported his appointment, race-based objections prevented his appointment at that time. He was offered a post at Southern University at Baton Rouge, which he held in 1942–43, followed by a year as an Instructor at Clark College in Atlanta. He then moved to Howard University in 1944 and within three years was appointed full professor and head of the Mathematics Department. He remained at Howard until 1954. He took a position at University of California Berkeley as a visiting professor in 1954, and was hired by UC Berkeley as a full professor in the newly created Statistics Department in 1955, becoming the Statistics department chair in 1956. He spent the rest of his career at UC Berkeley, retiring in 1988. Blackwell was also a pioneer in textbook writing and game theory. Blackwell wrote one of the first Bayesian textbooks, his 1969 Basic Statistics. Blackwell was also a member of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity (Tau chapter – University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign).   == Quotation ==   == Honors and awards == Invited Speaker at the International Congress of Mathematicians, 1954 President, Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 1956 National Academy of Sciences, 1965 American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1968 President of the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 1975-1977 Honorary Fellow, Royal Statistical Society, 1976 Vice President, American Statistical Association, 1978 John von Neumann Theory Prize, 1979 R. A. Fisher Lectureship, 1986 The Berkeley Citation, 1988 National Medal of Science (posthumously), 2014   == See also == C. R. Rao   == References ==   == External links == bio sketch from the American Statistical Association bio sketch from the Mathematical Association of America Dr. David Blackwell Biography Packet (5.21MB) provided by the Department of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley. David Blackwell's oral history video excerpts at The National Visionary Leadership Project On Google scholar David Blackwell, Scholar of Probability, Dies at 91 New York Times David Blackwell at the Mathematics Genealogy Project A volume dedicated to David H. Blackwell, Celebratio Mathematica

David E. Bloom, Ph.D. (born October 16, 1955) is an American author, professor, economist, and demographer. He is Professor of Economics and Demography at the Harvard School of Public Health, and director of the Program on the Global Demography of Aging. Bloom has written and published over 250 articles and books focusing on health, demography, education, and labor. He has been a contributing editor of American Demographics and an associate editor of the Review of Economics and Statistics. He has also served as a referee for over 50 academic journals, and has been a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors of Science Magazine since August 1991. He has been honored with an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship and the Galbraith Award for teaching. He was also a Fulbright Scholar in India (1982–1983) and a Scholar-in-Residence at the Russell Sage Foundation (1989–1990).   == Personal background == David E. Bloom was born on October 16, 1955 in New York City. He attended the New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations, Cornell University, graduating in 1976 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Industrial and Labor Relations. In 1978, he earned his Masters degree in Economics from Princeton University and his Ph.D. in Economics and Demography from Princeton in 1981. Bloom is married to Lakshmi Reddy Bloom, with whom he has two children, Sonali, a Yale University graduate, and Sahil, a Stanford University graduate.   == Professional background ==   === Academia === Throughout his career, Bloom has taught university courses at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. Primary areas of focus have included labor and development economics, global health and demographics, and statistics and econometrics. Following his graduation from Princeton, Bloom joined the public policy faculty of Carnegie Mellon University, School of Urban and Public Affairs, where he served as an assistant professor of Economics for academic years ending in 1981 and 1982. In July 1982, he joined the staff of Harvard University, Department of Economics, where he served as an Assistant Professor of Economics through June 1985. The following month, he served as the Paul Sack Associate Professor of Political Economy through June 1987. Bloom began working as a Professor of Economics at Columbia University, Department of Economics in July 1987, where he remained through the end of the 1996 academic year. During this time, he remained as Visiting Professor of Economics at Harvard, until March 1988. During the 1989–1990 academic year, Bloom joined the Russell Sage Foundation, where he served as the Scholar-in-Residence. He then served as the chair of the Department of Economics at Columbia from July 1990 to December 1993. In July 1995, Bloom began serving as the Acting Executive Director of the Harvard Institute for International Development. In July 1996, he served as the Deputy Director, while simultaneously serving as the Director of the Education and Social Development Group, remaining there through June 1999. Following the end of the 1996 academic year at Columbia, Bloom joined the staff of Harvard School of Public Health, where he served as the Professor of Population and Health Economics for three years, before being named the Clarence James Gamble Professor of Economics and Demography, where he has remained since June 1999. He is the Chair of Harvard's Department of Global Health and Population, and director of the Program on the Global Demography of Aging. He is also a Faculty Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research, where he participates in the programs on labor studies, health economics, and aging.   === Research interests === Bloom's primary areas of research include labor economics, health, demography, and the environment. He has written numerous articles, reports, and books presenting comparative studies between health status and economic growth, along with the effects of population change on economic development. He has also researched and presented the factors that determine wages, fringe benefits, and total family income. Additional focus has included: adjudication of labor disputes measurements of discrimination emerging world labor market effects of rapid population growth economics of municipal solid waste sociology and economics of marriage and fertility global spread and economic impacts of HIV/AIDS   === Consulting === Throughout his career, Bloom has provided consulting services to several national and international organizations, including the World Bank, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Labor Organization, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Asian Development Bank. He is also a member of the American Arbitration Association's Labor Arbitration Panel.   === Publishing === Bloom has written and published over 250 articles and books focusing on health, demography, education, and labor. He has been a contributing editor of American Demographics and an associate editor of the Review of Economics and Statistics. He has also served as a referee for over 50 academic journals, and has been a member of the Board of Reviewing Editors of Science Magazine since August 1991.   == Board memberships == Bloom is an Adjunct Trustee of amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research and member of the Board of Directors of Population Services International, which addresses HIV/AIDS on a global scale. He additionally serves as a member of the World Economic Forum's Global Health Advisory Board and its Global Agenda Councils on Population Growth and on Ageing. In April 2005, he was elected Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Along with fellow member, Joel Cohen, he serves as a co-director of an American Academy of Arts and Sciences educational project.   == Honors and awards == Fulbright Scholar in India (1982–1983) Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship (1986) J.K. Galbraith Prize for excellence in teaching (1987) Russell Sage Foundation (Scholar-in-Residence 1989–1990) Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2005) Paul G. Rogers Society for Global Health Research Ambassador (2009)   == Published works == Bloom, David E.; and Trahan, Jane T. Flexible Benefits and Employee Choice: Highlights of the Literature, Work in America Institute, 1986. ISBN 978-0080295183 Bloom, David E.; Canning, David; and Sevilla, Jaypee. Demographic Dividend: New Perspective on Economic Consequences Population Change, Rand Publishing, 2003. ISBN 978-0833029263 Bloom, David E.; Craig, Patricia H.; and Malaney, Pia N. The Quality of Life in Rural Asia, Asian Development Bank Press, 2001. ISBN 978-0195924541   == References ==   == External links == Official website

David F. Duncan (born in Kansas City, Missouri on June 26, 1947) is president of Duncan & Associates, a firm providing consultation on research design and data collection for behavioral and policy studies. He is also Clinical Associate Professor in the Department of Community Health at Brown University School of Medicine.   == Education == He graduated with a B.A. in psychology from the University of Missouri–Kansas City, and completed graduate work in criminology at Sam Houston State University. He earned the degree of Doctor of Public Health from the University of Texas at Houston with an interdisciplinary concentration in behavioral sciences, epidemiology, biostatistics, and program and policy evaluation. He later earned a postdoctoral diploma in alcoholism early intervention and treatment effectiveness research from Brown University.   == Work == Duncan is best known for his contributions in the field of drug abuse, which have often been highly controversial. In 1974, he and Edward Khantzian of Harvard Medical School, in separate publications, proposed what has come to be known as the self-medication hypothesis of addiction. Both authors proposed that addiction arose out of the use of drugs to medicate a preexisting disorder or problem. Duncan's version of the hypothesis is distinguished by its identification of addiction with negative reinforcement. Duncan argued that all of the characteristics commonly cited as typical of addiction, such as persistence in the face of negative consequences and high probability of relapse, are all common in any negatively reinforced behaviors. He was also one of the first people to develop the strategy of harm reduction. He has argued that harm reduction approaches to addictions, HIV or other public health concerns are instances of the traditional public health practice of tertiary prevention—prevention of deaths or disability that might otherwise occur due to a health problem. Duncan first applied this approach in his work with adolescent drug abusers in Houston, Texas in the early 1970s and soon afterward with heroin addicts. In 1983 he and Robert S. Gold published an argument for this approach, which they then called "cultivating drug use", using the word cultivating in its sense of the elimination of weeds and promotion of healthy growth. Duncan has also been involved in the development of computer assisted learning and particularly computer based health education. His leadership in this field began at the State University of New York at Brockport, where he collaborated with Robert S. Gold in developing the first course on computers in health education offered at any college. In 1980, he and Gold published two papers that spurred interest in the use of computers in health education. One of these papers was the first publication to suggest that microprocessors, as personal computers were then known, could be preferable to mainframe terminals for use in computer assisted learning. A few years later, Duncan and Gold, then at Southern Illinois University, taught the nation’s first college-level course on PC-based methods in education. Three years later, Duncan argued for the value of portable computers, which were just being introduced, for educational and data collection applications. He also pioneered the use of roleplaying games on the PC and internet for use in both health education and data collection.   == Career == Duncan was a consultant to President Clinton's White House Office of National Drug Control Policy during his tenure as Senior Study Director of the Substance Abuse Research Group of the Westat corporation. In his position at Westat he also provided consultation to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, National Academy of Science, United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, New York City Housing Authority, and SPSS Inc.. He served from 1996 to 1998 as Senior Public Health Epidemiologist in the Director's Office of the Rhode Island Department of Health where he was coordinator of health policy and Project Director of the state's Unified Needs Assessment Program for Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment. His varied career has included positions in both juvenile and adult corrections, as a deputy sheriff, and as a private detective. He has directed a halfway house for drug abusers, a comprehensive drug abuse treatment center, and a private school for emotionally disturbed children. He served as a research associate to the working group on substance abuse treatment for the President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform chaired by First Lady Hillary Clinton in 1993. He has held academic appointments as Associate Professor of Health Science at the State University of New York at Brockport, Professor of Health Education at Southern Illinois University, Professor of Biology at the Community College of Rhode Island, Professor of Health and Environmental Research at the University of Cologne in Germany, and Associate Professor of Medical Science (Community Health) at Brown University. He has been a visiting lecturer at the University of Rochester, New York State School of Psychiatry, Columbia University's Teachers College and School of Public Health, New England Gerontology Academy, Trinity College (Dublin), Oxford University, German Academy of Public Health, University of Würzburg, and Universidad Complutense de Madrid. He is chair of the Council on Illicit Drugs and a member of the Board of Directors of the National Association for Public Health Policy. He chairs the Advisory Committee for the M.P.H. Program at Fort Valley State University. He is a member of the Corporation (governing body) of Butler Hospital, a psychiatric hospital in Providence, Rhode Island, and of the Board of Directors of the Bowling Green-Warren County Primary Care Center in Bowling Green, Kentucky. He was Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors of the New England Gerontology Academy. He is a past chairman of the Mental Health Section of the American Public Health Association, and has served on A.P.H.A.'s Governing Council and committees on Program, Membership, and Continuing Education.   == Personal history == David F. Duncan, using the pen-name Harold Celline, was convicted of importing child pornography. In 1989 he appealed the conviction for "knowingly receiving visual depictions of minors engaging in sexually explicit conduct, transported and shipped in interstate and foreign commerce, in violation of 18 U.S.C Sec. 2252(a)(2)." The conviction was affirmed. He went to prison.    == Books == Duncan, D. F., and Gold, R. S. (1982). Drugs and the Whole Person. New York: John Wiley and Sons. Duncan, D. F., and Gold, R. S. (1985). Drugs and the Whole Person (2nd Ed). New York: MacMillan. Duncan, D. F. (1988). Epidemiology: Basis for Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. New York: MacMillan. CSAT Consensus Panel (2000). Substance Abuse Treatment for Persons with Child Abuse and Neglect Issues. (CSAT Treatment Improvement Protocol # 36) Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Treatrment. Hornik, R.; Judkins, D.; Golub, A.; Johnson, B.; and Duncan, D. F. (2000). Evaluation of the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign: Historical Trends in Drug Use and Design of the Phase III Evaluation. Washington, DC: White House Office of National Drug Control Policy. [1]   == References ==  Achalu, E.D. (2002). Self-Medication Hypothesis: A Review of the Two Major Theories and the Research Evidence. Addiction Info, p. 1. [2] [3] Addiction Technology Transfer Center of New England (2010). Faculty Biographies. Brown University. [4] Alumni Notes (11-12/1986). The Alcalde, 75(2), 42. [5] Becker, D. (3/29/2009). Dirty Drugs—An Interview of Prof. David F. Duncan. On Radio Station KPFT, Houston, Texas. [6] Becker, D. (4/22/2008). A Century of Lies—An Interview of David Duncan. On Radio Station KPFT, Houston, Texas. [7] Bibliography and Abstracts. [8] Duncan, D. F., & Gold, R. S. (1983). Cultivating drug use: A strategy for the 80s. Bulletin of the Society of Psychologists in Addictive Behaviors, 2, 143-147. [9] Duncan, D. F., Nicholson, T., Clifford, P., Hawkins, W., & Petosa, R. (1994). Harm reduction: An emerging new paradigm for drug education. Journal of Drug Education, 24, 281-290. [10] Grim, R. (Sept. 7, 2006). A White House drug deal gone bad. "Slate". [11] Jansen, F. W. (2005). The Self-Medication Hypothesis of David F. Duncan, Addiction Info. [12] Laflin, M.T. and Black, D.R. (2004). Viewpoint: Conversation with Dr. David F. Duncan. American Journal of Health Behavior, 28(2), 180-188. [13]   == External links == Duncan & Associates webpage publications by David F. Duncan The Self-Medication Hypothesis "Dirty Drugs": An Interview on Radio Station KPFT, Houston, Texas Drug Truth Site

David George Kendall FRS (15 January 1918 – 23 October 2007) was an English statistician and mathematician, known for his work on probability, statistical shape analysis, ley lines and queueing theory. He spent most of his academic life in the University of Oxford (1946–1962) and the University of Cambridge (1962–1985). He worked with M. S. Bartlett during World War II, and visited Princeton University after the war.   == Life and career == David George Kendall was born on 15 January 1918 in Ripon, West Riding of Yorkshire, and attended Ripon Grammar School before attending Queen's College, Oxford, graduating in 1939. He worked on rocketry during the war, before moving to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1946. In 1962 he was appointed the first Professor of Mathematical Statistics in the Statistical Laboratory, University of Cambridge; in which post he remained until his retirement in 1985. He was elected to a professorial fellowship at Churchill College, and he was a founding trustee of the Rollo Davidson Trust. In 1986, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Science) by the University of Bath. Kendall was an expert in probability and data analysis, and pioneered statistical shape analysis including the study of ley lines. He defined Kendall's notation for queueing theory. The Royal Statistical Society awarded him the Guy Medal in Silver in 1955, followed in 1981 by the Guy Medal in Gold. In 1980 the London Mathematical Society awarded Kendall their Senior Whitehead Prize, and in 1989 their De Morgan Medal. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1964. He was married to Diana Fletcher from 1952 until his death. They had two sons and four daughters, including Wilfrid Kendall, professor in the Department of Statistics at the University of Warwick and reporter Bridget Kendall MBE.   == Selected bibliography == Kendall, David G. (1960), "Geometric ergodicity and the theory of queues", in Arrow, Kenneth J.; Karlin, Samuel; Suppes, Patrick, Mathematical models in the social sciences, 1959: Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium, Stanford mathematical studies in the social sciences, IV, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, pp. 176–195, ISBN 9780804700214.    == References ==   == External links == Janus: The Papers of Professor David Kendall Royal Society citation

Sir David John Spiegelhalter, OBE FRS (born 16 August 1953), is a British statistician and Winton Professor of the Public Understanding of Risk in the Statistical Laboratory at the University of Cambridge and a Fellow of Churchill College, Cambridge. Spiegelhalter is an ISI highly cited researcher.   == Education == Spiegelhalter studied at the University of Oxford (Bachelor of Arts 1974) and University College London. He gained his Master of Science 1975 and Doctor of Philosophy 1978, supervised by Adrian Smith.   == Career == Spiegelhalter was research assistant in Brunel University in 1976 and then visiting lecturer at the University of California, Berkeley, 1977–8. After his PhD, he was a research assistant for the Royal College of Physicians; he was based at the University of Nottingham, where his PhD supervisor, Adrian Smith, had been appointed a professor. From 1981 he was at the Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit at Cambridge. He has been an honorary lecturer at the University of Hong Kong since 1991. He has also been a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis and the World Anti-Doping Agency. He played a leading role in the public inquiries into children's heart surgery at the Bristol Royal Infirmary and the murders by Harold Shipman. Between 2007 and 2012 he divided his work between the Cambridge Statistical Laboratory (three-fifths) and the Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit (two-fifths). He left the MRC in March 2012 and now works full-time at the Statistical Laboratory as the Winton Professor of the Public Understanding of Risk.  In 2012, Spiegelhalter hosted the BBC Four documentary Tails You Win: The Science of Chance which described the application of probability in everyday life. He also presented a 2013 Cambridge Science Festival talk, How to Spot a Shabby Statistic at the Babbage Lecture Theatre in Cambridge.   == Research == Spiegelhalter's research interests are in statistics including Bayesian approach to clinical trials, expert systems and complex modelling and epidemiology. Graphical models of conditional independence. He wrote several papers in the 1980s that showed how probability could be incorporated into expert systems, a problem that seemed intractable at the time. Spiegelhalter showed that while frequentist probability did not lend itself to expert systems, Bayesian probability most certainly did. Statistical software. In the 1990s Spiegelhalter led the Medical Research Council team that developed WinBUGS ("Bayesian analysis Using Gibbs Sampling"), a statistical-modeling system allowing hierarchical prior distributions. WinBUGS and its successor OpenBUGS specifies graphical models using acyclic directed graphs whose nodes are random variables, which are updated using Gibbs sampling (an updating method for Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation). Earlier Bayesian software had required that the probability distribution for the observed data be an exponential family and that the prior be its conjugate distribution. Allowing flexible choices of prior distributions simplified hierarchical modelling and helped to promote multilevel models, which became widely used in epidemiology and education. General issues in clinical trials, including cluster randomisation, meta-analysis and ethical monitoring. Monitoring and comparing clinical and public-health outcomes and their associated publication as performance indicators. Public understanding of risk, including promoting concepts such as the micromort (a one in a million chance of death) and microlife (a 30-minute reduction of life expectancy). Media reporting of statistics, risk and probability and the wider conception of uncertainty as going beyond what is measured to model uncertainty, the unknown and the unmeasurable.   == Honours == 1975 Fellow, Royal Statistical Society 1985 Guy Medal in Bronze, Royal Statistical Society 1990 Award for Outstanding Statistical Application, American Statistical Association 1993 Chartered Statistician, Royal Statistical Society 1994 Guy Medal in Silver, Royal Statistical Society 1994 Honorary Doctorate, Aalborg University, Denmark 2005 Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) 2006 Received an OBE in the Queen's Birthday Honours 2006 Appointed Honorary Professor of Biostatistics at University of Cambridge 2009 Weldon Memorial Prize and Medal 2010 Honorary Doctorate of Science, Plymouth University Spiegelhalter was knighted in the 2014 Birthday Honours for services to statistics.   == References ==

David van Dantzig (September 23, 1900 – July 22, 1959) was a Dutch mathematician, well known for the construction in topology of the dyadic solenoid.   == Biography == Born in Amsterdam in 1900, Van Dantzig started to study Chemistry at the University of Amsterdam in 1917, where Gerrit Mannoury lectured. He received his PhD at the University of Groningen in 1931 with a thesis entitled "Studien over topologische algebra" under supervision of Bartel Leendert van der Waerden. He was appointed professor at the Delft University of Technology in 1938, and at the University of Amsterdam in 1946. Among his doctoral students were Jan Hemelrijk (1950), Johan Kemperman (1950), David Johannes Stoker (1955), and Constance van Eeden (1958). In Amsterdam he was one of the founders of the Mathematisch Centrum. At the University of Amsterdam he was succeeded by Jan Hemelrijk. Originally working on topics in differential geometry and topology, after World War II he focused on probability, emphasizing the applicability to statistical hypothesis testing. In 1949 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.   == Publications == Books, a selection: 1931. Studien over topologische algebra. Doctoral thesis University of Groningen. 1832. Over de elementen van het wiskundig denken : voordracht. Rede Delft. Groningen : Noordhoff. 1938. Vragen en schijnvragen over ruimte en tijd : een toepassing van den wiskundigen denkvorm. Inaugurale rede Technische Hogeschool te Delft 1948. De functie der wetenschap : drie voordrachten, met discussie. With E.W. Beth and C.F.P. Stutterheim. 's-Gravenhage : Leopold Articles, a selection: D. van Dantzig, C. Scheffer "On hereditary time discrete stochastic processes, considered as stationary Markov chains, and the corresponding general form of Wald’s fundamental identity," Indag. Math. (16), No.4, (1954), p. 377–388   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "David van Dantzig", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . David van Dantzig at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Debabrata Basu (5 July 1924 – 24 March 2001) was an Indian statistician who made fundamental contributions to the foundations of statistics. Basu invented simple examples that displayed some difficulties of likelihood-based statistics and frequentist statistics; Basu's paradoxes were especially important in the development of survey sampling. In statistical theory, Basu's theorem established the independence of a complete sufficient statistic and an ancillary statistic. Basu was associated with the Indian Statistical Institute in India, and Florida State University in the United States.   == Biography == Debabrata Basu was born in Dacca, Bengal, unpartitioned India, now Dhaka, Bangladesh. His father, N. M. Basu, was a mathematician specialising in number theory. Young Basu studied mathematics at Dacca University. He took a course in statistics as part of the under-graduate honours programme in Mathematics but his ambition was to become a pure mathematician. After getting his master's degree from Dacca University, Basu taught there from 1947 to 1948. Following the partition of India in 1947, Basu made several trips to India. In 1948, he moved to Calcutta, where he worked for some time as an actuary in an insurance company. In 1950, he joined the Indian Statistical Institute as a research scholar under C.R. Rao. In 1950, the Indian Statistical Institute was visited by Abraham Wald, who was giving a lecture tour sponsored by the International Statistical Institute. Wald greatly impressed Basu. Wald had developed a decision-theoretic foundations for statistics in which Bayesian statistics was a central part, because of Wald's theorem characterising admissible decision rules as Bayesian decision rules (or limits of Bayesian decision rules). Wald also showed the power of using measure-theoretic probability theory in statistics. In 1953, after submitting his thesis to the University of Calcutta, Basu went as a Fulbright scholar to the University of California, Berkeley. There Basu had intensive discussions with Jerzy Neyman and "his brilliant younger colleagues" like Erich Leo Lehmann. Basu's theorem comes from this time. Basu thus had a good understanding of the decision-theoretic approach to statistics of Neyman, Pearson and Wald. In fact, Basu is described as having returned from Berkeley to India as a "complete Neyman Pearsonian" by J. K. Ghosh.  Basu met Ronald Fisher in the winter of 1954–1955; he wrote in 1988, "With his reference set argument, Sir Ronald was trying to find a via media between the two poles of Statistics – Berkeley and Bayes. My efforts to understand this Fisher compromise led me to the likelihood principle". In their festschrift for Basu, the editors Malay Ghosh and Patak write that  [Basu's] critical examination of both the Neyman–Pearsonian and the Fisherian modes of inference eventually forced him to a Bayesian point of view, via the likelihood route. The final conversion to Bayesianism came in January 1968, when Basu was invited to speak at a Bayesian Session in the Statistics Section of the Indian Science Congress. He confesses that, while preparing for these lectures, he became convinced that Bayesian inference did indeed provide one with a logical resolution of the underlying inconsistencies of both the Neyman–Pearson and the Fisherian theories. Since then, Dr. Basu became an ardent Bayesian and, in many of his foundation papers, pointed out the deficiencies of both the Neyman–Pearsonian and the Fisherian methods.  After 1968, Basu began writing polemical essays, which provided paradoxes to frequentist statistics, and which produced great discussion in statistical journals and at statistical meetings. Particularly stimulating papers were Basu's papers on the foundations of survey sampling. There is an extensive literature discussing Basu's problem of estimating the weight of the elephants at a circus with an enormous bull elephant named Jumbo and on the Fisher randomisation test. After teaching at the Indian Statistical Institute Basu moved to the United States and taught statistics at Florida State University from 1975 to 1990 when he was made an emeritus professor; he has supervised six students.   == Publications == Basu's main articles are reprinted with his comments in Basu, D. (1988). J. K. Ghosh, ed. Statistical information and likelihood : A collection of critical essays by Dr. D. Basu. Lecture Notes in Statistics 45. Springer. ISBN 0-387-96751-6. MR 953081.  Also Basu, D. (September 1980). "Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher Randomization Test". Journal of the American Statistical Association 75 (371): 575–582. doi:10.2307/2287648. JSTOR 2287648. MR 590687.    == References ==   == Further reading == "Special issue in memory of D. Basu". Sankhyā Ser. A (Calcutta: Indian Statistical Institute) 64 (3 (part 1 & 2)): vi–xiv+509–739, 741–899. 2002. MR 1985395.    == External links == Department of Statistics Florida State University Florida State Times obituary Debabrata Basu: another photograph on the Portraits of Statisticians page. For Basu's PhD students see Debabrata Basu at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Dennis Victor Lindley (25 July 1923 – 14 December 2013) was a British statistician, decision theorist and leading advocate of Bayesian statistics. Lindley grew up in the south-west London suburb of Surbiton. He was an only child and his father was a local building contractor. Lindley recalled (to Adrian Smith) that the family had "little culture" and that both his parents were "proud of the fact that they had never read a book." The school Lindley attended, Tiffin School, introduced him to "ordinary cultural activities." From there Lindley went to read mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge in 1941. During the war the degree course lasted only two years and, on finishing, Lindley had a choice between entering the armed forces and joining the Civil Service as a statistician. He chose the latter and, after taking a short course given by Oscar Irwin which he "did not understand", he joined a section of the Ministry of Supply doing statistical work under George Barnard. After the war Lindley spent some time at the National Physical Laboratory before returning to Cambridge for a further year of study. From 1948 to 1960 he worked at Cambridge, starting as a demonstrator and leaving as director of the Statistical Laboratory. In 1960 Lindley left to take up a new chair at Aberystwyth. In 1967 he moved to University College London. In 1977 Lindley took early retirement at the age of 54. From then until 1987 he travelled the world as an "itinerant scholar", and later continued to write and to attend conferences. He was awarded the Royal Statistical Society's Guy Medal in Gold in 2002. Lindley first encountered statistics as a set of techniques and in his early years at Cambridge he worked to find a mathematical basis for the subject. His lectures on probability were based on Kolmogorov's approach which at that time had no following in Britain. In 1954 Lindley met Savage who was also looking for a deeper justification of the ideas of Neyman, Pearson, Wald and Fisher. Both found that justification in Bayesian theory and they turned into critics of the classical statistical inference they had hoped to justify. Lindley became a great missionary for the Bayesian gospel. The atmosphere of the Bayesian revival is captured in a comment by Rivett on Lindley's move to University College London and the premier chair of statistics in Britain: "it was as though a Jehovah's Witness had been elected Pope."   == Publications ==  (with J. C. P. Miller) Cambridge Elementary Statistical Tables, Cambridge. 1953. Introduction to Probability and Statistics from a Bayesian Viewpoint, 2 volumes, Cambridge 1965. Bayesian Statistics : a Review, SIAM. 1971. Making Decisions, Wiley-Interscience. 1971. (with W.F. Scott) New Cambridge Elementary Statistical Tables, Cambridge. 1984. The bibliography in Freeman and Smith lists 118 articles up to 1993. "The Philosophy of Statistics," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), Vol. 49, No. 3, (2000), pp. 293–337. Understanding Uncertainty, Wiley-Interscience, 2006.   == 70th birthday tribute == Freeman, P. R.; Smith, A. F. M., eds. (1994). Aspects of Uncertainty: A Tribute to D. V. Lindley. Wiley. ISBN 0471943479.  This contains a biography and articles by various authors. Rivett, P. (May 1995). "Review of Aspects of Uncertainty". Journal of the Operational Research Society 46 (5): 663–665. doi:10.1057/jors.1995.91.    == Interviews == Smith, Adrian (August 1995). "A Conversation with Dennis Lindley". Statistical Science (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 10 (3): 305–319. doi:10.1214/ss/1177009940. JSTOR 2246016.  Joyce, Helen (June 2004). "Bayesian Thoughts" (PDF). Significance (Wiley-Blackwell) 1 (2): 73–75. doi:10.1111/j.1740-9713.2004.027.x.  O'Hagan, Tony. "Interview with Dennis Lindley". Royal Statistical Society. Retrieved 16 December 2013.    == References ==   == External links == Whittle, Peter. "The History of the Cambridge Statistical Laboratory". Statistical Laboratory, Cambridge. Retrieved 16 December 2013.  Lee, Peter M. "Portraits of Statisticians". University of York, Materials for the History of Statistics. Retrieved 16 December 2013.  Bernardo, José M. (2009). "The Valencia Story" (PDF). International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA) Newsletter. Retrieved 16 December 2013.

Sir Derek Wanless (29 September 1947 – 22 May 2012) was a former English banker and a former adviser to the Labour Party.   == Biography == Derek Wanless was born in Newcastle upon Tyne, where he was educated at the Royal Grammar School. From 1967-70, he was an undergraduate at King's College Cambridge, which he attended on a support grant from Westminster Bank (a constituent of the present NatWest Bank). He was an extraordinarily gifted mathematician and graduated as Senior Wrangler in 1970. On graduation he moved into banking, qualifying as a statistician, and attended the Program for Management Development at Harvard. He was a member of the Institute of Statisticians and a Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, of which he was President in 1999. He had joined Westminster Bank,a constituent of the present NatWest Bank in 1967, beginning with a Saturday job before becoming NatWest's Director of Personal Banking from 1986-1988. Then becoming the General Manager for UK Branch Business and UK Financial Services before, in 1992, taking on the role of Group Chief Executive until 1999, when he received a reported pay-off of £3,000,000. It was on Friday 8 October 1999, that BBC News reported that Derek Wanless had been ousted from his position as Chief Executive. Wanless was reportedly forced out by the bank's Non-Executive Directors, who replaced him with Sir David Rowland. Wanless had been criticised by City investors for taking the bank into investment banking, and failing to curtail high costs. As executive responsible for NatWest's card business, he led the team which invented Switch, the UK's debit card scheme. He led the NatWest Group immediately prior to its takeover, by the (then) relatively small Royal Bank of Scotland. In 2002 he carried out a review of the future funding of the National Health Service for Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer and in 2007 carried out a further review for the King's Fund. He was a Non-Executive Director of Northern Rock between 2000/2007, where he was Chairman of The Northern Rock's Audit and Risk committees. His position became highly contentious, following the incipient collapse of Northern Rock in September 2007. The Northern Rock's crisis was due to inadequate risk provision, and a 'run on the Bank' was only halted with promises of unlimited UK government support. Sir Derek was heavily criticised regarding his role in the Northern Rock affair by a committee of MPs sitting on the Commons Treasury Select Committee on 16 October 2007. Sir Derek's resignation was accepted by Northern Rock's newly appointed Chairman on 17 November 2007. He died of pancreatic cancer at the age of 64 in 2012.   == Affiliations == Sir Derek Wanless was a Freeman of the City of London, received a Knighthood in the 2005 New Year Honours and a Doctor of Civil Law, honoris causa from Durham University on 30 June 2005. He received an Honorary Doctorate in Business Administration (Hon DBA) from Sunderland University in July 2007. A further Honorary Doctorate was awarded by Coventry University in November 2007, which prompted a Daily Telegraph article questioning the value of such awards  The House of Commons Select Treasury Committee published its report into the Northern Rock affair on 24 January 2008. Wanless's role as Chairman of the Risk Committee, was criticised in the report. The report's conclusion is appended below, and the full report may be found as referenced.  #31. - The directors of Northern Rock were the principal authors of the difficulties that the company has faced since August 2007. It is right that members of the Board of Northern Rock have been replaced, though haphazardly, since the company became dependent on liquidity support from the Bank of England. The high-risk, reckless business strategy of Northern Rock, with its reliance on short- and medium-term wholesale funding and an absence of sufficient insurance and a failure to arrange standby facility or cover that risk, meant that it was unable to cope with the liquidity pressures placed upon it by the freezing of international capital markets in August 2007. Given that the formulation of that strategy was a fundamental role of the Board of Northern Rock, overseen by some directors who had been there since its demutualisation, the failure of that strategy must also be attributed to the Board. The non-executive members of the Board, and in particular the Chairman of the Board, the Chairman of the Risk Committee and the senior non-executive director, failed in the case of Northern Rock to ensure that it remained liquid as well as solvent, to provide against the risks that it was taking and to act as an effective restraining force on the strategy of the executive members.    == Key publications == 2007: Our Future Health Secured? A review of NHS funding and performance for the King's Fund 2006: Securing Good Health for Older People for the King's Fund with the Personal Social Services Research Unit (PSSRU) at The London School of Economics. 2004: Securing Good Health for the Whole Population for HM Treasury 2002: Securing Our Future Health: Taking a Long-Term View for HM Treasury   == References ==

Dietrich Stoyan (born 1940, Germany) — mathematician, statistician; student of Mathematics at Technical University Dresden; applied research at Deutsches Brennstoffinstitut Freiberg, 1967 PhD, 1975 Habilitation. Since 1976 at TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Rektor of that university in 1991—1997; he became famous by his statistical research of the diffusion of euro coins in Germany and Europe after the introduction of the euro in 2002.   == Research ==   === Queueing Theory === Qualitative theory, in particular inequalities, for queueing systems and related stochastic models. The books D. Stoyan: Comparison Methods for Queues and other Stochastic Models. J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1983 and A. Mueller and D. Stoyan: Comparison Methods for Stochastic Models and Risks, J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 2002 report on the results. The work goes back to 1969 when he discovered the monotonicity of the GI/G/1 waiting times with respect to the convex order.   === Stochastic Geometry === Stereological formulae, applications for marked point process, development of stochastic models. Successful joint work with Joseph Mecke led to the first exact proof of the fundamental stereological formulae. The book Stochastic Geometry and its Applications, by D. Stoyan, W.S. Kendall and J. Mecke reports on the results. The book of 1995 is the key reference for applied stochastic geometry.   === Spatial Statistics === Statistical methods for point processes, random sets and many other random geometrical structures such as fibre processes. Results can be found in the 1995 book on stochastic geometry and in the book, Fractals, Random Shapes and Point Fields by D. and H. Stoyan. (J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1994). A particular strength of Stoyan are second-order methods. At the moment Dietrich Stoyan is working (together with three colleagues) for a new book on point process statistics. He used packings of hard spheres as models for materials with the aim to solve mechanical problems for random heterogeneous materials. Stoyan is very active in demonstrating non-mathematicians and non-statisticians the potential of statistical and stochastic geometrical methods. In particular, he coorganized together with Klaus Mecke conferences where physicists, geometers and statisticians met. See the books Mecke Klaus R. and Stoyan D. (eds.): Statistical Physics and Spatial Statistics. Lecture Notes in Physics 554, Springer-Verlag, 2000 and Mecke Klaus R. and Stoyan D. (eds.): Morphology of Condensed Matter. Lecture Notes in Physics 600, Springer-Verlag, 2002.   == See also == Freiberg Freiberg University of Mining and Technology Stochastic geometry   == External links == Homepage

Donald Bruce Rubin is the John L. Loeb Professor of Statistics at Harvard University. He was hired by Harvard in 1984, and served as chair of the department from 1985-1994. He is most well known for the Rubin Causal Model, a set of methods designed for causal inference with observational data, and for his methods for dealing with missing data.   == Chronology == As an undergraduate Rubin attended the accelerated Princeton University PhD program where he was one of a cohort of 20 students mentored by the physicist John Wheeler (the intention of the program was to confirm degrees within 5 years of freshman matriculation). He switched to psychology and graduated in 1965. He began graduate school in psychology at Harvard with a National Science Foundation fellowship, but because his statistics background was considered insufficient, he was asked to take introductory statistics courses. Rubin felt insulted by this given his background in physics, so he decided to transfer to applied math, as he says in the introduction to Matched Sampling for Causal Effects. He received his M.A. in applied math in 1966, and spent the summer consulting for Princeton sociologist Robert Althauser on comparing the achievement of white and black students, where he first used a matching method. Rubin became a PhD student again, this time in Statistics under William Cochran at the Harvard Statistics Department. After graduating from Harvard in 1970, he began working at the Educational Testing Service in 1971, and served as a visiting faculty member at Princeton's new statistics department. He published his major papers on the Rubin causal model in 1974–1980, and a textbook on the subject with econometrician Guido Imbens to be published in May, 2015. Rubin later moved to the University of Wisconsin–Madison, the University of Chicago, and Harvard.   == Rubin causal model ==  The Rubin causal model is based on the idea of potential outcomes and the assignment mechanism: every unit has different potential outcomes depending on their "assignment" to a condition. For instance, someone may have one income at age 40 if they attend a private college and a different income at age 40 if they attend a public college; to measure the causal effect of going to a public versus a private college, the investigator should look at the outcome for the same individual in both alternative futures. It is obviously impossible to see both potential outcomes at once, and one of the potential outcomes is always missing. A randomized experiment works by assigning people randomly to (in this case) public or private college; because the assignment was random, the groups are (on average) equivalent, and the difference in income at age 40 can be attributed to the college assignment since that was the only difference between the groups. The assignment mechanism is the explanation for why some units received the treatment and others the control. In observational data, there is a non-random assignment mechanism: in the case of college attendance, people may choose to attend a private versus a public college based on their financial situation, parents' education, relative ranks of the schools they were admitted to, etc. If all of these factors can be balanced between the two groups of public and private college students, then in Rubin's model the effect of college attendance can be attributed to the college choice.   == Notes ==   == References == DB Rubin, "My introduction to matched sampling", in DB Rubin, Matched Sampling for Causal Effects, Cambridge, 2006.   == External links == Rubin's page on Harvard University Statistics Department website Donald Rubin at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Douglas Altman FMedSci (born London, UK, 12 July 1948) is a British statistician best known for his work on improving the reliability and reporting of medical research and for highly cited papers on statistical methodology. He is professor of statistics in medicine at the University of Oxford, founder and Director of Centre for Statistics in Medicine and Cancer Research UK Medical Statistics Group, and co-founder of the international Equator Network for health research reliability.   == Professional career == Doug Altman graduated in statistics from the University of Bath. His first job was in the Department of Community Medicine at St Thomas's Hospital Medical School. He then spent 11 years working for the Medical Research Council's Clinical Research Centre where he worked almost entirely as a statistical consultant in a wide variety of medical areas. In 1988 Doug Altman became head of the newly formed Medical Statistics Laboratory (now Medical Statistics Group) at Imperial Cancer Research Fund (now Cancer Research UK), and in 1995 also became founding director of the Centre for Statistics in Medicine (CSM) in Oxford. In 1998 he was made Professor of Statistics in Medicine by the University of Oxford. Altman is chief statistical advisor to the British Medical Journal (BMJ), where he is a member of the editorial "hanging committee", and co-convenor of the statistical Methods Group of the Cochrane Collaboration.   == Work on research integrity == Altman is regarded as a leading authority on the execution and reporting of health research, and has played a leading role in establishing better standards. He is one of the co-founders of the international EQUATOR health research reliability network, and a member of the CONSORT Group since 1999, a group dedicated to offering a standardised way for researchers to report trials. He is also one of the original authors of the IDEAL framework for improving surgical research.   == Contributions to statistical education == Altman's publications on statistical education, many co-authored with his long-standing collaborator Martin Bland, are well-known among the medical profession, being noted for their practical relevance and clarity. His textbook Practical Statistics for Medical Research, published in 1991, has sold 50,000 copies in hardback.   == Notable achievements == Altman is the author of over 450 papers in statistical methodology, with 11 being cited over 1,000 times. Among them is one Lancet paper, which has been cited over 23,000 times and is ranked 29th in the Nature/Web of Science Top 100 most-cited research papers of all time. Altman was awarded the Bradford Hill Medal by the Royal Statistical Society for his contributions to medical statistics in 1997, and a DSc from the University of London in the same year. In 2015 Altman was awarded a lifetime achievement award by the BMJ, where he was credited by the editor, Dr Fiona Godlee, with having "done more than anyone else to encourage researchers to fully report what they actually did, warts and all, rather than letting the best be the enemy of the good or, worse, pretending that research is perfect". Altman is also editor in chief of Trials , a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences and the Royal Statistical Society.   == Books authored == Altman, Douglas G. (1991). Practical Statistics for Medical Research. Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability (first ed.). Chapman & Hall. ISBN 978-1-58488-039-4.  Practical Statistics for Medical Research (1990). Douglas G. Altman ISBN 0-412-27630-5   === Books edited === Systematic Reviews in Healthcare: Meta-Analysis in Context (2001). Editors: Douglas G. Altman, Iain Chalmers, Gerd Antes, Michael Bradburn, Mike Clarke, Matthias Egger, George Davey Smith. ISBN 0-7279-1488-X Statistics With Confidence: Confidence Intervals and Statistical Guidelines (2000). Editors: Douglas G. Altman, David Machin, T. N. Bryant, Martin J. Gardner. ISBN 0-7279-0222-9 Systematic Reviews (1999). Editors: Douglas G. Altman, Iain Chalmers. ISBN 0-7279-0904-5 Statistics in Practice: Articles Published in the British Medical Journal. (1982). Editors: Sheila M. Gore, Douglas G. Altman. ISBN 0-7279-0085-4   === Peer-reviewed articles === List of the over 396 articles by Doug Altman available through PubMed. David M, Kenneth FS and Altman DG for the CONSORT Group. (2001) Revised recommendations for improving the quality of reports of parallel group randomized trials. Lancet 14, 1191-4. Bland JM, Altman DG. (1986) Statistical methods for assessing agreement between 2 methods of clinical measurement. Lancet i, 307-310. A reprint is available HERE BMJ Statistical Notes - A series of short articles on the use of statistics by Doug Altman and his longtime collaborator Martin Bland. Altman DG, Bland JM. (1983) Measurement in medicine - the analysis of method comparison studies. The Statistician 32, 307-317. Bland JM, Altman DG. (1999) Measuring agreement in method comparison studies. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 8, 135-160. Bland JM, Altman DG. (1995) Comparing methods of measurement - why plotting difference against standard method is misleading. Lancet 346, 1085-1087.   == References ==   == External links == Doug Altman's profile at ISI Highly Cited Researcher website Doug Altman's profile at the Centre for Statistics in Medicine CONSORT Statement webpage

Dudley Ryder, 2nd Earl of Harrowby KG, PC, FRS (19 May 1798 – 19 November 1882), styled Viscount Sandon between 1809 and 1847, was a British politician. He held office under Lord Palmerston as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster in 1855 and as Lord Privy Seal between 1855 and 1857.   == Background and education == Harrowby was born in London, the son of Dudley Ryder, 1st Earl of Harrowby, and Lady Susan (d. 1838), daughter of Granville Leveson-Gower, 1st Marquess of Stafford. He was educated at Christ Church, Oxford.   == Political career == Harrowby was elected Member of Parliament for Tiverton in 1819, a seat he held until 1831  before switching to represent Liverpool until 1847. He served as a Lord of the Admiralty in 1827 and as Secretary to the Board of Control under Lord Grey between 1830 and 1831. He remained out of office for a long time, but in 1855, eight years after he had succeeded his father as Earl of Harrowby, he was appointed Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster by Lord Palmerston, becoming a Privy Counsellor at the same time. In a few months he was transferred to the office of Lord Privy Seal, a position which he resigned in 1857. He was made a Knight of the Garter in 1859. Harrowby was also three times President of the Royal Statistical Society (1840–1842, 1849–1851, 1855–1857), chairman of the Maynooth commission and a member of other important royal commissions. He was regarded as among the most stalwart and prominent defenders of the Church of England.   == Family ==  Lord Harrowby married Lady Frances, daughter of John Stuart, 1st Marquess of Bute, in 1823. She died in March 1859. Harrowby remained a widower until his death at Sandon Hall on 19 November 1882, aged 84. He was succeeded in the earldom by his eldest son, Dudley.   == References ==   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links ==  "Ryder, Dudley (1798-1882)". Dictionary of National Biography. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.  Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Earl of Harrowby

Edwin James George Pitman (29 October 1897 – 21 July 1993) was an Australian mathematician who made significant contributions to statistics and probability theory. In particular, he is remembered primarily as the originator of the Pitman permutation test, Pitman nearness and Pitman efficiency. Pitman was born in Melbourne in 29 October 1897, and attended University of Melbourne, residing at Ormond College, where he graduated with First Class Honours. In 1926 he was appointed Professor of Mathematics at the University of Tasmania, which he held until his retirement in 1962. He was a founding member and second President of the Australian Mathematical Society. He was also active within the Statistical Society of Australia, which in 1978 named the Pitman medal in his honour. His work the Pitman measure of closeness or Pitman nearness concerning the exponential families of probability distributions has been studied extensively since the 1980s by C. R. Rao, Pranab K. Sen, and others. The Pitman–Koopman–Darmois theorem states that only exponential families of probability distributions admit a sufficient statistic whose dimension remains bounded as the sample size grows.   == Terminology == For "the sum of squares of deviations from the mean," he coined the term squariance. For "the logarithm of the likelihood" he coined the term loglihood. However, neither of these terms caught on.   == Pitman's published work (selected) == Sufficient statistics and intrinsic accuracy, Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 32, (1936), 567–579. The "closest" estimates of statistical parameters. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 33 (1937), 212–222. Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations. Suppl.J .R. Statist. Soc. 4, (1937), 119–130. Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations. II. The correlation coefficient test. Suppl. J. R. Statist. Soc. 4, (1937), 225–232. Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations. III. The analysis of variance test. Biometrika 29, (1938), 322–335. The estimation of the location and scale parameters of a continuous population of any given form, Biometrika 30, (1939) 391–421. Tests of hypotheses concerning location and scale parameters. Biometrika 31, (1939) 200–215. Statistics and science. Journal of the American Statistical Association 25, (1957), 322–330. Some remarks on statistical inference. Proc. Int. Res. Seminar, Berkeley (Bernoulli–Bayes–Laplace Anniversary Volume), (1965), 209–216. New York: Springer-Verlag.   == Autobiography == Pitman contributed a chapter, "Reminiscences of a mathematician who strayed into statistics", to the volume Joseph M. Gani (ed.) (1982) The Making of Statisticians, New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90684-3   == References == ^ Sen, Pranab K.; Keating, J. P.; Mason, R. L. (1993). Pitman's measure of closeness: A comparison of statistical estimators. Philadelphia: SIAM.  Williams, Evan J. (1994). "Edwin James George Pitman 1897–1993" (from Australian Science Archives Project). Historical Records of Australian Science 10 (2).  Sprent, P. "E. J. G. Pitman, 1897–1993". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 157 (1): 153–154. JSTOR 2983511.

Edith Abbott (September 26, 1876 – July 28, 1957) was an American economist, social worker, educator, and author. Abbott was born in Grand Island, Nebraska. Her younger sister was Grace Abbott.   == Education == Born September 25, 1876 in Grand Island, Nebraska, Edith was the daughter of Otheman Abbott and Elizabeth Griffin. In 1893, Abbott graduated from Brownell Hall, a girls' boarding school in Omaha. However, her family could not afford to send her to college, so she began teaching from the University of Nebraska in 1901. After two more years as a teacher, Abbott attended the University of Chicago and received a PhD in economics in 1905. In 1906, Abbott received a Carnegie Fellowship and continued her studies at University College London, and the London School of Economics. She learned from social reformers Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb, who championed new approaches to dealing with poverty. The Webbs influenced the direction of Abbott's career. The Webbs were in favour of repealing the British "poor laws" that they viewed as demeaning to people in poverty, and they supported establishing programs to eliminate poverty. While studying in London, Abbott lived part of the time in a social reformers' settlement in a poverty-stricken area of the East End, where she gained experience in social work. The next year, Abbott returned to the United States and taught economics for a year at Wellesley College.   == Early career == Abbott also worked as an assistant to Sophonisba Breckinridge, then director of social research at the Chicago School of Civics and Philanthropy. In that position, Abbott contributed to studies of juvenile delinquents and truants. She also created studies on women in industry and problems in the penal system. She lived with her sister, Grace, at Hull House from 1908 to 1920, associating with the men and women who worked in support of Jane Addams and her social reform causes. In 1920, Abbott and Breckinridge helped arrange the transfer of the School of Civics and Philanthropy to the University of Chicago, where it was renamed to the School of Social Service Administration. The school was the first university-based graduate school of social work. In 1924, Abbott became the school's dean, the first US woman to become the dean of an American graduate school. She served in that position until 1942, and she emphasized the importance of formal education in social work and the need to include field experience as part of that training. In 1926, Abbott helped establish the Cook County Bureau of Public Welfare. Abbott published research into several social issues: Women in Industry (1910) The Real Jail Problem (1915) Together with Breckinridge, she published the following studies: The Delinquent Child and the Home (1912) Truancy and Non-Attendance in the Chicago Schools (1917) The two women launched the influential journal Social Service Review in 1927, in addition to launching the University of Chicago Social Service Series of books and monographs, "making use of case records and public documents in a novel and striking way", as in the classics Immigration: Select Documents and Case Records (1924) and Historical Aspects of the Immigration Problem: Select Documents (1926).   == Later career == Abbott was a prominent immigration expert, working for reforms that would end exploitation of immigrants. She was appointed chair of the Committee on Crime and the Foreign Born of the Wickersham National Commission on Law Observance and Enforcement (1929–31). In 1935, Abbott helped draft the Social Security Act. From 1942 to 1953, Abbott taught and edited the Social Service Review, which she had co-founded with Breckinridge in 1927. Abbott was known to be a confidant and special consultant to Harry Hopkins, adviser to President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Abbott was also notable for being appointed to a single case on the California Supreme Court in 1950, making her the first woman to sit on the state's supreme court. During her career, Abbott wrote over 100 books and articles on a variety of topics. For this reason, she was known as the "passionate statistician." In her writing, Abbott stressed the importance and the essential need of a public welfare administration, the need for a more humane social welfare system, the responsibility of the state in relation to social problems, and the social aspects of legislation. Abbott spent her last years with her brother Arthur in the family home in Grand Island, where she died of pneumonia in 1957. She left the bulk of her estate to the Grand Island Public Library. She also left a trust for a collection of non-fiction books in memory of her mother, Elizabeth Abbott.   == Publications == Women in industry; a study in American economic history. New York; London: D. Appleton and Co., 1910.   == References ==   == External links == Harvard University Library Open Collections Program. Women Working, 1870–1930, Edith Abbott (1876–1957). A full-text searchable online database with complete access to publications written by Edith Abbott. Edith and Grace Abbott, Papers at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Abbott Family papers at Nebraska State Historical Society

Edward Henry Stanley, 15th Earl of Derby KG, PC, FRS (21 July 1826 – 21 April 1893), known as Lord Stanley from 1851 to 1869, was a British statesman. He served as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs twice, from 1866 to 1868 and from 1874 to 1878.   == Background and education == He was born to Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby, who led the Conservative Party from 1846–1868 and served as Prime Minister three times, and Emma Caroline Bootle-Wilbraham, daughter of Edward Bootle-Wilbraham, 1st Baron Skelmersdale, and was the older brother of Frederick Arthur Stanley, 16th Earl of Derby. The Stanleys were one of the richest landowning families in England. Lord Stanley, as he was styled before acceding to the earldom, was educated at Eton, Rugby and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he took a first in classics and became a member of the society known as the Cambridge Apostles.   == Political career == In March 1848 he unsuccessfully contested the borough of Lancaster, and then made a long tour in the West Indies, Canada and the United States. During his absence he was elected member for King's Lynn, which he represented till October 1869, when he succeeded to the peerage. He took his place, as a matter of course, among the Conservatives, and delivered his maiden speech in May 1850 on the sugar duties. Just before, he had made a very brief tour in Jamaica and South America. In 1852 he went to India, and while travelling in that country he was appointed under-secretary for foreign affairs in his father's first administration. On 11 March 1853, he was commissioned a captain in the 3rd Royal Lancashire Militia. From the outset of his career he was known to be more politically sympathetic to the Liberals rather than the Conservatives, and in 1855 Lord Palmerston offered him the post of Secretary of State for the Colonies. He was much tempted by the proposal, and hurried down to Knowsley to consult his father, who called out when he entered the room, "Halo, Stanley! what brings you here?—Has Dizzy cut his throat, or are you going to be married?" When the object of his sudden appearance had been explained, the Conservative chief received the courteous suggestion of the prime minister with anything but favour, and the offer was declined. On 13 May 1856, he was appointed to the Royal Commission on the purchase of commissions in the British army. In his father's second administration Lord Stanley held, at first, the office of Secretary of State for the Colonies (1858), but became President of the Board of Control on the resignation of Lord Ellenborough. He had the charge of the India Bill of 1858 in the House of Commons, became the first Secretary of State for India, and left behind him in the India Office an excellent reputation as a man of business. After the revolution in Greece and the disappearance of King Otto, the people most earnestly desired to have Queen Victoria's second son, Prince Alfred, for their king. He declined the honour, and they then took up the idea that the next best thing they could do would be to elect some great and wealthy English noble, not concealing the hope that although they might have to offer him a Civil List he would decline to receive it. Lord Stanley was the prime favourite as an occupant of this bed of thorns, and it has been said that he was actually offered the crown. That, however, is not true; the offer was never formally made.   === Foreign minister === After the fall of the Russell government in 1866 he became Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in his father's third administration. He compared his conduct in that great post to that of a man floating down a river and fending off from his vessel, as well as he could, the various obstacles it encountered. He thought that that should be the normal attitude of an English foreign minister, and probably in the circumstances of the years 1866–1868 it was the right one. He enunciated the policy of Splendid isolation in 1866 : it is the duty of the Government of this country, placed as it is with regard to geographical position, to keep itself upon terms of goodwill with all surrounding nations, but not to entangle itself with any single or monopolizing alliance with any one of them; above all to endeavor not to interfere needlessly and vexatiously with the internal affairs of any foreign country." He arranged the collective guarantee of the neutrality of Luxembourg in 1867, negotiated a convention about the Alabama, which, however, was not ratified, and most wisely refused to take any part in the troubles in Crete. In 1874 he again became Foreign Secretary in Disraeli's government. He acquiesced in the purchase of the Suez Canal shares, a measure then considered dangerous by many people, but ultimately most successful; he accepted the Andrassy Note, but declined to accede to the Berlin Memorandum. Derby's conduct during the Eastern Crisis was mysterious to many of his contemporaries and for some time thereafter. The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica could still state that Derby's "part in the later phases of the Russo-Turkish struggle has never been fully explained, for with equal wisdom and generosity he declined to gratify public curiosity at the cost of some of his colleagues. A later generation will know better than his contemporaries what were the precise developments of policy which obliged him to resign. He kept himself ready to explain in the House of Lords the course he had taken if those whom he had left challenged him to do so, but from that course they consistently refrained." The fact of the matter was that Derby's hope for peace with Russia led him (and his wife) to share Cabinet secrets with the Russian ambassador, Pyotr Shuvalov, in hopes of averting war with Russia. Robert Blake commented that "Derby surely must be the only Foreign Secretary in British history to reveal the innermost secrets of the Cabinet to the ambassador of a foreign power in order to frustrate the presumed intentions of his own Prime Minister." Derby resigned in January 1878 when the Cabinet resolved to send the British fleet through the Dardanelles, but when that action soon proved unnecessary, Derby was allowed to withdraw his resignation. However, he resigned again and finally in the same year when the Cabinet agreed to call up the reserve. By October 1879 it was clear enough that he had thrown in his lot with the Liberal Party, but it was not till March 1880 that he publicly announced this change of allegiance. He did not at first take office in the second Gladstone government, but became Colonial Secretary in December 1882, holding this position till the fall of that government in the summer of 1885. In 1886 the old Liberal party was run on the rocks and went to pieces. Lord Derby became a Liberal Unionist, and took an active part in the general management of that party, leading it in the House of Lords till 1891, when Lord Hartington became Duke of Devonshire. In 1892 he presided over the Labour Commission. He served as President of the first day of the 1881 Co-operative Congress.   == Personal life == Lord Derby married Lady Mary, daughter of George Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr and widow of James Gascoyne-Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Salisbury, in 1870. They had no children. Derby's health never recovered from an attack of influenza which he had in 1891, and he died at Knowsley on 21 April 1893, aged 66. He was succeeded in the earldom by his younger brother, Frederick. Lady Derby died in December 1900.   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Saintsbury, George. The earl of Derby (1892) online Wilson, Keith M., ed. British foreign secretaries and foreign policy: from Crimean War to First World War (Routledge Kegan & Paul, 1987)   === Primary sources === Derby, Edward Henry Stanley. Disraeli, Derby, and the Conservative Party: Journals and Memoirs of Edward Henry, Lord Stanley, 1849-1869 (Harvester Press, 1978)   == External links ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   Hamilton, John Andrew (1898). "Stanley, Edward Henry". In Lee, Sidney. Dictionary of National Biography 54. London: Smith, Elder & Co.  Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Earl of Derby

Edward Rolf Tufte(/ˈtʌfti/; born March 14, 1942) is an American statistician and professor emeritus of political science, statistics, and computer science at Yale University. He is noted for his writings on information design and as a pioneer in the field of data visualization.   == BiographyEdit == Edward Rolf Tufte was born in 1942 in Kansas City, Missouri, to Virginia Tufte and Edward E. Tufte (1912-1999). He grew up in Beverly Hills, California, where his father was a longtime city official, and graduated from Beverly Hills High School. He received a BS and MS in statistics from Stanford University and a PhD in political science from Yale. His dissertation, completed in 1968, was entitled The Civil Rights Movement and Its Opposition. He was then hired by Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School, where he taught courses in political economy and data analysis while publishing three quantitatively inclined political science books. In 1975, while at Princeton, Tufte was asked to teach a statistics course to a group of journalists who were visiting the school to study economics. He developed a set of readings and lectures on statistical graphics, which he further developed in joint seminars he taught with renowned statistician John Tukey, a pioneer in the field of information design. These course materials became the foundation for his first book on information design, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. After difficult negotiations with mainline publishers failed, Tufte decided to self-publish Visual Display in 1982 where he worked closely with graphic designer Howard Gralla. He financed the work by taking out a second mortgage on his home. The book quickly became a commercial success and secured his transition from political scientist to information expert. On March 5, 2010, President Barack Obama appointed Tufte to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act's Recovery Independent Advisory Panel "to provide transparency in the use of Recovery-related funds".   == WorkEdit == Tufte is an expert in the presentation of informational graphics such as charts and diagrams, and is a fellow of the American Statistical Association. He has held fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation and the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. His work habits are forward-looking and he is intensely critical in the self-editing process. He pulls in and casts out ideas from books, journals, posters, auction catalogs, and other less common sources. He invites others to critique his work in-progress and may nurture dozens of ideas over months in various states of growth and fruition. He deletes almost every photograph he takes. Over time, he deletes most of what he writes on his own forum, ET Notebooks. Every printing of every book corrects numerous small blemishes, ranging from color registration to kerning and hinting. This pattern of work is repeated in his sculpture: he digs through sources ranging from other art and other genres (most notably Feynman diagrams), to flea markets, nuclear power plants, and fields of grass. He is in search of forms and ideas from which to build models, table pieces, and occasionally larger landscape pieces. Even some nominally finished, large scale works are reworked heavily. But at the same time, some random sculptural equivalents of brush strokes or artifacts of a piece's former life are retained, a degree of wabi-sabi, as may be seen in Rocket Science (circa 2006–9, Hogpen Hill, Connecticut).   === Information designEdit ===  Tufte's writing is important in such fields as information design and visual literacy, which deal with the visual communication of information. He coined the word chartjunk to refer to useless, non-informative, or information-obscuring elements of quantitative information displays. Tufte's other key concepts include what he calls the lie factor, the data-ink ratio, and the data density of a graphic. He uses the term "data-ink ratio" to argue against using excessive decoration in visual displays of quantitative information. In Visual Display, Tufte explains, "Sometimes decorations can help editorialize about the substance of the graphic. But it's wrong to distort the data measures—the ink locating values of numbers—in order to make an editorial comment or fit a decorative scheme." Tufte encourages the use of data-rich illustrations that presented all available data. When such illustrations are examined closely, every data point has a value, but when they are looked at more generally, only trends and patterns can be observed. Tufte suggests these macro/micro readings be presented in the space of an eye-span, in the high resolution format of the printed page, and at the unhurried pace of the viewer's leisure. He uses several historical examples to make his case. These include John Snow's cholera outbreak map, Charles Joseph Minard's Carte Figurative, early space debris plots, Galileo Galilei's Sidereus Nuncius, and Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial. For instance, the listing of the names of deceased soldiers on the black granite of Lin's sculptural memorial is shown to be more powerful as a chronological list rather than as an alphabetical one. The sacrifice each fallen individual has made is thus highlighted within the overall time scope of the war. In Sidereus Nuncius Galilei presents the nightly observations of the moons of Jupiter in relation to the body itself, intervowen with the two-month narrative record.   === Criticism of PowerPointEdit === Tufte has criticized the way Microsoft PowerPoint is typically used. In his essay "The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint," Tufte criticizes many aspects of the software: Its use to guide and reassure a presenter, rather than to enlighten the audience; Its unhelpfully simplistic tables and charts, resulting from the low resolution of early computer displays; The outliner's causing ideas to be arranged in an unnecessarily deep hierarchy, itself subverted by the need to restate the hierarchy on each slide; Enforcement of the audience's lockstep linear progression through that hierarchy (whereas with handouts, readers could browse and relate items at their leisure); Poor typography and chart layout, from presenters who are poor designers or who use poorly designed templates and default settings (in particular, difficulty in using scientific notation); Simplistic thinking—from ideas being squashed into bulleted lists; and stories with beginning, middle, and end being turned into a collection of disparate, loosely disguised points—presenting a misleading facade of the objectivity and neutrality that people associate with science, technology, and "bullet points". Tufte cites the way PowerPoint was used by NASA engineers in the events leading to the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster as an example of the many problems. The software style is designed to persuade rather than to inform people of technical details. Tufte's analysis of a NASA PowerPoint slide is included in the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s report—including an engineering detail buried in small type on a crowded slide with six bullet points, that if presented in a regular engineering white paper, might have been noticed and the disaster prevented. Instead, Tufte argues that the most effective way of presenting information in a technical setting, such as an academic seminar or a meeting of industry experts, is by distributing a brief written report that can be read by all participants in the first 5 to 10 minutes of the meeting. Tufte believes that this is the most efficient method of transferring knowledge from the presenter to the audience and then the rest of the meeting is devoted to discussion and debate.   === Small multipleEdit === One method Tufte encourages to allow quick visual comparison of multiple series is the small multiple, a chart with many series shown on a single pair of axes that can often be easier to read when displayed as several separate pairs of axes placed next to each other. He suggests this is particularly helpful when the series are measured on quite different vertical (y-axis) scales, but over the same range on the horizontal x-axis (usually time).   === SparklineEdit === Although Tufte is said to have invented sparklines, in actuality he invented only the name and popularized it as technique. Sparklines are a condensed way to present trends and variation, associated with a measurement such as average temperature or stock market activity, often embedded directly in the text; for example: The Dow Jones index for February 7, 2006 . These are often used as elements of a small multiple with several lines used together. Tufte explains the sparkline as a kind of "word" that conveys rich information without breaking the flow of a sentence or paragraph made of other "words" both visual and conventional. To date, the earliest known implementation of sparklines was done by interaction designer Peter Zelchenko and programmer Mike Medved in early 1998.   === SculptureEdit === Beyond his academic endeavors over the years, Tufte has created sculptures, often large outdoor ones made of metal or stone, which were first primarily exhibited on his own rural Connecticut property. In 2009–10, some of these artworks were exhibited at the Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum in Ridgefield, Connecticut, in the one-man show Edward Tufte: Seeing Around. The Tufte sculpture garden in Woodbury, Connecticut is open to the public one day per year. In 2010, "the man known as 'ET'... opened a gallery, ET Modern, in New York City's Chelsea Art District" at 11th Avenue and 20th Street. The gallery closed in 2013 "after 3.5 good years".   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Works on political economyEdit ===   === Works of analytic designEdit ===   === ExhibitionsEdit === Visual Explanations: Prints and Sculptures, 2000–1, New York: Artists Space . Escaping Flatland, Los Angeles: Architecture+Design Museum, 7 November 2002 – 13 February 2003 . Seeing Around, June 13, 2009, to April 11, 2010, Ridgefield, Connecticut: Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum .   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Tufte, Edward Rolf, Website . "The Data Artist", Salon, 1997-03-10 . Tufte, Edward Rolf (2007), "Intelligent Designs", Magazine (article) (Stanford University's Alumni) . Pen and Parchment – The Beautiful Evidence of Medieval Drawings (video), The Metropolitan Museum of Art , 47 min. Swartz, Aaron, The Cognitive Style of PowerPoint (MS PowerPoint) (Presentation) . Robison, Wade; Boisjoly, Roger; Hoeker, David; Young, Stefan (2002) [1996], "Representation and Misrepresentation: Tufte and the Morton Thiokol Engineers on the Challenger", Science and Engineering Ethics (Online Ethics Center for Engineering) 8: 59–81, doi:10.1007/s11948-002-0033-2, retrieved 2013-04-17  sharply criticizes Tufte's analysis of pre-disaster non-employment of graphics in Visual Explanations. Robison was a Rochester Institute of Technology professor; Boisjoly a directly involved Thiokol engineer; Hoeker and Young freshman RIT students. Alternative link. Ivy League Rock and Roll – A day with Edward Tufte (review of a Tufte seminar, including discussion of his work) . Art Directors Club (biography, portrait and images of work) . Edward Tufte's 'Beautiful Evidence' (review), Yuri web . "Portrait of the artist", News (UK: The BBC) . Tufte, Edward Rolf (2011-06-29), "How the government conveys information", The Washington Post (interview) . ET Modern museum/gallery .

Edward Wegman is an American statistician and a professor of statistics at George Mason University. He holds a Ph.D. in mathematical statistics and is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Senior Member of the IEEE, and past chair of the National Research Council Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics. In addition to his work in the field of statistical computing, Wegman contributed a report to a Congressional hearing on climate change at the request of Republican Rep. Joe Barton. Wegman's report supported criticisms of the methodology of two specific paleoclimate studies into the temperature record of the past 1000 years, and argued that climate scientists were excessively isolated from the statistical mainstream. Subsequently, significant portions of Wegman's report were found to have been copied without attribution from a variety of sources, including Wikipedia, and a publication based on the report was retracted.   == Career == Wegman, a St. Louis, Missouri native, received a B.S. in mathematics from Saint Louis University in 1965. He then went to graduate school at the University of Iowa, where he earned an M.S. in 1967 and a Ph.D. in 1968, both in mathematical statistics. He held a faculty position at the University of North Carolina for ten years. In 1978, Wegman joined the Office of Naval Research, in which he headed the Mathematical Sciences Division. Later, Wegman served as the first program director of the Ultra High Speed Computing basic research program for the Strategic Defense Initiative's Innovative Science and Technology Office. He joined the faculty of George Mason University in 1986 and developed a master’s degree program in statistical science. Wegman is credited with coining the phrase "computational statistics" and developing a high-profile research program around the concept that computing resources could transform statistical techniques. He also has been the associate editor of seven academic journals, a member of numerous editorial boards, and the author of more than 160 papers and five books. Wegman is a member of the American Statistical Association, a former president of the International Association for Statistical Computing, and a past chairman of the Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics for the United States National Academy of Sciences. Wegman received the 2002 Founders Award from the American Statistical Association for "over thirty years of exceptional service and leadership to the American Statistical Association."   == Energy and Commerce hearing & plagiarism allegations ==  In 2006, Republican Congressman Joe Barton chose Wegman to assist the House Energy and Commerce Committee in its inquiry criticizing the multi-proxy paleoclimate reconstructions which had been dubbed the "Hockey stick graph". Wegman produced a report and offered testimony supporting published papers disputing the methodology and data used by the climate scientists. The legitimacy of this investigation was disputed, and Sherwood Boehlert as chairman of the United States House Committee on Science, Space and Technology arranged for an investigation by the National Research Council, the North Report which found that the Wegman committee's conclusions lacked substance. In October 2010, George Mason University (GMU) announced they were conducting a formal investigation into charges of plagiarism and misconduct related to the Wegman Report. In November 2010, USA Today reported that the "review of the 91-page report, by three experts... found repeated instances of passages lifted word for word and what appear to be thinly disguised paraphrases" of wording taken from the textbook Paleoclimatology: Reconstructing Climates of the Quaternary, as well as erroneous citations of data. Wegman criticized the "speculation and conspiracy theory" in the original allegations, and said that "these attacks are unprecedented" in his long career. A Nature editorial in May 2011 called the delays in GMU's inquiry "disheartening," as "long misconduct investigations do not serve anyone, except perhaps university public-relations departments that might hope everyone will have forgotten about a case by the time it wraps up," and urged resolution "as speedily as possible while allowing time for due process." In May 2011 the journal Computational Statistics and Data Analysis retracted a 2008 social network analysis based on the Wegman Report by Yasmin Said, Wegman, and others, because the paper used portions of other authors' writings without sufficient attribution. The lawyer for both authors said they stood by their work. Subsequently, USA Today reported additional concerns about separate 2009 review article authored by Wegman and Said which contained material copied without attribution from Wikipedia. Wegman, his attorney, and George Mason University declined to comment on the allegations. Ultimately, an investigation by George Mason University was completed in February 2012. The investigation found that regarding the Congressional Wegman Report, "no misconduct was involved"; while "extensive paraphrasing of another work did occur, in a background section... the work was repeatedly referenced and the committee found that the paraphrasing did not constitute misconduct". A separate university committee examining Said & Wegman's 2008 publication, based on the Wegman report, found "that plagiarism occurred in contextual sections of the article, as a result of poor judgment for which Professor Wegman, as team leader, must bear responsibility." The university's reports were not made public, but it was announced that Wegman was to receive an "official letter of reprimand" as a consequence. The decision was decried by Raymond S. Bradley, one of the scientists whose work had been copied without attribution by Said & Wegman; Bradley argued that the findings would encourage GMU students to think it acceptable to copy work without attribution. Writing in American Scientist in 2013, Andrew Gelman described Wegman as "perhaps the most prominent statistician to have repeatedly published material written by others without attribution."   == References ==   == External links == University faculty page Wegman's resume

Edwin Thompson Jaynes (July 5, 1922 – April 30, 1998) was the Wayman Crow Distinguished Professor of Physics at Washington University in St. Louis. He wrote extensively on statistical mechanics and on foundations of probability and statistical inference, initiating in 1957 the MaxEnt interpretation of thermodynamics, as being a particular application of more general Bayesian/information theory techniques (although he argued this was already implicit in the works of Gibbs). Jaynes strongly promoted the interpretation of probability theory as an extension of logic. In 1963, together with Fred Cummings, he modeled the evolution of a two-level atom in an electromagnetic field, in a fully quantized way. This model is known as the Jaynes–Cummings model. A particular focus of his work was the construction of logical principles for assigning prior probability distributions; see the principle of maximum entropy, the principle of transformation groups and Laplace's principle of indifference. Jaynes' posthumous book, Probability Theory: The Logic of Science (2003) gathers various threads of modern thinking about Bayesian probability and statistical inference, develops the notion of probability theory as extended logic, and contrasts the advantages of Bayesian techniques with the results of other approaches. This book was published posthumously in 2003 (from an incomplete manuscript that was edited by Larry Bretthorst). An unofficial list of errata is hosted by Kevin S. Van Horn.   == Notes ==   == External links == Edwin Thompson Jaynes at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Edwin Thompson Jaynes. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Cambridge University Press, (2003). ISBN 0-521-59271-2. Early (1994) version (fragmentary) of Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Book no longer downloadable for copyright reasons. A comprehensive web page on E. T. Jaynes's life and work. ET Jaynes' obituary at Washington university http://bayes.wustl.edu/etj/articles/entropy.concentration.pdf Jaynes' analysis of Rudolph Wolf's dice data

Elizur Wright (12 February 1804 – 22 November 1885) was an American mathematician and abolitionist. He is sometimes described as the "father of life insurance" for his pioneering work on actuarial tables. He is also sometimes called the "father of insurance regulation", as he campaigned that life insurance companies must keep reserves, and served as Massachusetts Insurance Commissioner.   == Early life == Wright was born in South Canaan, Connecticut, as part of a devout Christian family who held anti-slavery beliefs and instilled in him a strict moral character. His father, also named Elizur (1762-1845), graduated at Yale in 1781, and was known for his mathematical learning and devotion to the Calvinist faith. In 1810 the family moved to Tallmadge, Ohio, and the younger Elizur worked on the farm and attended an academy that was conducted by his father. The famous abolitionist John Brown attended the Academy in Tallmadge with Elizur. His home was often the refuge for fugitive slaves. In 1826, the younger Wright graduated from Yale and began to teach: first for two years in Groton, Massachusetts, then at Hudson, Ohio, as a mathematics and natural philosophy professor at Western Reserve College (1829-1833). It was during this time that Wright first encountered the writings of William Lloyd Garrison. Garrison's pamphlet, "Thoughts on African Colonization," persuaded Wright to believe that slavery should immediately be abolished, and that the American Colonization Society's effort to deport free blacks to an African colony was immoral and ineffective.   == Abolitionist == Along with Lewis Tappan, Arthur Tappan, Theodore Weld, James Birney, and other like-minded individuals, Wright founded the American Anti-Slavery Society at a convention in Philadelphia in December 1833, the year Wright had moved to New York City. Wright became the national secretary of the organization for five years. At this time, the American Anti-Slavery Society espoused the immediate abolition of slavery, called for an end to all racial prejudice and equality for all. To effect this change, members practiced a policy of "moral suasion," an appeal to people's ethics in an attempt to get them to embrace abolitionism and renounce slavery as sinful. Wright edited a large number of publications, including Human Rights (1834-1835), The Emancipator and the Quarterly Anti-Slavery Magazine (1835-1838). His continued opposition to slavery incurred the enmity of its advocates, and his house was once besieged by a mob, and an attempt was made to kidnap him and convey him to North Carolina. In 1838, he moved to Boston, where he became editor of the Massachusetts Abolitionist in April 1839. In 1846 he established the Chronotype newspaper, which he conducted until it was absorbed by the Commonwealth (1850), of which also he was for a time the editor. He was also involved in "The Great Postal Campaign" – a project whose job was to distribute abolitionist material across the country. The Anti-Slavery Society was successful in recruiting agents throughout the country to spread their message, but when Garrison and others began to broaden the scope of the Society to include women's rights and took on an anti-religion, anti-government tone, Wright and others objected and began to split from the Society in 1840. Wright became involved with the newly created Liberty Party and began to separate from the evangelists and the religious anti-slavery movements, believing that government intervention was the way to abolition. Wright was arrested and charged for aiding in the 1851 escape of Shadrach Minkins, the first black man to be seized in New England under the Fugitive Slave Act. He was not convicted. Wright was also indicted and tried for libel in consequence of his severe words for the liquor interests while publishing the Chronotype. Wright eventually became estranged from the abolitionist movement. Moreover, due partially to disappointment in his church's lack of support for the abolitionist cause, and to a slowly growing desire to find secular solutions to social problems, the formerly pious and devout Congregationalist. Eventually, Wright became an atheist.   == Business == Between 1853 and 1858, besides editing the Railroad Times, he gave his attention to invention and mechanics, constructing a spike-making machine, a water faucet, and an improvement in pipe coupling. He patented the last two, and manufactured them for a short time. According to Frank Preston Stearns, Wright became interested in life insurance as a mathematical study and read "the best works on life insurance ... with the same ardor with which young ladies devour an exciting novel." In the spring of 1852 an insurance broker "placed an advertising booklet in his hand... Elizur Wright looked it over and perceived quickly enough that no company could undertake to do what this one pretended to and remain solvent. The booklet served him for an editorial," and he embarked on a successful crusade to reform the insurance industry. He developed actuarial tables and the mathematics for calculating life insurance premiums. He campaigned for valuation laws requiring life insurance companies to hold sufficient reserves to guarantee that benefits would be paid, and nonforfeiture laws requiring the companies to provide cash surrender values. He also served as state commissioner of insurance for Massachusetts, from 1858 to 1866.[1] He devised a new formula for finding the values of policies of various terms, known as the “accumulation formula,” and, in order to facilitate his work, invented and afterward patented (1869) the “arithmeter,” a mechanical contrivance for multiplication and division, based on the logarithmic principle, a form of cylindrical slide rule.   == Public parks == Wright, a member of the Forestry Association, was instrumental in obtaining the Massachusetts Forestry Act of 1882. He initiated and promoted plans for making Middlesex Fells, an area north of Boston bordering Malden and Melrose, into a public park; although he did not succeed during his lifetime, the plan was carried out later and Middlesex Fells is Middlesex Fells Reservation to this day.   == Other activities == Wright served as an officer of the National Liberal League.   == Writings == La Fontaine, Fables (verse translation, 2 vols. 8vo, Boston, 1841; 2nd ed., New York, 1859) John Greenleaf Whittier, Ballads, and other Poems (introduction, London, 1844) A Curiosity of Law (1866) Savings Banks Life Insurance (1872) The Politics and Mysteries of Life Insurance (1873) Myron Holley, and what he did for Liberty and True Religion (1882) In addition, he wrote many pamphlets and reports.   == Notes ==   == References == James, Brewer, Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists and American Slavery, retrieved 2008-03-01   Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920). "Wright, Elizur". Encyclopedia Americana.  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Wilson, James Grant; Fiske, John, eds. (1889). "Wright, Elizur". Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography. New York: D. Appleton.    == Further reading == Wright, Philip Green and Elizabeth Quincy, Elizur Wright, the Father of modern Life Insurance. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1937.   == External links == Works by Elizur Wright at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Elizur Wright at Internet Archive The Fables of La Fontaine, translated by Elizur Wright; Project Gutenberg text. Cambridge Sketches by Frank Preston Stearns; has a section on Elizur Wright. Actuary Hall of Fame contains a brief account of Wright's life. Elizur Wright Business Papers at Baker Library Historical Collections, Harvard Business School. Elizur Wright Papers, Manuscript Division, The Library of Congress.

Elżbieta Pleszczyńska (born 20 March 1933) is a Polish full professor of statistics, activist of disability rights movement.   == Biography == M.Sc in mathematics at University of Warsaw, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry in 1956. She held position at Institute of Mathematics PAS until 1972. She received her Ph.D. in 1965 in the area of discriminant analysis ("Power of Test, and Separability of Hypothesis in Statistical Design of Experiments"). Her habilitation thesis, titled "Trend Estimation Problems in Time Series Analysis", was accepted in 1973. In 1967/8 she was visiting researcher in University of Wales (Great Britain), and in 1971/2 in University of Montreal. In 1973 she moved to the Institute of Computer Science, PAS. In 1977, 1979 and 1989 she was awarded by the Polish Academy of Science. In 1981 she visited Italy invited by CNR. In the 1990s she started (together with her team) so called grade data analysis, a science of applying copula and rank methods to problems of correspondence and cluster analysis together with outlier detection. (The adjective grade here honors statisticians of the first half of the 20th century, who called cumulative distribution functions in this way.) In 1993 the President of the Republic of Poland awarded Elżbieta Pleszczyńska with the Full Professor title in the area of mathematics. In 2000 she was an invited consultant of the Cambridge University. In the Institute of Computer Science PAS, she had been leader of the Statistical Data Analysis division for many years. According to the Polish law, professors in PAS must retire at the age of 70. Retirement in 2003, although a bit confusing, didn't stop her scientific and social activity.   === Scientific views === Prof. Pleszczyńska is known for her criticism of the classic statistical approach. Classic parametric methods, like Pearson correlation coefficient, or least squares method produce comparable results only for comparable distribution types (in practice multivariate normal distribution is being assumed). Parametric statistical tests are derived from distribution assumptions. Classic methods fail if the input data contain strong outliers, and interpretation of their results should be different for different distribution types. In practice, the underlying assumptions are often not checked, moreover they are always violated – there is no normal distribution in the real world, because every real variable is limited (for example people cannot be –170 cm or +2 km tall), and the normal distribution implies positive probability density for every real number. In most cases the real distribution is skewed or discrete, which doesn't prevent people from using normal distribution methods. The extend of this violation can be measured, but its maximum accepted level is just a convention, not mathematics. The parametric methods always work out of their conditions of use. However, their results are othen considered valid, which leads to "scientific" validation of false hypothesis. For the reasons mentioned above, Elżbieta Pleszczyńska is a strong advocate of explorative data analysis and non-parametric statistics, like Spearman's rho, Kendall's tau, or grade data analysis.   === Selected works === Kowalczyk, Teresa; Pleszczyńska, Elżbieta; Ruland, Fred (2004). Grade Models and Methods for Data Analysis with Applications for the Analysis of Data Populations. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing 151. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer Verlag. ISSN 1434-9222, ISBN 3-540-21120-9.  Pleszczyńska, Elżbieta; Szczesny, Wiesław (2002). Grade exploratory methods applied to some medical data sets. 22, 1. Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering. pp. 17–30.  Pleszczyńska, Elżbieta; Szczesny, Wiesław; Grzegorek, Maria (June 2002). Clustering Respondents in Clinical Databases Using Ordered Grade Clustering. Warszawa: in: Bobrowski L., Doroszewski J., Victor N. (eds.), Lecture Notes of the ICB Seminars Statistics and Clinical Practice, International Center of Biocybernetics, 64–69.  Bromek, T. (1991). Pleszczyńska, E., ed. Statistical inference. Theory and practice. Warszawa, Kluwer Dordrecht: PWN.    == Social work == Elżbieta Pleszczyńska has cofounded Foundation Supporting Physically Disabled Mathematicians and Computer Specialists in Warsaw (September 1990). For many years she has been the Foundation chairman. The Foundation under her leadership is mainly interested in professional rehabilitation of physically disabled (not only mathematicians and specialists), based on computer techniques, like telework. Pleszczyńska has been continuously focusing attention of the public opinion on rights of disable people, in her periodical reports.   == Private life == She has a son – journalist – and two grandchildren. She lives in Warsaw Wola district.   == References == ^ a b c d e f g (in English) http://gradestat.ipipan.waw.pl/english/tworcy.html#pleszczynska ^ a b (in Polish) http://www.impan.gov.pl/Rada/Awanse/dr.html ^ Kowalczyk, Teresa; Elżbieta Pleszczyńska; Fred Ruland (2004). Grade Models and Methods for Data Analysis with Applications for the Analysis of Data Populations. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing 151. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Springer Verlag.  ^ Example: Kendall, Maurice G. (1948). Rank Correlation Methods. London: Charles Griffin & Company Limited. pp. 108–109.  ^ (in Polish) http://www.pan.pl/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=45&Itemid=246&limit=1&limitstart=7, art. 84, 1 ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/recentpub/2004.html ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/recentpub/2005.html ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/recentpub/2007.html ^ (in English) http://www.ipipan.eu/publishing/printer/pub2008pr.html ^ Książyk, Janusz B. (2005). Olaf Matyja; Elżbieta Pleszczyńska; Marek Wiech, eds. Analiza danych medycznych i demograficznych przy użyciu programu GradeStat. Warszawa: Instytut Podstaw Informatyki PAN, Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka. pp. 7 (preface by prof. Pleszczyńska). ISBN 83-922508-0-X.  ^ a b (in English) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr_en/ ^ (in Polish) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/doeuropy5/czesc2.htm#15_lat ^ (in Polish) http://www.cs.put.poznan.pl/archiwumpti/download/Biuletyny/199103.pdf ^ (in Polish) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/doeuropy4/brosz2000_3.htm ^ (in Polish)http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/doeuropy6/art70.html ^ (in Polish)http://fpmiinr.idn.org.pl/rada.html ^ (in Polish) http://www.niepelnosprawni.pl/ledge/x/11055 ^ (in Polish) http://www.idn.org.pl/fpmiinr/publikacje.html   == External links == "The Foundation for Helping Physically Disabled Mathematicians and Computer Scientists – Warsaw". Retrieved September 9, 2008.  "Strona dla Eli Pleszczyńskiej – z okazji imienin" (in Polish). Retrieved September 9, 2008.

Emil Julius Gumbel (18 July 1891, Munich – 10 September 1966, New York City) was a German mathematician and political writer. Born in Munich, he graduated from the University of Munich shortly before the outbreak of the First World War. He was Professor of Mathematical Statistics at the University of Heidelberg. Following the murder of a friend, he attended the trial where he saw that the judge completely ignored evidence against the Brown Shirts Nazis. Horrified, he ardently investigated many similar political murders that had occurred and published his findings in Four Years of Political Murder in 1922. In 1928, he published Causes of Political Murder and also tried to create a political group to counter Nazism. Gumbel was also one of the 33 signers of the 1932 Dringender Appell. Among the Nazi's most-hated public intellectuals, he was forced out of his position in Heidelberg in 1932. Gumbel then moved to France, where he taught in Paris and Lyon, and then to the United States in 1940. He taught at the École Libre Des Hautes Études in Paris and at the New School for Social Research and Columbia University in New York City until his death in 1966. As a mathematician, Gumbel was instrumental in the development of extreme value theory, along with Leonard Tippett and Ronald Fisher. In 1958, Gumbel published a key book on the topic: Statistics of Extremes. He derived and analyzed the probability distribution that is now known as the Gumbel distribution in his honor. When he died, Gumbel's papers were made a part of The Emil J. Gumbel Collection, Political Papers of an Anti-Nazi Scholar in Weimar and Exile. These papers include reels of microfilm that document his activities against the Nazis.   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Brenner, Arthur David. Emil J. Gumbel: Weimar German Pacifist and Professor. ISBN 0-391-04101-0.  Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century. ISBN 0-8050-7134-2.    == External links == Works by Emil Julius Gumbel at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Emil Julius Gumbel at Internet Archive Emil Julius Gumbel Papers at University of Chicago Library Emil J. Gumbel Collection at the Leo Baeck Institute, New York Drawing depicting E. J. Gumbel

Emmanuel Jean Candès (born 27 April 1970) is a professor of mathematics, statistics, and electrical engineering (by courtesy) at Stanford University, where he is also the Barnum-Simons Chair in Mathematics and Statistics.   == Academic biography == Candès earned a M.Sc. from the École Polytechnique in 1993. He did his graduate studies at Stanford, where he earned a Ph.D. in statistics in 1998 under the supervision of David Donoho and immediately joined the Stanford faculty as an assistant professor of statistics. He moved to the California Institute of Technology in 2000, where in 2006 he was named the Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of Applied and Computational Mathematics. He returned to Stanford in 2009.   == Research == Candès' early research concerned nonlinear approximation theory. In his Ph.D. thesis, he developed generalizations of wavelets called curvelets and ridgelets that were able to capture higher order structures in signals. This work has had significant impact in image processing and multiscale analysis, and earned him the Popov prize in approximation theory in 2001. In 2004, Candès wrote a paper with Terence Tao that kicked off the field of compressed sensing: the recovery of sparse signals from a few carefully constructed, and seemingly random measurements. Many researchers have since contributed to this field, which has brought us the idea of a camera that can record pictures while needing only one sensor, and tools for designing distributed sensors that can communicate cheaply.   == Awards and honors == In 2001 Candès received an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. He was awarded the James H. Wilkinson Prize in Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing in 2005. In 2001, he received the Vasil A. Popov Prize as well as the National Science Foundation's highest honor: the Alan T. Waterman Award for research described by the NSF as "nothing short of revolutionary". In 2010 Candès and Terence Tao were awarded the George Pólya Prize. In 2011, Candès was awarded the ICIAM Collatz Prize Candès has also received the Lagrange Prize in Continuous Optimization, awarded by the Mathematical Optimization Society (MOS) and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM). He was also presented with the Dannie Heineman Prize by the Academy of Sciences at Göttingen in 2013. In 2014 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. In 2015 he will receive the George David Birkhoff Prize of the AMS / SIAM.   == References ==   == External links == Candès' web page at Stanford.

Emmanuel Todd (born 16 May 1951) is a French historian, anthropologist, demographer, sociologist and political scientist at the National Institute of Demographic Studies (INED) in Paris. His research examines the different types of families worldwide and how there are matching beliefs, ideologies and political systems, and the historical events involving these things.   == Life and works == Born in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, Yvelines, Emmanuel Todd is the grandson of the writer Paul Nizan, the son of the journalist Olivier Todd (fr), and the father of the historian David Todd. Todd is of Jewish descent. The historian Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, who pioneered microhistory, was a friend of the family and gave him his first history book. Aged 10, Todd wanted to become an archeologist. He studied at the Lycée international de Saint-Germain-en-Laye, where he was a member of the Communist Youth. He then studied political science at the Paris Institute of Political Studies and went on to prepare a Ph.D. in history at the Trinity college of the University of Cambridge with Peter Laslett. He defended his doctoral thesis on Seven peasant communities in pre-industrial Europe. A comparative study of French, Italian and Swedish rural parishes (18th and early 19th century) in 1976. Todd attracted attention in 1976 when he, at 25 years old, predicted the fall of the Soviet Union, based on indicators such as increasing infant mortality rates: La chute finale: Essais sur la décomposition de la sphère Soviétique (The Final Fall: An Essay on the Decomposition of the Soviet Sphere). He then worked for a time in the literary service of Le Monde daily, then returned to research, working on the hypothesis of a determination of ideologies and religious or political beliefs by familial systems (Explanation of Ideology: Family Structure & Social System, 1983). He then wrote, among other books, The Invention of Europe (1990) and The Fate of Immigrants (1994), in which he defended the "French model" of integration of immigrants.  Todd was opposed to the Maastricht Treaty in the 1992 referendum. In 1995, he wrote a memo for the Fondation Saint-Simon, which became famous — the media thereafter attributed to him the paternity of the expression "fracture sociale" (social crack or social gap), used by Jacques Chirac during the 1995 electoral campaign in order to distinguish himself from his rival Édouard Balladur. Todd, however, has rejected this paternity, and attributed the expression to Marcel Gauchet. In After the Empire: The Breakdown of the American Order (2001), Todd claims that many indices that he has examined (economic, demographic and ideological) show both that the United States has outlived its status as sole superpower, and that much of the rest of the world is becoming "modern" (declining birth rates etc.) far more rapidly than predicted. Controversially, he proposes that many US foreign policy moves are designed to mask what he sees as the redundancy of the United States. In his analysis, Putin's Russia emerges as probably a more trustworthy partner in today's world than the US. The book has been much-read although many of its more original ideas have been received with scepticism. In spite of his opposition to the Maastricht Treaty in 1992, Todd expressed himself in favour of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe in the referendum of 2005, advocating a protectionist framework at the European level for the future policies of the Union. In A Convergence of Civilizations: The Transformation of Muslim Societies Around the World (2007), written with fellow demographist Youssef Courbage, Todd criticized Samuel P. Huntington's thesis of a clash of civilizations, pointing instead to indices of a convergence in styles of life and in values among civilisations. Throughout much of this time he was working on "The Origins of Family Systems", which he has described as "his life's work". The first volume was published in 2011. He describes how in researching the book he has, over 40 years, "read more anthropology monographs than most anthropologists." He has described the book as "completed", with only the stage of writing up its second and final volume remaining. His 2015 work Qui est Charlie? Sociologie d'une crise réligieuse has become his most controversial and his most popular essay. In it, he claims that the 11th of January, 2015 marches to show solidarity with the victims of recent terrorist attacks in France were not an expression of positive French values but of racist and reactionary elements in France. The work has been accused by politicians of a seeming willingness to look aside from the reality of Islamist terrorism  while some readers accuse it of a reliance on unsupported a priori arguments while failing to consider other, more relevant political factors. The book aroused copious and emotional hostility, including a critique by the Prime Minister of France, Manuel Valls. Todd claims to have written quickly, partly out of frustration and not in a purely academic style, though he defends his arguments' basis in his decades of French demographic research.   == Quotes ==   == Essays ==   === With an English translation === The Final Fall: An Essay on the Decomposition of the Soviet Sphere (La chute finale: Essais sur la décomposition de la sphère Soviétique), 1976. Explanation of Ideology: Family Structure & Social System, 1985, translated by David Garrioch (La Troisième planète, 1983). The causes of progress: culture, authority, and change, 1987 (L'enfance du monde, 1984). The Making of Modern France: Ideology, Politics and Culture, 1988 (La Nouvelle France, 1988). After the Empire: The Breakdown of the American Order {literally, The Decomposition of the American System, compare with 1976 title} (Après l’Empire : essai sur la décomposition du système américain), 2001 in French, translated 2003/2004. A Convergence of Civilizations: The Transformation of Muslim Societies Around the World, with Youssef Courbage, 2007. Who is Charlie? Xenophobia and the New Middle Class, (Polity Press, 2015) (Qui est Charlie? Sociologie d'une crise religieuse, 2015).   === Without an English translation === The Fool And The Proletariat (Le Fou et le Prolétaire), Éditions Robert Laffont, Paris, 1979. On the pre-1914 elites of Europe, which led to WWI and totalitarianism. The Invention Of France (L'Invention de la France), with Hervé Le Bras (fr), Éditions Pluriel-Hachettes, Paris, 1981. The Invention of Europe (L'invention de l'Europe), 1990. The Fate [Destiny] of Immigrants (Le destin des immigrés), 1994. The Economic Illusion: Essays on the stagnation of developed societies (L'illusion économique. Essai sur la stagnation des sociétés développées), 1998. The Diversity Of The World: Family and Modernity (La Diversité du monde : Famille et modernité), Éditions du Seuil, coll. L'histoire immédiate, Paris, 1999. After Democracy (Après la démocratie), Gallimard.fr, Paris, 2008. Allah n'y est pour rien !, Paris, Le Publieur, coll. Arrêt sur images.net, 2011. The Origin Of Family Systems, Volume One: Eurasia (L'origine des systèmes familiaux, Tome 1: L'Eurasie), Gallimard.fr, Paris, 2011. Le mystère français, with Hervé Le Bras (fr), Paris, Le Seuil, coll. « La République des idées », Paris, 2013.   == Footnotes ==   == External links == Protectionism and Democracy, Interview with Emmanuel Todd, by Karim Emile Bitar (french), published in L'ENA hors les murs, the ENA alumni magazine. Emmanuel Todd: The Specter of a Soviet-Style Crisis translation of an interview with Le Figaro The Conceited Empire interview with Martin A. Senn & Felix Lautenschlager for The New Zuricher Interview with Emmanuel Todd, by Michael Monninger Extract from Prospect, June 2003 see also this excerpt Emmanuel Todd interview on the 'French riots' translation of an interview with Le Monde Google Video: Charlie Rose interview of Emmanuel Todd Interview starts at 38:48 in the video.[dead link] Original source -- http://www.charlierose.com/view/interview/2002 [live link but non-working video] Relevant clip -- http://youtube.com/watch?v=5OgoL8p6DtI as cited by http://www.elitetrader.com/vb/printthread.php?threadid=51993 web interview (in french) arrêt sur images 2014 Interview with Oliver Berruyer

Eric Ghysels (born in 1956 in Brussels) is a Belgian economist with particular interest in finance and time series econometrics who works in the field of financial econometrics, and is currently the Edward M. Bernstein Distinguished Professor of Economics at the University of North Carolina and a Professor of Finance at the Kenan-Flagler Business School .   == Biography == Ghysels was born in Brussels, Belgium, as the son of Pierre Ghysels (a civil servant) and Anna Janssens (a homemaker). He completed his undergraduate studies in economics (Supra Cum Laude) at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel in 1979. He obtained a Fulbright Fellowship from the Hoover Foundation, Belgian American Educational Foundation in 1980, and finished his PhD at the Kellogg Graduate School of Management of Northwestern University in 1984. Ghysels is a fellow of the American Statistical Association and co-founded with Robert Engle the Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE). He is also co-editor of the Journal of Financial Econometrics. In 2008-2009 Ghysels was resident scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and has since been a regular visitor of the bank as well as several other central bank institutions around the world working mostly on topics pertaining to Mixed data sampling regression models and filtering methods. Ghysels is also a research fellow at CIRANO, Extramural Fellow at CentER - Tilburg University, research affiliate at the Volatility Institute - New York University Stern School of Business and in 2011 Fernand Braudel Senior Fellow at European University Institute, Florence, Italy.   == Research == Ghysels' most recent research focuses on Mixed data sampling (MIDAS) regression models and filtering methods with applications in finance and other fields. He has also worked on diverse topics such as seasonality in economic times series, Generalized Method of Moment estimation and testing of asset pricing models, time varying betas, estimation of risk neutral and objective probability measures for the purpose of option pricing, among many other topics. Mixed data sampling or MIDAS regressions are econometric regression models can be viewed in some cases as substitutes for the Kalman filter when applied in the context of mixed frequency data.   == Publications == Recent work on Mixed data sampling (MIDAS) includes: Andreou, E, Eric Ghysels and A. Kourtellos (2010) Should macroeconomic forecasters use daily financial data and how?, Discussion Paper UNC. Andreou, E, Eric Ghysels and A. Kourtellos (2010) Forecasting with mixed-frequency data, Chapter prepared for Oxford Handbook on Economic Forecasting edited by Michael P. Clements and David F. Hendry Chen, Xilong, Eric Ghysels and Fangfang Wang, (2010), The HYBRID GARCH Class of Models, Discussion Paper UNC. Bai, J., Eric Ghysels and Jonathan Wright (2010), State Space Models and MIDAS Regressions, Discussion Paper UNC. Eric Ghysels and J. Wright (2009), Forecasting Professional Forecasters, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics Anderson, E., Eric Ghysels and J. Juergens (2009) The Impact of Risk and Uncertainty on Expected Returns, Journal of Financial Economics Eric Ghysels and B. Sohn (2009) Which Power Variation Predicts Volatility Well? Journal of Empirical Finance Andreou, E, Eric Ghysels and A. Kourtellos (2010) "Regression Models With Mixed Sampling Frequencies", Journal of Econometrics (Article in Press) Eric Ghysels, Santa-Clara, P. and Valkanov, R. (2005), There is a Risk-return Trade-off After All, Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 509-548. Eric Ghysels, Santa-Clara, P. and Valkanov, R. (2006) Predicting volatility: How to get most out of returns data sampled at different frequencies Journal of Econometrics 131, 59-95 Eric Ghysels, Sinko, A., Valkanov, R. (2007) MIDAS Regressions: Further Results and New Directions. Econometric Reviews, 26 (1), 53–90 Riccardo Colacito, Robert Engle and Eric Ghysels A Component Model of Dynamic Correlations, Journal of Econometrics (Article in Press) He has also published several books, including a monograph with Denise Osborn (University of Manchester) on the Econometric Analysis of Seasonal Time Series. Representative set of other publications: Ghysels, E. (1988) A Study Towards a Dynamic Theory of Seasonality for Economic Time Series, Journal of the American Statistical Association. Reprinted in Modelling Seasonality, S. Hylleberg (ed.), Oxford University Press, 181-192. Ghysels, E. and A. Hall, (1990), Are Consumption-Based Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Models Structural?, Journal of Econometrics 45, 121-139. Ghysels, E. and A. Hall, (1990), A Test for Structural Stability of Euler Conditions Parameters Estimated Via the Generalized Method of Moments Estimator, International Economic Review 31, 355-364. Ghysels, E. (1994), On the Economics and Econometrics of Seasonality.” Invited paper, 1990 World Congress of the Econometric Society, August 1990, in Advances in Econometrics I, C.A. Sims (ed.), Cambridge University Press, 257-316. Ghysels, E., C.W.J. Granger and P. Siklos (1995), Is Seasonal Adjustment a Linear or Nonlinear Data-Filtering Transformation? Invited JBES paper, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14, 139-152. Reprinted in Newbold, P. and S.J. Leybourne (2003) Recent Developments in Time Series, Edward Elgar. Reprinted in Essays in Econometrics: collected Papers of Clive W.J. Granger: Vol. I, Cambridge University Press Ghysels, E., A. Harvey and E. Renault, (1995), Stochastic Volatility, in Handbook of Statistics 14, Statistical Methods in Finance, G.S. Maddala and C. R. Rao (eds.), North Holland, Amsterdam. Ghysels, E. (1998), On Stable Factor Structures in the Pricing of Risk: Do Time-Varying Betas Help or Hurt? Journal of Finance 53, 549-573. Cao, C., Ghysels, E. and F. Hatheway, (2000), Price Discovery without Trading: The Case of the Nasdaq Pre-opening (NYSE Best Paper Award – Western Finance Association Meetings 1999, Santa Monica), Journal of Finance 55, 1339-1366. Chernov, M. and E. Ghysels, (2000), A Study Towards a Unified Approach to the Joint Estimation of Objective and Risk Neutral Measures for the Purpose of Options Valuation, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 407-458, Reprinted in Stochastic Volatility: Selected Readings, N. Shephard (ed.), Oxford University Press, 398-448, (All-Star JFE paper selection based on average yearly citations). Andreou, E. and E. Ghysels, (2002) Detecting multiple breaks in financial market volatility dynamics, Journal of Applied Econometrics 17, 579-600. Anderson, E., E. Ghysels and J. Juergens (2005), Do Heterogeneous Beliefs Matter for Asset Pricing?, Review of Financial Studies, 18, 875-924. Eriksson, A., E. Ghysels and F. Wang (2009), The Normal Inverse Gaussian Distribution and the Pricing of Derivatives, Journal of Derivatives, Spring   == External links == Eric Ghysels Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE) Journal of Financial Econometrics

Erich Leo Lehmann (20 November 1917 – 12 September 2009) was an American statistician, who made a major contribution to nonparametric hypothesis testing. He is one of the eponyms of the Lehmann–Scheffé theorem and of the Hodges–Lehmann estimator of the median of a population.   == Early life == Lehmann was born in Strasbourg, Alsace-Lorraine in 1917 to a family of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry. He grew up in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, until the Machtergreifung in 1933 his family fled to Switzerland to escape the Nazis. He graduated from high school in Zurich, and studied mathematics for two years at Trinity College, Cambridge. Following that, he emigrated to the United States, arriving in New York in late 1940. He enrolled in University of California, Berkeley as a post-graduate student—albeit without a prior degree—in 1941.   == Career == Lehmann obtained his MA in mathematics in 1942 and his PhD (under Jerzy Neyman) in 1946, at the University of California, Berkeley, where he taught from 1942. From August 1944 to August 1945 he worked as an operations analyst for the United States Air Force on Guam. He taught at Columbia University and at Princeton University during 1950–51, and then during 1951–1952 he was a visiting associate professor at Stanford University. He was an editor of "The Annals of Mathematical Statistics" and president of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of Science. In 1997, on the occasion of his eightieth birthday, the department of statistics at the University of California at Berkeley created the Erich Lehmann Fund in Statistics to support the students of the department.   == Selected publications ==   === Books === Testing Statistical Hypotheses, 1959 Basic Concepts of Probability and Statistics, 1964, co-author J. L. Hodges Elements of Finite Probability, 1965, co-author J. L. Hodges Lehmann, Erich L.; With the special assistance of H. J. M. D'Abrera (2006). Nonparametrics: Statistical methods based on ranks (Reprinting of 1988 revision of 1975 Holden-Day ed.). New York: Springer. pp. xvi+463. ISBN 978-0-387-35212-1. MR 2279708.   Theory of Point Estimation, 1983 Lehmann, Erich L. (1998). Elements of Large-Sample Theory. New York: Springer Verlag. ISBN 978-0-387-98595-4.  Reminiscences of a Statistician, 2007, ISBN 978-0-387-71596-4 Fisher, Neyman, and the Creation of Classical Statistics, 2011, ISBN 978-1-4419-9499-8 [published posthumously]   === Articles === Lehmann, E.L.; Scheffé, H. (1950). "Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation. I.". Sankhyā: the Indian Journal of Statistics 10 (4): 305–340. JSTOR 25048038. MR 39201.  Lehmann, E.L.; Scheffé, H. (1955). "Completeness, similar regions, and unbiased estimation. II". Sankhyā: the Indian Journal of Statistics 15 (3): 219–236. JSTOR 25048243. MR 72410.  Hodges, J. L.; Lehmann, E. L. (1956). "The efficiency of some nonparametric competitors of the t-test". Annals of Mathematical Statistics 27 (2): 324–335. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177728261.  Hodges, J. L.; Lehmann, E. L. (1963). "Estimation of location based on ranks". Annals of Mathematical Statistics 34 (2): 598–611. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177704172.    == References ==   == Further reading == Brillinger, D. R. (2010). "Erich Leo Lehmann, 1917-2009". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 173 (3): 683–686. doi:10.1111/j.1467-985X.2010.00645_1.x.     == External links == Erich Leo Lehmann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Ernst Engel (March 26, 1821 – December 8, 1896) was a German statistician and economist, famous for the Engel curve and the Engel's law.   == BiographyEdit == Ernst was born in Dresden in 1821. He studied at the famous mining academy of Freiberg, in Saxony, and on completing his curriculum traveled in Germany and France. Immediately after the revolution of 1848, he was attached to the royal commission in Saxony appointed to determine the relations between trade and labor. In 1850, he was directed by the government to assist in the organization of the German Industrial Exhibition of Leipzig (the first of its kind). His efforts were so successful that, in 1854, he was induced to enter the government service, as chief of the newly instituted statistical department. He retired, however, from the office in 1858. He founded at Dresden the first Mortgage Insurance Society (Hypotheken-Versicherungsgesellschaft), and as a result of the success of his work, was summoned in 1860 to Berlin as director of the statistical department, in succession to Karl Friedrich Wilhelm Dieterici. In his new office, he made himself a name of worldwide reputation. Raised to the rank of Geheimer Regierungsrat, he retired in 1882 and lived henceforward in Serkowitz, today part of Radebeul near Dresden, where he died in 1896. His investigations into the social condition of the working classes were much noted.   == WorksEdit == Engel was a voluminous writer on the subjects with which his name is connected, but his statistical papers are mostly published in the periodicals which he himself established, namely, Preuss. Statistik (in 1861); Zeitschrift des Königlichen Preußischen Statistischen Bureaus, and Zeitschrift des Statistischen Bureaus des Königreichs Sachsen. Among his works were Die Methoden der Volkszählung (“Census methods,” 1861), Die Volkszählungen, ihre Stellung zur Wissenschaft und ihre Aufgabe in der Geschichte (“Censi, their place in science and role in history,” 1862), Land und Leute des Preussischen Staates (“The Prussian land and people,” 1863), and Das Zeitalter des Dampfes (“The era of steam,” 1881).   == BibliographyEdit == Heinrich Strecker, Rolf Wiegert (1997) “Engel, (Christian Lorenz) Ernst,” pp. 280–3 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Photograph of Engel on Portraits of Statisticians  "Engel, Ernst". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.

Ernst Louis Étienne Laspeyres (November 28, 1834 – August 4, 1913) was Professor ordinarius of economics and statistics or State Sciences and cameralistics (public finance and administration) in Basel, Riga, Dorpat (now Tartu), Karlsruhe, and finally for 26 years in Gießen. Laspeyres was the scion of a Huguenot family of originally Gascon descent which had settled in Berlin in the 17th century, and he emphasised the Occitan pronunciation of his name as a link to his Gascon origins. Laspeyres is mainly known today for his 1871 development of the index number formula method for determining price increases, used for calculating the rate of inflation. A type of this calculation is known today as the Laspeyres Index. In addition to his accomplishments in price indices, Laspeyres may be counted as one of the fathers of business administration as an academic-professional discipline in Germany, and as one of the main unifiers of economics and statistics by “developing ideas which are today by and large nationally and internationally reality: quantification and operationalization of economics; expansion of official statistics; cooperation of official statistics and economic research; and integration of the economist and the statistician in one person.” (Rinne 1983) In economics, Laspeyres was to some extent a representative of the Historical School and certainly of Kathedersozialismus.   == BibliographyEdit == Books by Laspeyres Wechselbeziehungen zwischen Volksvermehrung und Höhe des Arbeitslohns, 1860 Geschichte der Volkswirtschäftlichen Anschauungen der Niederländer und ihrer Literatur zur Zeit der Republik, 1863 Der Einfluß der Wohnung auf die Sittlichkeit, 1869 Articles by Laspeyres “Mitteilungen aus Pieter de la Courts Schriften. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der niederländischen Nationalökonomik des 17. Jahrhunderts” in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1862 “Hamburger Warenpreise 1851-1860 und die kalifornisch-australische Geldentdeckung seit 1848. Ein Beitrag zur Lehre von der Geldentwertung” in Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 1884 “Die Berechnung einer mittleren Warenpreissteigerung” in Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, 1871 “Welche Waren werden im Verlaufe der Zeiten immer teurer? – Statistische Studien zur Geschichte der Preisen” in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1872 “Statistische Untersuchungungen über die wirtschaftliche und soziale Lage der sogenannte arbeitenden Klassen” in Concordia Zeitschrift für die Arbeiterfrage, 1875 “Die Kathedersocialisten und die statistischen Congresse. Gedanken zur Begründung einer nationalökonomischen Statistik und einer statistischen Nationalökonomie” in Deutsche Zeit- und Streit-Fragen, 1875 “Zur wirtschaftlichen Lage der ländlichen Arbeiter im deutschen Reich” in Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1876 “Preise (Die Bewegungen der Warenpreise in der zweiten Hälfte des 19. Jahrhunderts)”, voce nell'enciclopedia Meyers Konversations-Lexikon, 1883 “Statistischen Untersuchungen zur Frage der Steuerüberwälzung” in Finanz-Archiv, 1901 “Einzelpreise und Durchschnittspreise vegetalischer und animalischer Produkte in Preußen während der 75 Jahre 1821 bis 1895” in Zeitschrift, Prussia, Statistisches Bureau, 1901   == ReferencesEdit == Spoerer, M. (2008). "The Laspeyres-Paradox: tax overshifting in nineteenth century Prussia". Cliometrica 2 (3): 173–193. doi:10.1007/s11698-007-0018-0.  Drechsler, W. (2000). "Etienne Laspeyres' History of the Economic Thought of the Netherlanders: A Law & Economics Classic?". European Journal of Law and Economics 10 (3): 235–242. doi:10.1023/A:1026595431775.  Diewert, W. Erwin (2008). "Laspeyres, Ernst Louis Etienne (1834–1913)". In Steven N. Durlauf; Lawrence E. Blume. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (2nd ed.). The Macmillan Press. pp. 133–134. doi:10.1057/9780230226203.0934. ISBN 978-0-333-78676-5.  Rinne, Horst (1981). “Ernst Louis Etienne Laspeyres, 1834–1913”. Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik, vol. 196, pp. 194–215. Rinne, Horst (1983). “Étienne Laspeyres” in Neue Deutsche Biographie, vol. 13. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 660–661.

Ernst Filip Oskar Lundberg (2 June 1876 - 31 December 1965) Swedish actuary, and mathematician. Lundberg is one of the founders of mathematical risk theory and worked as managing director of several insurance companies. According to Harald Cramér, "Filip Lundberg's works on risk theory were all written at a time when no general theory of stochastic processes existed, and when collective reinsurance methods, in the present sense of the word, were entirely unknown to insurance companies. In both respects his ideas were far ahead of their time, and his works deserve to be generally recognized as pioneering works of fundamental importance."   == Biography == Born in 1876, Filip Lundberg's father, Philip Lundberg, was a school teacher in mathematics who died just three months after Lundberg was born. Filip's first ambition was to follow his father's career in mathematics. He studied mathematics at the University of Uppsala, graduating in 1896 and receiving his Licentiate in 1898. However, instead of becoming a teacher, Filip joined a newly founded insurance company. In 1903 Lundberg went on to defend his doctoral thesis on the probability and collective risk. He soon moved to a second company where he was appointed actuary and at the age of 28 became its managing director. From 1904 to the 1930s Lundberg s activities were divided between his everyday life and trying to understand the relationship between the concepts 'collective' and 'risk'. Lundberg's results are described in his academic publications between the years 1909 and 1930. His major work on the ruin problem were published in 1926 and 1928. From 1910 on he was a leading voice in debates about the life insurance industry and a prolific writer and debater. Lundberg advocated a cautious approach to the insurance business which emphasized consolidation before expansion. Lundberg went on to become a leader of the industry, managing other companies, serving as chairman of the Association of Swedish Life Insurance Companies for ten years and sitting on government committees on insurance. Filip Lundberg left his last position within Swedish insurance, as chairman of the board of Eir, in the same year that his collective risk theory was definitively clarified. Filip Lundberg died in 1965.   == Work == In parallel to his business career Lundberg worked on a theory of collective risk. In 1903 he finished his doctoral thesis, Approximations of the Probability Function/Reinsurance of Collective Risks. This introduced the compound Poisson process and involved work on the central limit theorem. Cramér writes that the thesis has a reputation for being impossible to understand but, that looked at now, "one cannot help being struck by his ability to deal intuitively with concepts and methods that would have to wait another thirty years before being put on a rigorous foundation." Cramér mentions later work by Andrey Kolmogorov and William Feller but it was Cramér himself who developed Lundberg's ideas on risk and linked them to the emerging theory of stochastic processes. Focardi & Fabozzi describes Lundberg's thesis as a milestone in actuarial mathematics. It was the first to define a collective theory of risk and to apply a sophisticated probabilistic formulation to the insurance ruin problem. Lundberg’s work anticipated many future developments of probability theory, including what was later to be known as the theory of point processes. Lundbergs theory, together with that of French mathematician Louis Bachelier, was in advance of its time and inspired the subsequent development of probability theory. But the type of mathematics implied by his work could not be employed completely until the development of digital computers. Because he published many of his major works in Swedish, Lundberg's work went unnoticed by the actuarial community for nearly 30 years. However, eventually Lundberg's ideas became known largely through the work of Cramér and his students. Although Lundberg published some work in German, the international scientific language of the time, Lundberg's thesis and most of his subsequent writings were in Swedish. His mathematical language did not travel easily, either.   == Discussions == Cramér, H. (1969). "Historical review of Filip Lundberg's works on risk theory". Scandinavian Actuarial Journal 1969: 6–9. doi:10.1080/03461238.1969.10404602.  K. Englund and A. Martin-Löf (2001) Ernst Filip Oskar Lundberg, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 308–311. New York: Springer. Focardi, Sergio M. & Fabozzi, Frank J. (2004). The Mathematics of Financial Modeling and Investment Management, pp. 80–81. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. Å. Grenholm et al. (1969). Filip Lundberg: Förgrundsman i svensk livförsäkring.   == See also == Ruin theory Harald Cramer Louis Bachelier   == External links == There is a photograph at Lundberg, Ernst Filip Oskar on the Portraits of Statisticians page. A biography of Lundberg can be found at the StatProb Encyclopedia Ernest Filip Oskar Lundberg

Francis Amasa Walker (July 2, 1840 – January 5, 1897) was an American economist, statistician, journalist, educator, academic administrator, and military officer in the Union Army. Walker was born into a prominent Boston family, the son of the economist and politician Amasa Walker, and he graduated from Amherst College at the age of 20. He received a commission to join the 15th Massachusetts Infantry and quickly rose through the ranks as an assistant adjutant general. Walker fought in the Peninsula Campaign and was wounded at the Battle of Chancellorsville but subsequently participated in the Bristoe, Overland, and Richmond-Petersburg Campaigns before being captured by Confederate forces and held at the infamous Libby Prison. In July 1866, he was nominated by President Andrew Johnson and confirmed by the United States Senate for the award of the honorary grade of brevet brigadier general United States Volunteers, to rank from March 13, 1865, when he was age 24. Following the war, Walker served on the editorial staff of the Springfield Republican before using his family and military connections to gain appointment as the Chief of the Bureau of Statistics from 1869 to 1870 and Superintendent of the 1870 census where he published an award-winning Statistical Atlas visualizing the data for the first time. He joined Yale University's Sheffield Scientific School as a professor of political economy in 1872 and rose to international prominence serving as a chief member of the 1876 Philadelphia Exposition, American representative to the 1878 International Monetary Conference, President of the American Statistical Association in 1882, and inaugural President of the American Economic Association in 1886, and vice president of the National Academy of Sciences in 1890. Walker also led the 1880 census which resulted in a twenty-two volume census, cementing Walker's reputation as the nation's preeminent statistician. As an economist, Walker debunked the wage-fund doctrine and engaged in a prominent scholarly debate with Henry George on land, rent, and taxes. Walker argued in support of bimetallism and although he was an opponent of the nascent socialist movement, he argued that obligations existed between the employer and the employed. He published his International Bimetallism at the height of the 1896 presidential election campaign in which economic issues were prominent. Walker was a prolific writer, authoring ten books on political economy and military history. In recognition of his contributions to economic theory, beginning in 1947, the American Economic Association recognized the lifetime achievement of an individual economist with a "Francis A. Walker Medal". Walker accepted the presidency of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1881, a position he held for fifteen years until his death. During his tenure, he placed the institution on more stable financial footing by aggressively fund-raising and securing grants from the Massachusetts government, implemented many curricular reforms, oversaw the launch of new academic programs, and expanded the size of the Boston campus, faculty, and student enrollments. MIT's Walker Memorial Hall, a former students' clubhouse and one of the original buildings on the Charles River campus, was dedicated to him in 1916.   == Background == Walker was born in Boston, Massachusetts, the youngest son of Hanna (née Ambrose) and Amasa Walker, a prominent economist and state politician. The Walkers had three children, Emma (born 1835), Robert (born 1837), and Francis. Because the Walkers' next-door neighbor was Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., the junior Walker and junior Holmes were playmates as young children and renewed their friendship later in life. The family moved from Boston to North Brookfield, Massachusetts in 1843 and remained there. As a boy he had both a noted temper as well as a magnetic personality.  Beginning his schooling at the age of seven, Walker studied Latin at various private and public schools in Brookfield before being sent to the Leicester Academy when he was twelve. He completed his college preparation by the time he was fourteen and spent another year studying Greek and Latin under the future suffragist and abolitionist Lucy Stone, and entered Amherst College at the age of fifteen. Although he had planned to matriculate at Harvard after his first year at Amherst, Walker's father believed his son was too young to enter the larger college and insisted he remain at Amherst. While he had entered with the class of 1859, Walker became ill during his first year there and fell back a year. He was a member of the Delta Kappa and Athenian societies as a freshman, joined and withdrew from Alpha Sigma Phi as a sophomore on account of "rowdyism", and finally joined Delta Kappa Epsilon. As a student, Walker was awarded the Sweetser Essay Prize and the Hardy Prize for extemporaneous speaking. He graduated in 1860 as Phi Beta Kappa with a degree in law. After graduation, he joined the law firm of Charles Devens and George Frisbie Hoar in Worcester, Massachusetts.   == Military service ==   === 15th Massachusetts Infantry === As tensions between the North and South increased over the winter of 1860–1861, Walker equipped himself and began drilling with Major Devens' 3rd Battalion of Rifles in Worcester and New York. Despite his older brother Robert serving in the 34th Massachusetts Infantry, his father objected to his youngest son mobilizing with the first wave of volunteers. Walker returned to Worcester but began to lobby William Schouler and Governor John Andrew to grant him a commission as a second lieutenant under Devens' command of the 15th Massachusetts. Following his 21st birthday and the First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861, Walker secured the consent of his father to join the war effort as well as assurances by Devens that he would receive an officer's commission. However, the lieutenancy never materialized and Devens instead offered Walker an appointment as a sergeant major, which he assumed on August 1, 1861, after re-tailoring his previously ordered lieutenant's uniform to reflect his enlisted status. However, by September 14, 1861, Walker had been recommended by Devens and reassigned to Brig. Gen. Darius N. Couch as assistant adjutant general and promoted to captain. Walker remained in Washington, D.C., over the winter of 1861–1862 and did not see combat until May 1862 at the Battle of Williamsburg. Walker also served at Seven Pines as well as at the Seven Days Battles of the Peninsula Campaign in the summer of 1862 under Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan in the Army of the Potomac.   === Second Army Corps ===  Walker remained at the Berkeley Plantation until his promotion on August 11 to major and transferral with General Couch to the II Corps of the Army of the Potomac. Although the II Corps later saw action at the battles of Antietam and Fredericksburg, the latter being under the new command of Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside, Walker and the Corps did not join Burnsides's Mud March over the winter. Walker was promoted to lieutenant colonel on January 1, 1863, and remained with the II Corps. He fought the Battle of Chancellorsville in May 1863, where his hand and wrist were shattered and neck lacerated by an exploding shell. A record of the 1880 Census indicated that he had "compound fracture of the metacarpal bones of the left hand resulting in permanent extension of his hand." Later in 1896, as the President of MIT, he would receive one of the first radiographs in the country, which documented the extent of the damage to his hand. He did not return to service until August 1863. Walker participated in the Bristoe Campaign and narrowly escaped encirclement during the Battle of Bristoe Station before withdrawing and encamping near the Berry Hill Plantation for much of the winter and spending some leave in the North. After extensive reorganization during the winter of 1863–1864, Walker and the Army of the Potomac fought in the Overland Campaign through May and June 1864. The Battle of Cold Harbor in early June took a substantial toll on the ranks of the II Corps and Walker injured his knee during the battle. In the ensuing Richmond-Petersburg Campaign, Walker was appointed a brevet colonel. However, on August 25, 1864, as he rode to find Maj. Gen. John Gibbon at the front during the Second Battle of Ream's Station, Walker was surrounded and captured by the 11th Georgia Infantry. On August 27, Walker was able to escape from a marching prisoner column with another prisoner but was recaptured by the 51st North Carolina Infantry after trying to swim across the Appomattox River and nearly drowning. After being held as a prisoner in Petersburg, he was transferred to the infamous Libby Prison in Richmond, where his older brother was also held. In October 1864, Walker was released with thirty other prisoners as a part of an exchange. Walker returned to North Brookfield to recuperate and resigned his commission on January 8, 1865, as a result of his injuries and health. At the end of the war, Maj. Gen. Winfield Scott Hancock recommended that Walker be brevetted as a brigadier general of U.S. Volunteers in recognition of his meritorious services during the war and especially his gallant conduct at Chancellorsville. On July 9, 1866, Walker was nominated by President Andrew Johnson for the award of the honorary grade of brevet brigadier general, U.S. Volunteers, to rank from March 13, 1865 (when he was age 24), for gallant conduct at the battle of Chancellorsville and meritorious services during the war. The U.S. Senate confirmed the award on July 23, 1866. After the war, Walker became a companion of the Massachusetts Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States.   == Postbellum activity == By late spring 1865, Walker regained sufficient strength and began to assist his father by lecturing on political economy at Amherst as well as assisting him in the preparation of The Science of Wealth. He also taught Latin, Greek, and mathematics at the Williston Seminary in Easthampton, Massachusetts until being offered an editorial position at the Springfield Republican by Samuel Bowles. At the Republican, Walker wrote on Reconstruction era politics, railroad regulation, and representation.   === 1870 Census === While his editorial career was moving forward, Walker called upon his own as well as his father's political contacts to secure an appointment under David Ames Wells as the Chief of the U.S. Bureau of Statistics and Deputy Special Commissioner of Internal Revenue in January 1869. On January 29, 1869, Major General J.D. Cox, who had also previously served in McClellan's army and was currently the Secretary of the Interior under President Grant's administration, notified the twenty-nine-year-old Walker that he was being nominated to become the Superintendent of the 1870 census. After he was confirmed by the Senate, Walker sought to strike a moderate reformist position free from the inefficient and unscientific methods of the 1850 and 1860 censuses; however, the required legislation was not passed and the census proceeded under the rules governing previous collections. Among the problems facing Walker included a lack of authority to determine, enforce, or control the marshals' personnel, methods, or timing all of which were regularly manipulated by local political interests. Additionally, the 1870 census would not only occur five years after Civil War but would also be the first in which emancipated African Americans would be fully counted in the census. Owing to the confluence of these problems, the Census was completed and tabulated several months behind schedule to much popular criticism, and led indirectly to a deterioration in Walker's health during the spring of 1871. Walker took leave to travel to England with Bowles that summer to recuperate and upon return that fall, despite an offer from The New York Times to join their editorial board with an annual salary of $8,000 ($143,300 in 2009), accepted Secretary Columbus Delano's offer to become the U.S. Commissioner of Indian Affairs in November 1871. The appointment was simultaneously a go-around to continue to fund Walker's federal responsibilities as Census superintendent despite Congress' cessation of appropriations for the position as well as a political opportunity to replace a scandal-ridden predecessor. Walker continued to work on the Census for several years thereafter, culminating in the publication of the Statistical Atlas of the United States that was unprecedented in its use of visual statistics and maps to report the results of the Census. The Atlas won him praise from both the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution as well as a First Class medal from the International Geographical Congress.   === Indian Bureau === Despite his Census-related efforts, Walker did not neglect his obligations as Indian Affairs Superintendent. In the post-war era, the government redoubled efforts to issue western land grants to settlers, ranchers, miners, and railroads which only served to heighten tensions with the Native American tribes who had already been displaced from their homelands as well as stripped of their ostensible sovereignty following an 1872 act of Congress. The U.S. Army and various Indian tribes engaged in open hostilities throughout the 1860s and 1870s. Walker harbored no benevolence for the Indians, characterizing them as "voluptuary," "garrulous," "lazy," "cowardly in battle," and "beggar-like" even after an expedition along the Platte River to meet various chieftains. Walker echoed Grant's recommendation that the Native Americans be secured on reservations of limited mineral or agricultural value so they could be educated and reformed. In November 1872, an eruption of settler-Indian violence in Oregon known as the Modoc War hastened Walker's disinterest in the position and he resigned as Commissioner on December 26, 1872 to take a faculty position at Yale. However, Walker also criticized his successors' graft, corruption, and abuse of power in subsequent years and published The Indian Question in 1874.   === Other engagements === 1876 was a busy year for Walker. Henry Brooks Adams sought to recruit Walker to be the Editor-in-Chief of his Boston Post after failing to recruit Horace White and Charles Nordhoff for the position. That spring, Walker was nominated to run for the Secretary of the State of Connecticut, running on a platform that would later be embodied by the "Mugwump" movement, but ultimately lost to Marvin H. Sanger by a margin of 7,200 votes out of 99,000 cast. In the summer, the faculty of Amherst attempted to recruit him to become the President, but the position went instead to the Rev. Julius Hawley Seelye to appease the more conservative trustees. Walker's rise to prominence was further accelerated by his appointment by Charles Francis Adams, Jr. as the Chief of the Bureau of Awards at the 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. Previous world expositions in Europe were fraught with national factionalism and a superabundance of awards. Walker imposed a much leaner operation replacing juries with judges and being more selective in awarding prizes. Walker won formal international recognition when he was named a "Knight Commander" by Sweden and Norway and a "Comendador" by Spain. He was also invited to serve as Assistant Commissioner General for the 1878 Paris Exposition. The Centennial Exposition affected Walker's later career by greatly increasing his interest in technical education as well as introducing him to MIT President John D. Runkle and Treasurer John C. Cummings.   === 1880 Census === Walker accepted a re-appointment as the superintendent of the 1880 Census because a new law, spearheaded by Congressman James A. Garfield, had been passed to allow him to appoint trained census enumerators free from political influence. Notably, the 1880 Census's results suggested population throughout the Southern states had increased improbably over Walker's 1870 census but an investigation revealed that the latter had been inaccurately enumerated. Walker publicized the discrepancy even as it effectively discredited the accuracy his 1870 work. The tenth Census resulted in the publication of twenty-two volumes, was popularly regarded as the best census of any up to that time, and definitively established Walker's reputation as the preeminent statistician in the nation. The Census was again delayed as a result of its size and was the subject of praise and criticism on its comprehensiveness and relevance. Walker also used the position as a bully pulpit to advocate for the creation of a permanent Census Bureau to not only ensure that professional statisticians could be trained and retained but that the information could be better popularized and disseminated. Following Garfield's 1880 election, there was wide speculation that he would name Walker to be Secretary of the Interior, but Walker had accepted the offer to become President of MIT in the spring of 1881 instead.   == Academic career ==  As his Census obligations diminished in 1872, Walker reconsidered becoming an editorialist and even briefly entertained the idea of becoming a shoe manufacturer with his brother-in-law back in North Brookfield. However, in October 1872, he was unanimously offered to fill Daniel Coit Gilman's vacated post at Yale's recently established Sheffield Scientific School led by the mineralogist George Jarvis Brush. While at Yale, Walker served as a member of the School Committee at New Haven (1877–1880) and the Connecticut Board of Education (1878–1881). Walker was awarded honorary or ad eundem degrees from Amherst (M.A. 1863, Ph.D. 1875, LL.D. 1882), Yale (M.A. 1873, LL.D. 1882), Harvard (LL.D. 1883), Columbia (LL.D. 1887), St. Andrews (LL.D. 1888), Dublin (LL.D. 1892), Halle (Ph.D. 1894), and Edinburgh (LL.D. 1896). He was elected as an honorary member of the Royal Statistical Society in 1875 and the National Academy of Sciences in 1878 where he served as the vice president from 1890 until his death. In addition to being elected as the president of the American Statistical Association in 1882, he helped found and launch the International Statistical Institute in 1885 and was named its "President-adjoint" in 1893. Walker also served as the inaugural president of the American Economic Association from 1885 to 1892. He took appointments as a lecturer at Johns Hopkins University (its first professor of economics) from 1877 to 1879, lecturer at Harvard University in 1882, 1883, and 1896, and trustee at Amherst College from 1879 to 1889.   === Wages-fund theory === Walker's scholarly contributions are widely recognized as having broadened, liberalized, and modernized economic and statistical theory with his contributions to wages, wealth distribution, money, and social economics. Although his arguments presage both neoclassical economics and institutionalism, he is not readily classified into either. As a Professor of Political Economy, his first major scholarly contribution was on his The Wages Question which set out to debunk the wage-fund doctrine as well as address the then-radical notion of obligations between the employer and the employed. His theory of wage distribution later came to be known as residual theory and set the stage for contributions by John Bates Clark on the marginal productivity theory. Despite Walker's advocacy of profit sharing and expansion of educational opportunities using trade and industrial schools, he was an avowed opponent of the nascent socialist movement and published critiques of Edward Bellamy's popular novel Looking Backward.   === Henry George debates === Beginning in 1879, Walker and the political economist Henry George engaged in a prominent debate over economic rents, land, money, and taxes. Based on a series of lectures delivered at Harvard, Walker published his Land and Its Rent in 1883 as a criticism of George's 1879 Progress and Poverty. Walker's position on international bimetallism influenced his arguments that the primary cause of economic depressions was not land speculation, but rather constriction of the money supply. Walker also criticized George's assumptions that technical progress was always labor saving and whether land held for speculation was unproductive or inefficient.   === Bimetallism === In August 1878, Walker represented the United States at the third International Monetary Conference in Paris while also attending the 1878 Exposition. Not only were the attempts by the United States to re-establish an international silver standard defeated, but Walker also had to scramble to complete the report on the Exposition in only four days. Although he returned to the U.S. in October disheartened by the failure of the conference and exhausted by his obligations at the Exposition, the trip had secured Walker a commanding national and international reputation. Walker published International Bimetallism in 1896 roundly critiquing the demonetization of silver out of political pressure and the impact of this change on prices and profits as well as worker employment and wages. Walker's reputation and position on the issue isolated him among public figures and made him a target in the press. The book was published in the midst of the 1896 presidential election pitting populist "silver" candidate William Jennings Bryan against the capitalist "gold" candidate William McKinley and the competing interpretations of the nation's leading economist's stance on the issue became a political football during the campaign. The presidential candidate and economist were not close allies as Walker advocated a double standard by all leading financial nations while Bryan argued for the United States' unilateral shift to a silver standard. The rift was heightened by the east-west divide on the issue as well as Walker's general distaste for political populism; Walker's position was supported by conservative bankers and statesmen like Henry Lee Higginson, George F. Hoar, John M. Forbes, and Henry Cabot Lodge.   === Other interests === Political Economy, the first edition published in 1883, was one of the most widely used textbooks of the 19th century as a component of the American Science Series. Robert Solow criticized the third edition (1888) for being devoid of facts, figures, and mostly full of off-the-cuff judgments on the practices and capacities of native Americans and immigrants, but generally embodying the state of the art of economics at the time. Walker also took an interest in demographics later in his career, particularly towards the issues of immigration and birth rates. He published The Growth of the United States in 1882 and Restriction on Immigration in 1896 arguing for increasing restrictions out of concern about the diminished industrial and intellectual capacity of the most recent wave of immigrants. Walker also argued that unrestricted immigration was the major reason behind nineteenth-century native American fertility decline, but while the argument was politically popular and became widely accepted in mobilizing restrictions on immigration, it rested upon a surprisingly facile statistical analysis that was later refuted. Writing on immigrants from southern Italy, Hungary, Austria, and Russia in The Atlantic, Walker claimed,  "The entrance into our political, social, and industrial life of such vast masses of peasantry, degraded below our utmost conceptions, is a matter which no intelligent patriot can look upon without the gravest apprehension and alarm. These people have no history behind them which is of a nature to give encouragement. They have none of the inherited instincts and tendencies which made it comparatively easy to deal with the immigration of the olden time. They are beaten men from beaten races; representing the worst failures in the struggle for existence. Centuries are against them, as centuries were on the side of those who formerly came to us. They have none of the ideas and aptitudes which fit men to take up readily and easily the problem of self-care and self-government, such as belong to those who are descended from the tribes that met under the oak-trees of old Germany to make laws and choose chieftains."  Based upon his experiences in the military, Walker published two books describing the history of the Second Army Corps (1886) as well as a biography of General Winfield Scott Hancock (1884). Walker was elected Commander of the Massachusetts Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States in 1883 was also the President of the National Military Historical Association.   == MIT presidency ==  Established in 1861 and opened in 1865, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) saw its financial stability severely undermined following the Panic of 1873 and subsequent Long Depression. Seventy-five-year-old founder William Barton Rogers was elected interim president in 1878 after John Daniel Runkle stepped down. Rogers wrote Walker in June 1880 to offer him the Presidency, and Walker evidently debated the opportunity for some time as Rogers sent follow-up inquiries in January and February 1881 requesting his committed decision. Walker ultimately accepted in early May and was formally elected President by the MIT Corporation on May 25, 1881, resigning his Yale appointment in June and his Census directorship in November. However, the assassination attempt on President Garfield in July 1881 and the ensuing illness before Garfield's death in September upset Walker's transition and delayed his formal introduction to the faculty of MIT until November 5, 1881. On May 30, 1882, during Walker's first Commencement exercises, Rogers died mid-speech where his last words were famously "bituminous coal".  MIT's inability to secure a more stable financial footing during this era can largely be attributed to the existence of the Lawrence Scientific School at Harvard. Given the choice between funding technological research at the oldest university in the nation, or at an independent and adolescent institution, potential benefactors were indifferent or even hostile to funding MIT's competing mission. Earlier overtures from Harvard President Charles William Eliot towards consolidation of the two schools were rejected or disrupted by Rogers in 1870 and 1878. Despite his tenure at the analogous Sheffield School of Yale University, Walker remained committed to MIT's independence from a larger institution. Walker also repeatedly received overtures from Leland Stanford to become the first president of his new university in Palo Alto, California, but Walker remained committed to MIT owing to his Boston upbringing.   === Aid and expansion === In light of the difficulties in raising capital for these expansions and despite MIT's privately endowed status, Walker and other members of the Corporation lobbied the Massachusetts legislature for a $200,000 grant to aid in the industrial development of the Commonwealth ($4,446,000 in 2009 dollars). After intensive negotiations that called upon Walker's extensive connections and civic experience, in 1887 the legislature made a grant of $300,000 over two years to the Institute, which would lead to a total of $1.6 million in grants from the Commonwealth before the practice was discontinued in 1921.  Walker sought to erect a new building to address the increasingly cramped conditions of the original Boylston Street campus located near Copley Square, in the increasingly fashionable and crowded Back Bay neighborhood of Boston. Because the stipulations of the original land grant prevented MIT from covering more than two-ninths of its current lot, Walker announced his intention to build the industrial expansion on a lot directly across from the Trinity Church fully intending that expected opposition would lead to favorable terms for selling the proposed land and funding construction elsewhere. With the financial health of the Institute only beginning to recover, Walker began construction on the partially-funded expansion, fully expecting the immediacy of the project to be a persuasive tool for raising its funds. The strategy was only partially successful, as the 1883 building had laboratory facilities that were second-to-none but also lacked the outward architectural grandeur of its sister building and was generally considered an eyesore on its surroundings. Mechanical shops were moved out of the original Rogers Building in the mid-1880s to accommodate other programs, and in 1892 the Institute began construction on another Copley Square building. New programs were also launched under Walker's tenure: Electrical Engineering in 1882, Chemical Engineering in 1888, Sanitary Engineering in 1889, Geology in 1890, Naval Architecture in 1893.   === Reforms === Although Walker continued Census-related activities, he began to lecture on political economy as well as establishing a new general course of study (Course IX) emphasizing economics, history, law, English, and modern languages. Walker also set out to reform and expand the Institute's organization by creating a smaller Executive Committee, apart from the fifty-member Corporation, to handle regular administrative issues. Walker emphasized the importance of faculty governance by regularly attending their meetings and seeking their advice on major decisions.  Walker also sought to improve the state of student life and alumni relations by supporting the creation of a gymnasium, dormitories, and the Technology Club, which served to foster a stronger identity and loyalty among the largely commuter student body. He also won considerable praise from the student body by reducing the required time spent for recitation and preparation, limiting the faculty to examinations lasting no longer than three hours, expanding entrance examinations to other cities, starting a summer curriculum, and launching masters and doctoral graduate degree programs. These reforms were largely a response to Walker's on-going defense of the Institute and its curriculum from outside accusations of overwork, poor writing, inapplicable skills, and status as a "mere" trade school. Between 1881 and 1897, enrollments quadrupled from 302 to 1,198 students, annual degrees granted increased from 28 to 179, faculty appointments quadrupled from 38 to 156, and the endowment grew thirteenfold from $137,000 to $1,798,000 ($3,046,000 to $46,367,000 in 2009 dollars). While MIT is a private institution, Walker's extensive civic activities as President set the precedent for future presidents to use the post to fulfill civic and cultural obligations throughout Boston. He served as a member of the Massachusetts Board of Education (1882–1890), Boston School Committee (1885–1888), Boston Art Commission (1885–1897), Boston Park Commission (1890–1896), Massachusetts Historical Society (1883–1897), and a trustee of the Boston Public Library in 1896. Walker was committed to a variety of reforms in public and normal schools such as secular curricula, expanding the emphasis on arithmetic, reducing the emphasis on ineffectual home exercises, and increasing the pay and training of teachers.   == Personal life ==  Walker married Exene Evelyn Stoughton on August 16, 1865 (born October 11, 1840). They had five sons and two daughters together: Stoughton (b. June 3, 1866), Lucy (b. September 1, 1867), Francis (b. 1870–1871), Ambrose (b. December 28, 1870), Eveline (b. 1875–1876), Etheredge (b. 1876–1877), and Stuart (b. 1878–1879). Walker was an avid spectator and supporter of college football and baseball, and was a regular Yale enthusiast at the annual Harvard-Yale football game, even during his MIT presidency. Following a trip to a dedication in the "wilderness of Northern New York" in December 1896, Walker returned exhausted and ill. He died on January 5, 1897 as a result of apoplexy. His funeral service was conducted at Trinity Church, and Walker was buried at Walnut Grove cemetery in North Brookfield, Massachusetts. His grave can be found in Section 1 Lot 72.   == Legacy ==  Following Walker's death, alumni and students began to raise funds to construct a monument to him and his fifteen years as leader of the university. Although the funds were easily raised, plans were delayed for over two decades as MIT made plans to move to a new campus on the western bank of the Charles River in Cambridge. The new Beaux-Arts campus opened in 1916, and featured a neo-classical Walker Memorial building housing a gymnasium, students' club and lounge, and a commons room. Despite his prominence and leadership in the fields of economics, statistics, and political economy, Walker's Course IX on General Studies was dissolved shortly after his death, and a seventy-year debate followed over the appropriate role and scope of humanistic and social studies at MIT. Graduation requirements changed over the years, but have always included some number of courses in the humanities. Since 1975, all undergraduate students are required to take eight classes distributed across the MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences before receiving their degrees. To address continuing concerns about poor communications skills, a Communication Requirement has been added for two of the classes taken in a designated major to be "communication-intensive", including "substantial instruction and practice in oral presentation". Beginning in 1947, the American Economic Association recognized the lifetime achievement of an individual economist with a "Francis A. Walker Medal". The quinquennial award was discontinued in 1982 after the creation of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences effectively made it superfluous. The medal was awarded to Wesley Clair Mitchell in 1947, John Maurice Clark in 1952, Frank Knight in 1957, Jacob Viner in 1962, Alvin Hansen in 1967, Theodore Schultz in 1972, and Simon Kuznets in 1977.   == Principal works == The Indian Question (1874) The Wages Question: A treatise on Wages and the Wages Class (1876) Money (1878) Money in its Relation to Trade and Industry (1879) Political Economy (first edition, 1883) Land and its Rent (1883) History of the Second Army Corps (1886) Life of General Hancock (1894) The Making of the Nation (1895) International Bimetallism (1896)   == See also ==  List of American Civil War generals List of Massachusetts generals in the American Civil War   == Notes ==   == References == "Statisticians in History: Francis Amasa Walker". American Statistical Association. Retrieved 2009-06-18.  Adelstein, Richard P. (1988). "Mind and Hand: Economics and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology". In William J. Barber. Economists and higher learning in the nineteenth century. Middletown, Conn.: Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 0-8195-5176-7.  Billings, John S. (1902). "Biographical Memoir of Francis Amasa Walker 1840–1897" (PDF). National Academy Press.  Cord, Steven B. (2003). "Walker: the General Leads the Charge". The American Journal of Economics and Sociology 62 (5): 231–243. doi:10.1111/j.0002-9246.2003.00262.x.  Dewey, Davis R. (1897). "Francis A. Walker as a Public Man". In Albert Shaw. The Review of Reviews, January–June 1897 XV. New York: The Review of Reviews Co. pp. 166–171.  Dunbar, Charles F. (July 1897). "The Career of Francis Amasa Walker". Quarterly Journal of Economics 11 (4): 436–448. JSTOR 1880719.  Eicher, John H.; Eicher, David J. (2001). Civil War High Commands. Stanford University Press. ISBN 0-8047-3641-3.  Fitzpatrick, Paul J. (1957). "Leading American Statisticians in the Nineteenth Century". Journal of the American Statistical Association 52 (279): 301–321. doi:10.2307/2280901.  Fonseca, Gonçalo L. "Francis Amasa Walker". History of Economic Thought. Retrieved 2009.  Hadley, Arthur Twining (1897). "Francis A. Walker's Contributions to Economic Theory". Political Science Quarterly (The Academy of Political Science) 12 (2): 295–308. doi:10.2307/2140123. JSTOR 2140123.  Harnwell, Susan L. (2008). "Francis Amasa Walker". 15th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry in the Civil War.  Hodgson, Dennis (1992). "Ideological Currents and the Interpretation of Demographic Trends: The Case of Francis Amasa Walker". Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 28 (1): 28–44. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(199201)28:1<28::AID-JHBS2300280103>3.0.CO;2-L.  Hunt, Jack R.; Brown (1990). Brevet Brigadier Generals in Blue. Gaithersburg, MD: Olde Soldier Books. ISBN 1-56013-002-4.  Kinnahan, Thomas P. (2008). "Charting Progress: Francis Amasa Walker's Statistical Atlas of the United States and Narratives of Western Expansion". American Quarterly 60 (2): 399–423. doi:10.1353/aq.0.0012.  Munroe, James P. (1923). A Life of Francis Amasa Walker. New York: Henry Holt & Company.  Newton, B. (1968). The Economics of Francis Amasa Walker: American Economics in Transition. New York: A. M. Kelley.  Parrington, Vernon Louis (1927). "Francis A. Walker". Main Currents in American Thought 3. Harcourt, Brace, and Co. pp. 111–117. ISBN 0-7812-5283-0.  Spencer, Joseph Jansen (1897). "General Francis A. Walker: A Character Sketch". In Albert Shaw. The Review of Reviews, January–June 1897 XV. New York: The Review of Reviews Co. pp. 159–166.  Solow, Robert M. (1987). "What do we know that Francis Amasa Walker didn't?". History of Political Economy 19 (2): 183–189. doi:10.1215/00182702-19-2-183.  A.W. Ward, W.P. Trent; et al., eds. (1907–1921). "Francis Amasa Walker". The Cambridge history of English and American literature. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.  Whitaker, John K. (1997). "Enemies or Allies? Henry George and Francis Amasa Walker One Century Later". Journal of Economic Literature 35 (4): 1891–1915.  Wright, Carroll D. (1897). "Francis Amasa Walker". Publications of the American Statistical Association (American Statistical Association) 5 (38): 245–275. doi:10.2307/2276668. JSTOR 2276668.    == External links == Biographical note – MIT Archives Biographical note – New School Works by Francis Amasa Walker at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Francis Amasa Walker at Internet Archive  "Walker, Amasa". The American Cyclopædia. 1879.   "Walker, Amasa". Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography. 1889.   "Walker, Francis Amasa". New International Encyclopedia. 1905.

Sir Francis Galton, FRS (/ˈfrɑːnsɪs ˈɡɔːltən/; 16 February 1822 – 17 January 1911) was an English Victorian statistician, progressive, polymath, sociologist, psychologist, anthropologist, eugenicist, tropical explorer, geographer, inventor, meteorologist, proto-geneticist and psychometrician. He was knighted in 1909. Galton produced over 340 papers and books. He also created the statistical concept of correlation and widely promoted regression toward the mean. He was the first to apply statistical methods to the study of human differences and inheritance of intelligence, and introduced the use of questionnaires and surveys for collecting data on human communities, which he needed for genealogical and biographical works and for his anthropometric studies. He was a pioneer in eugenics, coining the term itself and the phrase "nature versus nurture". His book Hereditary Genius (1869) was the first social scientific attempt to study genius and greatness. As an investigator of the human mind, he founded psychometrics (the science of measuring mental faculties) and differential psychology and the lexical hypothesis of personality. He devised a method for classifying fingerprints that proved useful in forensic science. He also conducted research on the power of prayer, concluding it had none by its null effects on the longevity of those prayed for. His quest for the scientific principles of diverse phenomena extended even to the optimal method for making tea. As the initiator of scientific meteorology, he devised the first weather map, proposed a theory of anticyclones, and was the first to establish a complete record of short-term climatic phenomena on a European scale. He also invented the Galton Whistle for testing differential hearing ability. He was Charles Darwin's half-cousin.   == Early life == Galton was born at "The Larches", a large house in the Sparkbrook area of Birmingham, England, built on the site of "Fair Hill", the former home of Joseph Priestley, which the botanist William Withering had renamed. He was Charles Darwin's half-cousin, sharing the common grandparent Erasmus Darwin. His father was Samuel Tertius Galton, son of Samuel "John" Galton. The Galtons were famous and highly successful Quaker gun-manufacturers and bankers, while the Darwins were distinguished in medicine and science. He was cousin of Douglas Strutt Galton and half-cousin of Charles Darwin and both families boasted Fellows of the Royal Society and members who loved to invent in their spare time. Both Erasmus Darwin and Samuel Galton were founding members of the famous Lunar Society of Birmingham, whose members included Boulton, Watt, Wedgwood, Priestley, Edgeworth, and other distinguished scientists and industrialists. Likewise, both families were known for their literary talent: Erasmus Darwin composed lengthy technical treatises in verse; Galton's aunt Mary Anne Galton wrote on aesthetics and religion, and her notable autobiography detailed the unique environment of her childhood populated by Lunar Society members.  Galton was by many accounts a child prodigy – he was reading by the age of two; at age five he knew some Greek, Latin and long division, and by the age of six he had moved on to adult books, including Shakespeare for pleasure, and poetry, which he quoted at length (Bulmer 2003, p. 4). Later in life, Galton would propose a connection between genius and insanity based on his own experience. He stated, "Men who leave their mark on the world are very often those who, being gifted and full of nervous power, are at the same time haunted and driven by a dominant idea, and are therefore within a measurable distance of insanity" Galton attended King Edward's School, Birmingham, but chafed at the narrow classical curriculum and left at 16. His parents pressed him to enter the medical profession, and he studied for two years at Birmingham General Hospital and King's College London Medical School. He followed this up with mathematical studies at Trinity College, University of Cambridge, from 1840 to early 1844. According to the records of the United Grand Lodge of England, it was in February 1844 that Galton became a freemason at the so-called Scientific lodge, held at the Red Lion Inn in Cambridge, progressing through the three masonic degrees as follows: Apprentice, 5 February 1844; Fellow Craft, 11 March 1844; Master Mason, 13 May 1844. A curious note in the record states: "Francis Galton Trinity College student, gained his certificate 13 March 1845". One of Galton's masonic certificates from Scientific lodge can be found among his papers at University College, London. A severe nervous breakdown altered Galton's original intention to try for honours. He elected instead to take a "poll" (pass) B.A. degree, like his half-cousin Charles Darwin (Bulmer 2003, p. 5). (Following the Cambridge custom, he was awarded an M.A. without further study, in 1847.) He then briefly resumed his medical studies. The death of his father in 1844 had left him financially independent but emotionally destitute, and he terminated his medical studies entirely, turning to foreign travel, sport and technical invention. In his early years Galton was an enthusiastic traveller, and made a notable solo trip through Eastern Europe to Constantinople, before going up to Cambridge. In 1845 and 1846 he went to Egypt and travelled down the Nile to Khartoum in the Sudan, and from there to Beirut, Damascus and down the Jordan. In 1850 he joined the Royal Geographical Society, and over the next two years mounted a long and difficult expedition into then little-known South West Africa (now Namibia). He wrote a successful book on his experience, "Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa". He was awarded the Royal Geographical Society's Founder's Gold Medal in 1853 and the Silver Medal of the French Geographical Society for his pioneering cartographic survey of the region (Bulmer 2003, p. 16). This established his reputation as a geographer and explorer. He proceeded to write the best-selling The Art of Travel, a handbook of practical advice for the Victorian on the move, which went through many editions and is still in print. In January 1853 Galton met Louisa Jane Butler (1822–1897) at his neighbour's home and they were married on 1 August 1853. The union of 43 years proved childless.   == Middle years == Galton was a polymath who made important contributions in many fields of science, including meteorology (the anti-cyclone and the first popular weather maps), statistics (regression and correlation), psychology (synaesthesia), biology (the nature and mechanism of heredity), and criminology (fingerprints). Much of this was influenced by his penchant for counting or measuring. Galton prepared the first weather map published in The Times (1 April 1875, showing the weather from the previous day, 31 March), now a standard feature in newspapers worldwide. He became very active in the British Association for the Advancement of Science, presenting many papers on a wide variety of topics at its meetings from 1858 to 1899 (Bulmer 2003, p. 29). He was the general secretary from 1863 to 1867, president of the Geographical section in 1867 and 1872, and president of the Anthropological Section in 1877 and 1885. He was active on the council of the Royal Geographical Society for over forty years, in various committees of the Royal Society, and on the Meteorological Council. James McKeen Cattell, a student of Wilhelm Wundt who had been reading Galton's articles, decided he wanted to study under him. He eventually built a professional relationship with Galton, measuring subjects and working together on research. In 1888, Galton established a lab in the science galleries of the South Kensington Museum. In Galton's lab, participants could be measured to gain knowledge of their strengths and weaknesses. Galton also used these data for his own research. He would typically charge people a small fee for his services. During this time, Galton wrote a controversial letter to the Times titled 'Africa for the Chinese', where he argued that the Chinese, as a race capable of high civilisation and (in his opinion) only temporarily stunted by the recent failures of Chinese dynasties, should be encouraged to immigrate to Africa and displace the supposedly inferior aboriginal blacks.   == Heredity and eugenics ==  The publication by his cousin Charles Darwin of The Origin of Species in 1859 was an event that changed Galton's life (Forrest 1974, p. 84). He came to be gripped by the work, especially the first chapter on "Variation under Domestication," concerning animal breeding. Galton devoted much of the rest of his life to exploring variation in human populations and its implications, at which Darwin had only hinted. In so doing, he established a research program which embraced multiple aspects of human variation, from mental characteristics to height; from facial images to fingerprint patterns. This required inventing novel measures of traits, devising large-scale collection of data using those measures, and in the end, the discovery of new statistical techniques for describing and understanding the data. Galton was interested at first in the question of whether human ability was hereditary, and proposed to count the number of the relatives of various degrees of eminent men. If the qualities were hereditary, he reasoned, there should be more eminent men among the relatives than among the general population. To test this, he invented the methods of historiometry. Galton obtained extensive data from a broad range of biographical sources which he tabulated and compared in various ways. This pioneering work was described in detail in his book Hereditary Genius in 1869. Here he showed, among other things, that the numbers of eminent relatives dropped off when going from the first degree to the second degree relatives, and from the second degree to the third. He took this as evidence of the inheritance of abilities. Galton recognised the limitations of his methods in these two works, and believed the question could be better studied by comparisons of twins. His method envisaged testing to see if twins who were similar at birth diverged in dissimilar environments, and whether twins dissimilar at birth converged when reared in similar environments. He again used the method of questionnaires to gather various sorts of data, which were tabulated and described in a paper The history of twins in 1875. In so doing he anticipated the modern field of behaviour genetics, which relies heavily on twin studies. He concluded that the evidence favoured nature rather than nurture. He also proposed adoption studies, including trans-racial adoption studies, to separate the effects of heredity and environment. Galton recognised that cultural circumstances influenced the capability of a civilisation's citizens, and their reproductive success. In Hereditary Genius, he envisaged a situation conducive to resilient and enduring civilisation as follows:  The best form of civilization in respect to the improvement of the race, would be one in which society was not costly; where incomes were chiefly derived from professional sources, and not much through inheritance; where every lad had a chance of showing his abilities, and, if highly gifted, was enabled to achieve a first-class education and entrance into professional life, by the liberal help of the exhibitions and scholarships which he had gained in his early youth; where marriage was held in as high honour as in ancient Jewish times; where the pride of race was encouraged (of course I do not refer to the nonsensical sentiment of the present day, that goes under that name); where the weak could find a welcome and a refuge in celibate monasteries or sisterhoods, and lastly, where the better sort of emigrants and refugees from other lands were invited and welcomed, and their descendants naturalised. (p. 362)  Galton invented the term eugenics in 1883 and set down many of his observations and conclusions in a book, Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development. He believed that a scheme of 'marks' for family merit should be defined, and early marriage between families of high rank be encouraged by provision of monetary incentives. He pointed out some of the tendencies in British society, such as the late marriages of eminent people, and the paucity of their children, which he thought were dysgenic. He advocated encouraging eugenic marriages by supplying able couples with incentives to have children. On 29 October 1901, Galton chose to address eugenic issues when he delivered the second Huxley lecture at the Royal Anthropological Institute The Eugenics Review, the journal of the Eugenics Education Society, commenced publication in 1909. Galton, the Honorary President of the society, wrote the foreword for the first volume. The First International Congress of Eugenics was held in July 1912. Winston Churchill and Carls Elliot were among the attendees.   == Empirical test of pangenesis and Lamarckism == Galton conducted wide-ranging inquiries into heredity which led him to challenge Charles Darwin's hypothetical theory of pangenesis. Darwin had proposed as part of this hypothesis that certain particles, which he called "gemmules" moved throughout the body and were also responsible for the inheritance of acquired characteristics. Galton, in consultation with Darwin, set out to see if they were transported in the blood. In a long series of experiments in 1869 to 1871, he transfused the blood between dissimilar breeds of rabbits, and examined the features of their offspring. He found no evidence of characters transmitted in the transfused blood (Bulmer 2003, pp. 116–118). Darwin challenged the validity of Galton's experiment, giving his reasons in an article published in Nature where he wrote:  Now, in the chapter on Pangenesis in my Variation of Animals and Plants under Domestication I have not said one word about the blood, or about any fluid proper to any circulating system. It is, indeed, obvious that the presence of gemmules in the blood can form no necessary part of my hypothesis; for I refer in illustration of it to the lowest animals, such as the Protozoa, which do not possess blood or any vessels; and I refer to plants in which the fluid, when present in the vessels, cannot be considered as true blood." He goes on to admit: "Nevertheless, when I first heard of Mr. Galton's experiments, I did not sufficiently reflect on the subject, and saw not the difficulty of believing in the presence of gemmules in the blood.  Galton explicitly rejected the idea of the inheritance of acquired characteristics (Lamarckism), and was an early proponent of "hard heredity" through selection alone. He came close to rediscovering Mendel's particulate theory of inheritance, but was prevented from making the final breakthrough in this regard because of his focus on continuous, rather than discrete, traits (now known as polygenic traits). He went on to found the biometric approach to the study of heredity, distinguished by its use of statistical techniques to study continuous traits and population-scale aspects of heredity. This approach was later taken up enthusiastically by Karl Pearson and W.F.R. Weldon; together, they founded the highly influential journal Biometrika in 1901. (R.A. Fisher would later show how the biometrical approach could be reconciled with the Mendelian approach. ) The statistical techniques that Galton invented (correlation, regression—see below) and phenomena he established (regression to the mean) formed the basis of the biometric approach and are now essential tools in all the social sciences.   == Innovations in statistics and psychological theory ==   === Historiometry === The method used in Hereditary Genius has been described as the first example of historiometry. To bolster these results, and to attempt to make a distinction between 'nature' and 'nurture' (he was the first to apply this phrase to the topic), he devised a questionnaire that he sent out to 190 Fellows of the Royal Society. He tabulated characteristics of their families, such as birth order and the occupation and race of their parents. He attempted to discover whether their interest in science was 'innate' or due to the encouragements of others. The studies were published as a book, English men of science: their nature and nurture, in 1874. In the end, it promoted the nature versus nurture question, though it did not settle it, and provided some fascinating data on the sociology of scientists of the time.   === The Lexical Hypothesis === Sir Francis was the first scientist to recognise what is now known as the Lexical hypothesis. This is the idea that the most salient and socially relevant personality differences in people's lives will eventually become encoded into language. The hypothesis further suggests that by sampling language, it is possible to derive a comprehensive taxonomy of human personality traits.   === The questionnaire === Galton's inquiries into the mind involved detailed recording of people's subjective accounts of whether and how their minds dealt with phenomena such as mental imagery. To better elicit this information, he pioneered the use of the questionnaire. In one study, he asked his fellow members of the Royal Society of London to describe mental images that they experienced. In another, he collected in-depth surveys from eminent scientists for a work examining the effects of nature and nurture on the propensity toward scientific thinking.   === Variance and standard deviation === Core to any statistical analysis is the concept that measurements vary: they have both a central tendency, or mean, and a spread around this central value, or variance. In the late 1860s, Galton conceived of a measure to quantify normal variation: the standard deviation. Galton was a keen observer. In 1906, visiting a livestock fair, he stumbled upon an intriguing contest. An ox was on display, and the villagers were invited to guess the animal's weight after it was slaughtered and dressed. Nearly 800 participated, but not one person hit the exact mark: 1,198 pounds. Galton stated that "the middlemost estimate expresses the vox populi, every other estimate being condemned as too low or too high by a majority of the voters", and calculated this value (in modern terminology, the median) as 1,207 pounds. To his surprise, this was within 0.8% of the weight measured by the judges. Soon afterwards, he acknowledged that the mean of the guesses, at 1,197 pounds, was even more accurate. The same year, Galton suggested in a letter to the journal Nature a better method of cutting a round cake by avoiding making radial incisions.   === Experimental derivation of the normal distribution === Studying variation, Galton invented the quincunx, a pachinko-like device, also known as the bean machine, as a tool for demonstrating the law of error and the normal distribution (Bulmer 2003, p. 4).   === Bivariate normal distribution === He also discovered the properties of the bivariate normal distribution and its relationship to regression analysis.   === Correlation and regression ===  In 1846, the French physicist Auguste Bravais (1811–1863) first developed what would become the correlation coefficient. After examining forearm and height measurements, Galton independently rediscovered the concept of correlation in 1888 (Bulmer 2003, pp. 191–196) and demonstrated its application in the study of heredity, anthropology, and psychology. Galton's later statistical study of the probability of extinction of surnames led to the concept of Galton–Watson stochastic processes (Bulmer 2003, pp. 182–184). This is now a core of modern statistics and regression. Galton invented the use of the regression line (Bulmer 2003, p. 184) and for the choice of r (for reversion or regression) to represent the correlation coefficient. In the 1870s and 1880s he was a pioneer in the use of normal theory to fit histograms to actual tabulated data, much of which he collected himself: for instance large samples of sibling and parental height. Consideration of the results from these empirical studies lead to his further insights into evolution, natural selection, and regression to the mean.   === Regression to mediocrity === Galton was the first to describe and explain the common phenomenon of regression toward the mean, which he first observed in his experiments on the size of the seeds of successive generations of sweet peas. The conditions under which regression toward the mean occurs depend on the way the term is mathematically defined. Galton first observed the phenomenon in the context of simple linear regression of data points. Galton developed the following model: pellets fall through a quincunx or "bean machine" forming a normal distribution centered directly under their entrance point. These pellets could then be released down into a second gallery (corresponding to a second measurement occasion. Galton then asked the reverse question "from where did these pellets come?"  The answer was not "on average directly above". Rather it was "on average, more towards the middle", for the simple reason that there were more pellets above it towards the middle that could wander left than there were in the left extreme that could wander to the right, inwards (p. 477)    === Theories of perception === Galton went beyond measurement and summary to attempt to explain the phenomena he observed. Among such developments, he proposed an early theory of ranges of sound and hearing, and collected large quantities of anthropometric data from the public through his popular and long-running Anthropometric Laboratory, which he established in 1884, and where he studied over 9,000 people. It was not until 1985 that these data were analysed in their entirety.   === Differential psychology === Galton's study of human abilities ultimately led to the foundation of differential psychology and the formulation of the first mental tests. He was interested in measuring humans in every way possible. This included measuring their ability to make sensory discrimination which he assumed was linked to intellectual prowess. Galton suggested that individual differences in general ability are reﬂected in performance on relatively simple sensory capacities and in speed of reaction to a stimulus, variables that could be objectively measured by tests of sensory discrimination and reaction time. He also measured how quickly people reacted which he later linked to internal wiring which ultimately limited intelligence ability. Throughout his research Galton assumed that people who reacted faster were more intelligent than others.   === Composite photography === Galton also devised a technique called "composite portraiture" (produced by superimposing multiple photographic portraits of individuals' faces registered on their eyes) to create an average face (see averageness). In the 1990s, a hundred years after his discovery, much psychological research has examined the attractiveness of these faces, an aspect that Galton had remarked on in his original lecture. Others, including Sigmund Freud in his work on dreams, picked up Galton's suggestion that these composites might represent a useful metaphor for an Ideal type or a concept of a "natural kind" (see Eleanor Rosch)—such as Jewish men, criminals, patients with tuberculosis, etc.—onto the same photographic plate, thereby yielding a blended whole, or "composite", that he hoped could generalise the facial appearance of his subject into an "average" or "central type". (See also entry Modern physiognomy under Physiognomy). This work began in the 1880s while the Jewish scholar Joseph Jacobs studied anthropology and statistics with Francis Galton. Jacobs asked Galton to create a composite photograph of a Jewish type. One of Jacobs' first publications that used Galton's composite imagery was "The Jewish Type, and Galton's Composite Photographs," Photographic News, 29, (24 April 1885): 268–269. Galton hoped his technique would aid medical diagnosis, and even criminology through the identification of typical criminal faces. However, his technique did not prove useful and fell into disuse, although after much work on it including by photographers Lewis Hine and John L. Lovell and Arthur Batut.   == Fingerprints == In a Royal Institution paper in 1888 and three books (Finger Prints, 1892; Decipherment of Blurred Finger Prints, 1893; and Fingerprint Directories, 1895), Galton estimated the probability of two persons having the same fingerprint and studied the heritability and racial differences in fingerprints. He wrote about the technique (inadvertently sparking a controversy between Herschel and Faulds that was to last until 1917), identifying common pattern in fingerprints and devising a classification system that survives to this day. The method of identifying criminals by their fingerprints had been introduced in the 1860s by Sir William James Herschel in India, and their potential use in forensic work was first proposed by Dr Henry Faulds in 1880, but Galton was the first to place the study on a scientific footing, which assisted its acceptance by the courts (Bulmer 2003, p. 35). Galton pointed out that there were specific types of fingerprint patterns. He described and classified them into eight broad categories: 1: plain arch, 2: tented arch, 3: simple loop, 4: central pocket loop, 5: double loop, 6: lateral pocket loop, 7: plain whorl, and 8: accidental.   == Final years ==  In an effort to reach a wider audience, Galton worked on a novel entitled Kantsaywhere from May until December 1910. The novel described a utopia organised by a eugenic religion, designed to breed fitter and smarter humans. His unpublished notebooks show that this was an expansion of material he had been composing since at least 1901. He offered it to Methuen for publication, but they showed little enthusiasm. Galton wrote to his niece that it should be either "smothered or superseded". His niece appears to have burnt most of the novel, offended by the love scenes, but large fragments survived.   == Honours and impact == Over the course of his career Galton received many major awards, including the Copley Medal of the Royal Society (1910). He received in 1853 the Founder's Medal, the highest award of the Royal Geographical Society, for his explorations and map-making of southwest Africa. He was elected a member of the prestigious Athenaeum Club in 1855 and made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1860. His autobiography also lists the following: Silver Medal, French Geographical Society (1854) Gold Medal of the Royal Society (1886) Officier de l'Instruction Publique, France (1891) D.C.L. Oxford (1894) Sc.D. (Honorary), Cambridge (1895) Huxley Medal, Anthropological Institute (1901) Elected Hon. Fellow Trinity College, Cambridge (1902) Darwin Medal, Royal Society (1902) Linnean Society of London's Darwin–Wallace Medal (1908) Galton was knighted in 1909. His statistical heir Karl Pearson, first holder of the Galton Chair of Eugenics at University College London (now Galton Chair of Genetics), wrote a three-volume biography of Galton, in four parts, after his death (Pearson 1914, 1924, 1930). In the early days of IQ testing, Lewis Terman estimated that Galton's childhood IQ was about 200, based on the fact that he consistently performed mentally at roughly twice his chronological age (Forrest 1974). (This follows the original definition of IQ as mental age divided by chronological age, rather than the modern definition based on the standard distribution and standard deviation.) The flowering plant genus Galtonia was named in his honour.   == Major works == Galton, Francis (1853). Narrative of an explorer in South Africa. London.  Galton, F. (1869). Hereditary Genius. London: Macmillan. Galton, F (1883). Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development. London: J.M. Dent & Company Galton, F (1889). Natural Inheritance. London: Macmillan.   == See also ==  A Large Attendance in the Antechamber, a play about Galton Darwin–Wedgwood family Efficacy of prayer Eugenics in the United States Historiometry Racial hygiene Galton's problem   == References ==   == Further reading == Brookes, Martin (2004). Extreme Measures: The Dark Visions and Bright Ideas of Francis Galton. Bloomsbury.  Bulmer, Michael (2003). Francis Galton: Pioneer of Heredity and Biometry. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 0-8018-7403-3.  Cowan, Ruth Schwartz. Sir Francis Galton and the Study of Heredity in the Nineteenth Century. Garland (1985). Originally Cowan's PhD dissertation, Johns Hopkins University, (1969).  Ewen, Stuart and Elizabeth Ewen (2006; 2008) "Nordic Nightmares," pp. 257–325 in Typecasting: On the Arts and Sciences of Human Inequality, Seven Stories Press. ISBN 978-1-58322-735-0 Forrest, D.W. (1974). Francis Galton: The Life and Work of a Victorian Genius. Taplinger. ISBN 0-8008-2682-5.  Galton, Francis (1909). Memories of My Life:. New York: E. P. Dutton and Company.  Gillham, Nicholas Wright (2001). A Life of Sir Francis Galton: From African Exploration to the Birth of Eugenics, Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-514365-5 Pearson, Karl. "The life, letters and labours of Francis Galton (3 vols. 1914, 1924, 1930)".  Daniëlle Posthuma, Eco J. C. De Geus, Wim F. C. Baaré, Hilleke E. Hulshoff Pol, René S. Kahn & Dorret I. Boomsma (2002). "The association between brain volume and intelligence is of genetic origin". Nature Neuroscience 5 (2): 83–84. doi:10.1038/nn0202-83. PMID 11818967.  Quinche, Nicolas, Crime, Science et Identité. Anthologie des textes fondateurs de la criminalistique européenne (1860–1930). Genève: Slatkine, 2006, 368p., passim. Stigler, S. M. (2010). "Darwin, Galton and the Statistical Enlightenment". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 173 (3): 469–482. doi:10.1111/j.1467-985X.2010.00643.x.    == External links == Francis Galton at Find a Grave Galton's Complete Works at Galton.org (including all his published books, all his published scientific papers, and popular periodical and newspaper writing, as well as other previously unpublished work and biographical material). Works by Francis Galton at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Francis Galton at Internet Archive Works by Francis Galton at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  The Galton Machine or Board demonstrating the normal distribution on YouTube Portraits of Galton from the National Portrait Gallery (United Kingdom) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Francis Galton", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science History and Mathematics Human Memory – University of Amsterdam website with test based on the work of Galton An 8-foot-tall (2.4 m) Probability Machine (named Sir Francis Galton) comparing stock market returns to the randomness of the beans dropping through the quincunx pattern. on YouTube from Index Funds Advisors IFA.com Catalogue of the Galton papers held at UCL Archives "Composite Portraits", by Francis Galton, 1878 (as published in the Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, volume 8). "Enquiries into Human Faculty and its Development", book by Francis Galton, 1883. The Scientific Way to Cut a Cake on YouTube, demonstrated by Alex Bellos

Francis Ysidro Edgeworth FBA (8 February 1845 – 13 February 1926) was an Anglo-Irish philosopher and political economist who made significant contributions to the methods of statistics during the 1880s. From 1891 onward he was appointed the founding editor of The Economic Journal.   == Life == Edgeworth was born in Edgeworthstown, County Longford, Ireland. He did not attend school, but was educated by private tutors at the Edgeworthstown estate until he reached the age to enter university. His father, Francis Beaufort Edgeworth was descended from French Huguenots, and "was a restless philosophy student at Cambridge on his way to Germany when he decided to elope with a teenage Catalonian refugee [Rosa Florentina Eroles] he met on the steps of the British Museum. One of the outcomes of their marriage was Ysidro Francis Edgeworth (the name order was reversed later) ..." Richard Lovell Edgeworth was his grandfather, and the writer Maria Edgeworth his aunt. As a student at Trinity College, Dublin, and Balliol College, Oxford, Edgeworth studied ancient and modern languages. A voracious autodidact, he studied mathematics and economics only after he had completed university. He qualified as a barrister in London in 1877 but did not practise. On the basis of his publications in economics and mathematical statistics in the 1880s, Edgeworth was appointed to a chair in economics at King's College London in 1888, and in 1891 was appointed Drummond Professor of Political Economy at Oxford University. Also in 1891 he was appointed the founding editor of The Economic Journal. He continued as editor or joint-editor until his death 35 years later. Edgeworth was a highly influential figure in the development of neo-classical economics. He was the first to apply certain formal mathematical techniques to individual decision making in economics. He developed utility theory, introducing the indifference curve and the famous Edgeworth box, which is now familiar to undergraduate students of microeconomics. He is also known for the Edgeworth conjecture, which states that the core of an economy shrinks to the set of competitive equilibria as the number of agents in the economy gets large. In statistics, Edgeworth is most prominently remembered by having his name on the Edgeworth series. His most original and creative book on economics was Mathematical Psychics: An Essay on the Application of Mathematics to the Moral Sciences, published in 1881 at the beginning of his long career in the subject. The book was notoriously difficult to read. He frequently referenced literary sources and interspersed the writing with passages in a number of languages, including Latin, French and Ancient Greek. The mathematics was similarly difficult, and a number of his creative applications of mathematics to economic or moral issues would be judged as incomprehensible. However, one of the most influential economists of the time, Alfred Marshall, commented in his review of Mathematical Psychics: This book shows clear signs of genius, and is a promise of great things to come... His readers may sometimes wish that he had kept his work by him a little longer till he had worked it out a little more fully, and obtained that simplicity which comes only through long labour. But taking it as what it claims to be, 'a tentative study', we can only admire its brilliancy, force, and originality. Edgeworth's close friend William Stanley Jevons said of Mathematical Psychics: Whatever else readers of this book may think about it, they would probably all agree that it is a very remarkable one... There can be no doubt that in the style of his composition Mr. Edgeworth does not do justice to his matter. His style, if not obscure, is implicit, so that the reader is left to puzzle out every important sentence like an enigma. The Royal Statistical Society awarded him the Guy Medal in 1907. Edgeworth served as the president of the Royal Statistical Society, 1912–14. In 1928 A.L. Bowley published a book entitled and devoted to F. Y. Edgeworth's Contributions to Mathematical Statistics.   == Contributions to economics ==  In Mathematical Psychics (1881), his most famous and original book, he criticised Jevons's theory of barter exchange, showing that under a system of "recontracting" there will be, in fact, many solutions, an "indeterminacy of contract". Edgeworth's "range of final settlements" was later resurrected by Martin Shubik (1959) as the game-theoretic concept of "the core". Edgeworth's conjecture As the number of agents in an economy increases, the degree of indeterminacy is reduced. In the limit case of an infinite number of agents (perfect competition), contract becomes fully determinate and identical to the 'equilibrium' of economists. The only way of resolving this indeterminacy of contract would be to appeal to the utilitarian principle of maximising the sum of the utilities of traders over the range of final settlements. Incidentally, it was in this 1881 book that Edgeworth introduced into economics the generalised utility function, U (x, y, z, ...), and drew the first 'indifference curve'. International trade He was the first one to use offer curves and community indifference curves to illustrate its main propositions, including the "optimal tariff". Taxation paradox Taxation of a good may actually result in a decrease in price. He set the utilitarian foundations for highly progressive taxation, arguing that the optimal distribution of taxes should be such that 'the marginal disutility incurred by each taxpayer should be the same' (Edgeworth, 1897). Monopoly pricing In 1897, in an article on monopoly pricing, Edgeworth criticised Cournot's exact solution to the duopoly problem with quantity adjustments as well as Bertrand's "instantly competitive" result in a duopoly model with price adjustment. At the same time, Edgeworth showed how price competition between two firms with capacity constraints and/or rising marginal cost curves resulted in indeterminacy. This gave rise to the Bertrand-Edgeworth model of oligopoly. Marginal productivity theory Edgeworth criticised the marginal productivity theory in several articles (1904, 1911), and tried to refine the neo-classical theory of distribution on a more solid basis. Although his work in questions of war finance during World War I was original, they were a bit too theoretical and did not achieve the practical influence he had hoped. Edgeworth's limit theorem Edgeworth's limit theorem relates to equilibrium of supply and demand in a free market. See Edgeworth's limit theorem. Though Edgeworth's economic ideas were original and in depth, his contemporaries frequently complained of his manner of expression for lack of clarity. He was prone to verbosity and coining obscure words without providing definition for the reader.   == Publications of Edgeworth ==   === Collections/Selections === F. Y. Edgeworth (1925) Papers relating to political economy 3 vols. Available online at Gallica Philip Mirowski (ed.) (1994). Edgeworth's Writings on Chance, Economic Hazard, and Statistics, Rowman & Littlefield. Charles R. McCann Jr. (ed.) (1966) F.Y. Edgeworth: Writings in Probability, Statistics and Economics, 3 vols. Cheltenham, Glos.: Elgar. Peter Newman (ed.) (2003) F.Y. Edgeworth : Mathematical psychics, and further papers on political economy Oxford University Press.   === Individual works === "Mr. Mathew Arnold on Bishop Butler's Doctrine of Self-Love", 1876, Mind New and Old Methods of Ethics, 1877. "The Hedonical Calculus", 1879, Mind Mathematical Psychics: An essay on the application of mathematics to the moral sciences, 1881. "Mr. Leslie Stephen on Utilitarianism", 1882, Mind "The Law of Error", 1883, Phil Mag "The Method of Least Squares", 1883, Phil Mag "The Physical Basis of Probability", 1883, Phil Mag "On the Method of Ascertaining a Change in the Value of Gold", 1883, JRSS "Review of Jevons's Investigations", 1884, Academy "The Rationale of Exchange", 1884, JRSS "The Philosophy of Chance", 1884, Mind "On the Reduction of Observations", 1884, Phil Mag "A Priori Probabilities", 1884, Phil Mag "Chance and Law", 1884, Hermathena "Methods of Statistics", 1885, Jubilee Volume of RSS. "The Calculus of Probabilities Applied to Psychic Research, I & II", 1885, 1886, Proceedings of Society for Psychic Research "On Methods of Ascertaining Variations in the Rate of Births, Deaths and Marriages", 1885, JRSS "Progressive Means", 1886, JRSS "The Law of Error and the Elimination of Chance", 1886 Phil Mag "On the Determination of the Modulus of Errors", 1886, Phil Mag "Problems in Probabilities", 1886, Phil Mag "Review of Sidgwick's Scope and Method", 1886, Academy "Review of Jevons's Journals", 1886, Academy "Four Reports by the committee investigating best method of ascertaining and measuring variations in the monetary standard", 1887, Reports of the BAAS (Parts I & 3; Part 2) "Observations and Statistics: An essay on the theory of errors of observation and the first principles of statistics", 1887, Transactions of Cambridge Society. Metretike, or the method of measuring probability and utility, 1887. "On Observations Relating to Several Quantities", 1887, Hermathena "The Law of Error", 1887, Nature "The Choice of Means", 1887, Phil Mag "On Discordant Observations", 1887, Phil Mag "The Empirical Proof of the Law of Error", 1887, Phil Mag "On a New Method of Reducing Observations Relating to Several Quantities", 1888, Phil Mag "New Methods of Measuring Variation in General Prices, 1888, JRSS "The Statistics of Examinations", 1888, JRSS "The Value of Authority Tested by Experiment", 1888, Mind "Mathematical Theory of Banking", 1888, JRSS "On the Application of Mathematics to Political Economy: Address of the President of Section F of the British Association for the Advancement of Science", 1889, JRSS "The Mathematical Theory of Political Economy: Review of Walras's Elements", 1889, Nature "Review of Wicksteed's Alphabet", 1889, Academy "Review of Bohm-Bawerk's Kapital und Kapitalismus", 1889, Academy "Review of Bertrand's Calcul des Probabilites", 1889, J of Education "Points at which Mathematical Reasoning is Applicable to Political Economy", 1889, Nature "Appreciation of Gold", 1889, QJE "The Element of Chance in Competitive Examinations", 1890, JRSS "Economic Science and Statistics", 1889, Nature "Review of Marshall's Principles", 1890, Nature "Review of Jevons's Pure Logic", 1890, Academy "Review of Walras's Elements", 1890, Academy "Review of Bohm-Bawerk's Capital and Interest", 1890, Academy "La Théorie mathématique de l'offre et de la demande et le côut de production", 1891, Revue d'Economie Politique "Osservazioni sulla teoria matematica dell' economica politica", 1891, GdE (trans. "On the Determinateness of Economic Equilibrium") "Ancora a proposito della teoria del baratto", 1891, GdE "Review of Ricardo's Principles", 1891, J of Education "The British Economic Association", 1891, In: The Economic Journal (EJ), Vol. 1, p. 1 - 14 (in  Wikisource) "Review of Keynes's Scope and Method", 1891, EJ "An Introductory Lecture on Political Economy", 1891, EJ "Review of Sidgwick's Elements of Politics", 1891, EJ "Review of Second Edition of Marshall's Principles", 1891, EJ "Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Prices," Connecticut Academy, 1892. "Correlated Averages", 1892, Philos Magazine "The Law of Error and Correlated Averages", 1892, Philos Magazine. "Recent Attempts to Evaluate the Amount of Coin Circulating in a Country", 1892, EJ "Review of Marshall's Economics of Industry", 1892, Nature "Review of Cantillon's Essai", 1892, EJ "Review of Palgrave's Dictionary", 1892, EJ "Review of Bohm-Bawerk's Positive Theory of Capital", 1892, EJ "Review of Smart's Introduction to the Theory of Value", 1892, EJ "Review of Dusing's Das Geschlechtverhaltniss", 1892, EJ "Review of Benson's Capital, Labor and Trade", 1892, EJ "Review of Smart's Women's Wages", 1893 "Review of Bonar's Philosophy", 1893, Mind "Review of Walsh's Bimetallism", 1893, EJ "Review of Fisher's Mathematical Investigations", 1893, EJ "Professor Böhm-Bawerk on the Ultimate Standard of Value", 1894, EJ "One More Word on the Ultimate Standard of Value", 1894, EJ "Review of Wiser's Natural Value", 1894, EJ "Theory of International Values: Parts I, II and III", 1894, EJ "Recent Writings on Index Numbers", 1894, EJ "The Measurement of Utility by Money", 1894, EJ "Asymmetric Correlation between Social Phenomenon", 1894, JRSS Entries: "Average", "Census", "Cournot", "Curves", "Demand Curves", Difficulty of Attainment", "Distance in Time", "Error", 1894, in Palgrave, editor, Dictionary of Political Economy, Vol. 1. "Review of the Webbs' History of Trade Unionism", 1894, EJ "Review of Third Edition of Marshall's Principles", 1895, EJ "Mr. Pierson on the Scarcity of Gold", 1895, EJ "Thoughts on Monetary Reform", 1895, EJ "The Stationary State in Japan", 1895, EJ "A Defense of Index-Numbers", 1896, EJ "Statistics on Unprogressive Communities", 1896, JRSS "The Asymmetrical Probability Curve (Abstract)", 1894, Proceedings of Royal Society "The Asymmetrical Probability Curve", 1896, Phil Mag "The Compound law of Error", 1896, Phil Mag Entries: "Gossen", "Index Numbers", "Intrinsic Value", "Jenkin", "Jennings", "Least Squares" and "Mathematical Method", 1896, in Palgrave, editor, Dictionary of Political Economy, Vol. 2. "Review of Price's Money", 1896, EJ "Review of Nicholson's Strikes and Social Problems", 1896, EJ "Review of Pierson's Leerboek, Vol. 1", 1896, EJ "Review of Pierson's Leerkook, Vol. 2", 1897, EJ "Review of Bastable, Theory of International Trade", 1897, EJ "Review of Grazani's Istituzioni", 1897, EJ "La teoria pura del monopolio", 1897, GdE, (trans."The Pure Theory of Monopoly") "The Pure Theory of Taxation: Parts I, II and III", 1897, EJ "Miscellaneous Applications of the Calculus of Probabilities", Parts 1, 2, 3, 1897, 1898, JRSS "Review of Cournot's Recherches", 1898, EJ "Professor Graziani on the Mathematical Theory of Monopoly", 1898, EJ "Review of Darwin's Bimetallism", 1898, EJ "On the Representation of Statistics by Mathematical Formulae", Part 1 (1898), Parts 2, 3, 4 (1899) "On a Point in the Theory of International Trade", 1899, EJ "Review of Davidson, Bargain Theory of Wages", 1899, EJ "Professor Seligman on the Mathematical Method in Political Economy", 1899, EJ Entries: "Pareto", "Pareto's Law", "Probability", Supply Curve" and "Utility", 1899, in Palgrave, editor, Dictionary of Political Economy, Vol. 3 "Answers to Questions by Local Taxation Commission", 1899, Reprint of Royal Commission for Local Taxation "The Incidence of Urban Rates, Parts I, II and III" 1900, EJ "Defence of Mr. Harrison's Calculation of the Rupee Circulation", 1900, EJ "Review of J.B. Clark's Theory of Distribution", 1900, EJ "Review of Smart's Taxation of Land-Values", 1900, EJ "Review of Bastable, Theory of International Trade (3rd edition)", 1897, EJ "Review of Bonar and Hollander, Letters of Ricardo", 1900, EJ "Mr. Walsh on the Measurement of General Exchange Value", 1901, EJ "Disputed Points in the Theory of International Trade", 1901, EJ "Review of Gide's Cooperation", 1902, EJ "Review of Wells's Anticipations", 1902, EJ "Methods of Representing Statistics of Wages and Other Groups Not *"Fulfilling the Normal Law of Error", with A.L. Bowley, 1902, JRSS "The Law of Error", 1902, Encycl Britannica "Review of Cannan's History of Theories of Production", 1903, EJ "Review of Bortkiewicz's Anwendungen and Pareto's Anwendungen", 1903, EJ "Review of Bastable's Public Finance", 1903, EJ "Review of Bastable's Cartels et Trusts", 1903, EJ "Review of Pigou's Riddle of the Tariff", 1904, EJ "Review of Nicholson's Elements", 1904, EJ "Review of Bowley's National Progress", 1904, EJ "Review of Plunkett's Ireland", 1904, EJ "Review of Northon's Loan Credit", 1904, EJ "Review of Graziani's Istituzione", 1904, EJ "Review of Dietzel's Vergeltungzolle", 1904, EJ "Preface", 1904, in J.R. MacDonald, editor, Women in the Printing Trades. "The Theory of Distribution", 1904, QJE "The Law of Error", 1905, Transactions of Cambridge Society "Review of Nicholson's History of English Corn Laws", 1905, EJ "Review of Cunynghame's Geometrical Political Economy", 1905, EJ "Review of Carver's Theory of Distribution", 1905, EJ "Review of Taussig's Present Position", 1905, EJ "Review of Henry Sidgwick: A memoir", 1906, EJ "The Generalised Law of Error, or Law of Great Numbers", 1906, JRSS "Recent Schemes for Rating Urban Land Values", 1906, EJ "On the Representation of Statistical Frequency by a Series", 1907, JRSS "Statistical Observations on Wasps and Bees", 1907, Biometrika "Review of de Foville's Monnaie and Guyot's Science economique", 1907, EJ "Appreciations of Mathematical Theories", Parts I & II (1907), Parts III & IV (1908), EJ "On the Probable Errors of Frequency Constants", I, II & III (1908), Add. (1909), JRSS "Review of Andreades's Lecture on the Census", 1908, EJ "Review of Rea's Free Trade", 1908, EJ "Review of Withers's Meaning of Money", 1909, EJ "Review of Mitchell's Gold Prices", 1909, EJ "Review of Jevons's Investigations", 1909, EJ "Application du calcul des probabilités à la Statistique", 1909, Bulletin de l'Institut international de statistique "On the Use of the Differential Calculus in Economics to Determine Conditions of Maximum Advantage", 1909, Scientia "Applications of Probabilities to Economics, Parts I & II", 1910, EJ. "The Subjective Element in the First Principles of Taxation", 1910, QJE "Review of John Stuart Mill's Principles", 1910, EJ "Review of Colson's Cours", 1910, EJ "Review of J. Maurice Clark's Local Freight Discriminations", 1910, EJ "Review of Hammond's Railway Rate Theories", 1911, EJ "Probability and Expectation", 1911, Encycl Britannica "Monopoly and Differential Prices", 1911, EJ "Contributions to the Theory of Railway Rates", Part I & II (1911), Part III (1912), Part IV (1913), EJ "Review of Moore's Laws of Wages", 1912, EJ "Review of Pigou's Wealth and Welfare", 1913, EJ "On the Use of the Theory of Probabilities in Statistics Relating to Society", 1913, J of RSS "A Variant Proof of the Distribution of Velocities in a Molecular Chaos", 1913, PhilMag "On the Use of Analytical Geometry to Represent Certain Kinds of Statistics", Parts I-V, 1914, J of RSS "Recent Contributions to Mathematical Economics, I & II", 1915, EJ On the Relations of Political Economy to War, 1915. The Cost of War and ways of reducing it suggested by economic theory, 1915. "Economists on War: Review of Sombart, etc.", 1915, EJ "Review of Pigou's Economy and Finance of War", 1916, EJ "Review of Preziosi's La Germania alla Conquista dell' Italia", 1916, EJ "British Incomes and Property", 1916, EJ "On the Mathematical Representation of Statistical Data", Part I (1916), Parts II-IV (1917), J of RSS "Review of Gill's National Power and Prosperity", 1917, EJ "Review of Lehfeldt's Economics in Light of War", 1917, EJ "Some German Economic Writings about the War", 1917, EJ "After-War Problems: Review of Dawson at al.", 1917, EJ "Review of Westergaard's Scope and Methods of Statistics", 1917, JRSS "Review of Anderson's Value of Money", 1918, EJ "Review of Moulton and Phillips on Money and Banking", 1918, EJ "Review of Loria's Economic Causes of War", 1918, EJ "Review of Arias's Principii", 1918, EJ "Review of Smith-Gordon, Rural Reconstruction of Ireland and Russell's National Being", 1918, EJ "On the Value of a Mean as Calculated from a Sample", 1918, EJ "An Astronomer on the Law of Error", 1918, PhilMag Currency and Finance in Time of War, 1918. "The Doctrine of Index-Numbers According to Prof. Wesley Mitchell", 1918, EJ "Psychical Research and Statistical Method", 1919, JRSS "Methods of Graduating Taxes on Income and Capital", 1919, EJ "Review of Cannan's Money", 1919, EJ "Review of Andreades's Historia", 1919, EJ "Review of Lehfeldt's Gold Prices", 1919, EJ A Levy on Capital for the Discharge of the Debt, 1919. "Mathematical Formulae and the National Commission on Income Tax", 1920, EJ "On the Application of Probabilities to the Movement of Gas Molecules", Part I (1920), Part II (1922), Phil Mag "Entomological Statistics", 1920, Metron "Review of Gustav Cassel's Theory of Social Economy", 1920, EJ "Review of Bowley's Change in Distribution of National Income", 1920, JRSS "Review of the Webbs' History of Trade Unionism", 1920, EJ "Molecular Statistics", Part I (1921), Part II (1922), JRSS "On the Genesis of the Law of Eror", 1921, PhilMag "The Philosophy of Chance", 1922, Mind "The Mathematical Economics of Professor Amoroso", 1922, EJ "Equal Pay to Men and Women for Equal Work", 1922, EJ "Review of Keynes's Treatise on Probability", 1922, JRSS "Review of Pigou's Political Economy of War", 1922, EJ "Statistics of Examinations", 1923, JRSS "On the Use of Medians for Reducing Observations Relating to Several Quantities", 1923, Phil Mag "Mr. Correa Walsh on the Calculation of Index Numbers", 1923, JRSS "Index Numbers According to Mr. Walsh", 1923, EJ Women's Wages in Relation to Economic Welfare, 1923, EJ "Review of Marshall's Money, Credit and Commerce", 1923, EJ "Review of The Labour Party's Aim", 1923, EJ "Review of Bowley's Mathematical Groundwork", 1924, EJ "Review of Fisher's Economic Position of the Married Woman", 1924, EJ "Untried Methods of Representing Frequency", 1924, JRSS Papers Relating to Political Economy, 3 volumes, 1925. "The Plurality of Index-Numbers", 1925, EJ "The Element of Probability in Index-Numbers", 1925, JRSS "The Revised Doctrine of Marginal Social Product", 1925, EJ "Review of J.M. Clark's Overhead Costs", 1925, EJ. "mathematical method in political economy," 1926, Palgrave's Dictionary of Political Economy, reprinted in 1987, The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 3. "Mr Rhode's Curve and the Method of Adjustment", 1926, JRSS   == References ==   == External links ==  Works written by or about Francis Ysidro Edgeworth at Wikisource Archival material relating to Francis Ysidro Edgeworth listed at the UK National Archives   == Additional reading == P J FitzPatrick, "Leading British statisticians of the nineteenth century, Journal of the American Statistical Association 55 (1960), 38–70. M G Kendall, "Francis Ysidro Edgeworth, 1845–1926," Biometrika 55 (1968), 269–275. Newman, Peter (1987). "Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 84–98. _____. (2001). "Edgeworth, Francis Ysidro (1845–1926)," International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pp. 4170–4175. Abstract. Spiegel, Henry William. The Growth of Economic Thought. Ed. Durham & London. Duke University Press, 1991. Stigler, Stephen M. * (1987). "Edgeworth as statistician," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 98–98.

Frank I. Luntz (born February 23, 1962) is an American political consultant, pollster, and "public opinion guru" best known for developing talking points and other messaging for various Republican causes. His work has included assistance with messaging for Newt Gingrich's Contract with America, promotion of the terms death tax instead of estate tax and climate change instead of global warming, and public relations support for pro-Israel policies in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Luntz's most recent work has been with the Fox News Channel as a frequent commentator and analyst, as well as running focus groups during and after presidential debates. Luntz describes his specialty as “testing language and finding words that will help his clients sell their product or turn public opinion on an issue or a candidate.” He is also an author of business books dealing with communication strategies and public opinion. Luntz's current company, Luntz Global, LLC, specializes in message creation and image management for commercial and political clients.   == Background == Luntz was born and grew up in West Hartford, Connecticut, the son of Phyllys (née Kelmenson) and Lester Luntz, who together wrote the first American forensic dentistry textbook. He graduated from Hall High School, graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in history and political science from the University of Pennsylvania, and received a doctorate in politics from Oxford University. Luntz is unmarried. Luntz has appeared as a consultant or panel member on a number of television news shows, including The Colbert Report, Capital Gang, Good Morning America, Hannity, Hardball with Chris Matthews, Meet the Press, PBS NewsHour, Nightline, The O'Reilly Factor, Real Time with Bill Maher, and The Today Show. He has written op-eds for publications such as The Financial Times, The Los Angeles Times, The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, and The Washington Post. He was an adjunct professor at the University of Pennsylvania from 1989 until 1996 and also taught at George Washington University and American University.   == Use of language == Luntz frequently tests word and phrase choices using focus groups and interviews. His stated purpose in this is the goal of causing audiences to react based on emotion. "80 percent of our life is emotion, and only 20 percent is intellect. I am much more interested in how you feel than how you think." "If I respond to you quietly, the viewer at home is going to have a different reaction than if I respond to you with emotion and with passion and I wave my arms around. Somebody like this is an intellectual; somebody like this is a freak." In an article in The New Yorker Luntz is quoted as saying,  The way my words are created is by taking the words of others.... I've moderated an average of a hundred plus focus groups a year over five years... I show them language that I've created. Then I leave a line for them to create language for me.  In a January 9, 2007, interview on Fresh Air with Terry Gross, Luntz redefined the term "Orwellian" in a "positive" sense, saying that if one reads Orwell's "Essay On Language" (presumably referring to "Politics and the English Language"), "To be 'Orwellian' is to speak with absolute clarity, to be succinct, to explain what the event is, to talk about what triggers something happening… and to do so without any pejorative whatsoever." Luntz's description of "Orwellian" is considered to contradict both its popularly-defined meaning as well as that defined by George Orwell. Luntz believes that Orwell would not have approved of many of the uses to which his pseudonym is applied by quoting Orwell's essay "Politics and the English Language", where Luntz focuses on how Orwell derides the use of cliché and dying metaphors. Luntz's description of his job revolves around exploiting the emotional content of language. "It's all emotion. But there's nothing wrong with emotion. When we are in love, we are not rational; we are emotional." "...my job is to look for the words that trigger the emotion." "We know that words and emotion together are the most powerful force known to mankind.." Additionally in his January 9, 2007, interview on Fresh Air, Luntz discussed his use of the term, "energy exploration" (oil drilling). His research on the matter involved showing people a picture of current oil drilling and asking if in the picture it "looks like exploration or drilling." He said that 90 percent of the people he spoke to said it looked like exploring. "Therefore I'd argue that it is a more appropriate way to communicate." He went on to say "if the public says after looking at the pictures, that doesn't look like my definition of drilling—it looks like my definition of exploring—then don't you think we should be calling it what people see it to be, rather than adding a political aspect to it all?" Terry Gross responded: "Should we be calling it what it actually is, as opposed to what somebody thinks it might be? The difference between exploration and actually getting out the oil—they're two different things, aren't they?" James L. Martin, chairman of the conservative 60 Plus Association, described Luntz's role as being that of pollster and popularizer of the phrase "death tax".  Martin gained an important ally in GOP pollster Frank Luntz, whose polling revealed that 'death tax' sparked voter resentment in a way that 'inheritance tax' and 'estate tax' couldn't match. After all, who wouldn't be opposed to a 'tax on death'? Luntz shared his findings with Republicans and included the phrase in the GOP's Contract with America. Luntz went so far as to recommend in a memo to GOP lawmakers that they stage press conferences 'at your local mortuary' to dramatize the issue. 'I believe this backdrop will clearly resonate with your constituents,' he wrote. 'Death is something the American people understand.' Apparently, he's right. Spurred by Luntz, Republicans have employed the term 'death tax' so aggressively that it has entered the popular lexicon. Nonpartisan venues like newspapers and magazines have begun to use it in a neutral context—a coup for abolitionists like Martin.   == Publications == Luntz is the author of the 2007 New York Times Best Seller, "Words That Work: It's Not What You Say, It's What People Hear." His second book, "What Americans Really Want ... Really: The Truth About Our Hopes, Dreams and Fears," climbed to #6 on the New York Times Business Best Sellers list. In March 2011, Luntz released his book,"Win: The Key Principles to Take Your Business From Ordinary to Extraordinary".   == Notable work and views ==   === U.S. politics, 1990s === Luntz was Pat Buchanan's pollster during the 1992 U.S. Republican presidential primary, and later that year served as Ross Perot's pollster in the general election. Luntz also served as Newt Gingrich's pollster in mid-1990s for the Contract with America. During that time, he helped Gingrich produce a GOPAC memo that encouraged Republicans to "speak like Newt" by describing Democrats and Democratic policies using words such as “corrupt,” "devour," "greed," "hypocrisy," "liberal," "sick," and "traitors."   === Israel and the Palestinians === In December 2008 to January 2009, Luntz wrote a report titled "The Israel project's 2009 Global Language Dictionary" that has been used by the Israeli government to defend Israeli policy in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The report, commissioned by The Israel Project, advised media spokespeople to use specific language that Luntz believed would create a more favorable impression of Israel in the United States and the rest of the international community. For example, when discussing the contours of a two-state solution, the report advised describing Palestinian negotiating points as "demands" because Americans dislike people who make "demands." The report was marked "not for distribution or publication", but it was leaked to Newsweek shortly after it was written. According to the Guardian, Luntz also wrote that "Israeli spokesmen or political leaders must never, ever justify 'the deliberate slaughter of innocent women and children' and they must aggressively challenge those who accuse Israel of such a crime." Luntz cited as an example of an "effective Israeli sound bite" one which read, "I particularly want to reach out to Palestinian mothers who have lost their children. No parent should have to bury their child." Patrick Cockburn criticized the report as essentially admitting "the Israeli government does not really want a two-state solution, but this should be masked because 78 per cent of Americans do.″   === Global warming ===  Although Luntz later tried to distance himself from the Bush administration policy, it was his idea that administration communications reframe "global warming" as "climate change" since "climate change" was thought to sound less severe. Luntz has since said that he is not responsible for what the Bush administration did after that time. Though he now believes humans have contributed to global warming, he maintains that the science was in fact incomplete, and his recommendation sound, at the time he made it. In a 2002 memo to President George W. Bush titled "The Environment: A Cleaner, Safer, Healthier America", obtained by the Environmental Working Group, Luntz wrote: "The scientific debate is closing ... but not yet closed. There is still a window of opportunity to challenge the science.... Voters believe that there is no consensus about global warming within the scientific community. Should the public come to believe that the scientific issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly. Therefore, you need to continue to make the lack of scientific certainty a primary issue in the debate, and defer to scientists and other experts in the field." In 2010, Luntz announced new research that shows the American people are eager for Congress to act on climate legislation that would promote energy independence and a healthier environment. "Americans want their leaders to act on climate change—but not necessarily for the reasons you think," Luntz said. "A clear majority of Americans believe climate change is happening. This is true of McCain voters and Obama voters alike. And even those that don't still believe it is essential for America to pursue policies that promote energy independence and a cleaner, healthier environment." In reference to recent political events, Luntz added: "People are much more interested in seeing solutions than watching yet another partisan political argument."    === 2005 UK Conservative leadership election === In 2005 Luntz conducted a focus group broadcast on the Conservative leadership race on the BBC current affairs show Newsnight. The focus group's overwhelmingly positive reaction to David Cameron was seen by many as crucial in making him the favorite in a crowded field. Cameron was the eventual victor. In March 2007, Newsnight invited him back to gauge comparative opinions on Cameron, Gordon Brown and Sir Menzies Campbell in the city of Birmingham.   === 2007 Irish general elections === Luntz led a focus group telecast with the Irish state broadcaster RTE to gather the opinions of the Irish people before the May 24, 2007 general elections. RTÉ hoped to show viewers some of the campaign techniques the political parties were using without their knowledge.   === 2007 Australian federal election === Another focus group of swing voters was analysed by Luntz in the lead-up to the November 2007 poll between the ruling Coalition and the opposition Labor party. Luntz noted that, like the Irish scenario, the Coalition was well established, presiding over the country for 11 years and overseeing continued economic growth for much of that period; and that unlike the lead-up to the Irish elections, Australia had a stronger and more popular opposition leader in Kevin Rudd: "This is much closer to the Irish election where the leader just barely scraped in, Bertie Ahern, because the economy was so good. But the big difference there was the opposition leader was not as good as Kevin Rudd." Luntz was brought in to conduct his research in a collaborative effort by Sky News Australia and The Australian newspaper.   === 2010 UK General Election === During the 2010 UK General Election, Luntz led focus groups during the Prime Ministerial debates between Gordon Brown, David Cameron and Nick Clegg, and wrote about his findings for The Sun, and also appeared on the BBC's Daily Politics. Luntz has predicted that 2015 will likely result in a hung parliament.   === Gun control === In 2012 Luntz conducted a poll that found that sizable majorities of gun owners supported gun control measures such as mandatory criminal background checks, minimum age restrictions, and eligibility requirements for concealed weapon permits.   === U.S. politics, 2010s ===   ==== Occupy Wall Street movement, 2011 ==== In November 2011, during the height of the Occupy Wall Street movement, Luntz had a meeting with the Republican Governors Association to discuss how to address the growing populist Occupy movement sweeping the country.  I'm so scared of this anti-Wall Street effort. I'm frightened to death. They're having an impact on what the American people think of capitalism.   ==== Depression and sale of LuntzGlobal, 2012–2014 ==== Frustrated with the contention and argumentation of voters after the 2012 presidential election, The Atlantic reported on Luntz, "Something in his psyche has broken, and he does not know if he can recover." As a result, in 2014, he sold the majority of shares of his polling business, LuntzGlobal, but he continues to be a contributor to news outlets.   == Criticism ==   === Refusal to release poll data === In 1997, the American Association for Public Opinion Research, of which Luntz was not a member, criticized Luntz for refusing to release poll data to support his claimed results "because of client confidentiality". Diane Colasanto, who was president of the AAPOR at the time, said  It is simply wanting to know, How many people did you question? What were the questions? We understand the need for confidentiality, but once a pollster makes results public, the information needs to be public. People need to be able to evaluate whether it was sound research.  In 2000 he was censured by the National Council on Public Polls "for allegedly mischaracterizing on MSNBC the results of focus groups he conducted during the [2000] Republican Convention." In September 2004, MSNBC dropped Luntz from its planned coverage of that year's presidential debate, saying "[W]e made a decision not to use focus groups as part of our debate coverage. This decision had nothing to do with Frank's past work or politics." Luntz disagreed, believing that MSNBC "buckled to political pressure" from activist David Brock.   === 2010 "Lie of the Year" award === Luntz was awarded the 2010 PolitiFact Lie of the Year award for his promotion of the phrase 'government takeover' to refer to healthcare reform, starting in the spring of 2009. "'Takeovers are like coups,' Luntz wrote in a 28-page memo. 'They both lead to dictators and a loss of freedom.'" In an editorial response, the Wall Street Journal wrote that "PolitiFact's decree is part of a larger journalistic trend that seeks to recast all political debates as matters of lies, misinformation and 'facts,' rather than differences of world view or principles." The editors of PolitiFact announced "We have concluded it is inaccurate to call the plan a government takeover."   === Leaked tape from the University of Pennsylvania === On April 25, 2013, The American Spectator, a conservative news outlet, published a scathing article about Luntz entitled "The Problematic Frank Luntz’s Stockholm Syndrome".  In fact, what Luntz has done is simply reveal the kind of thinking that goes on in the minds of too many on the right who, whether they realize it or not, have been intellectually and culturally bullied that there is some sort of 'right way'—'right' as in 'correct'—to think. Resulting in some conservatives who suffer from what might be called a political version of Stockholm Syndrome—where the captives identify with their captors.  The article was a response to an April 22, 2013 leaked recording of Luntz at the University of Pennsylvania, where he said conservative radio personalities (specifically Rush Limbaugh and Mark Levin) were being "problematic" and "destroying" Republicans' ability to connect with more voters, or even maintain a majority in the House of Representatives in the 2014 mid-term elections. As part of his critique Luntz said:  And they get great ratings, and they drive the message, and it's really problematic. And this is not on the Democratic side. It's only on the Republican side... [Democrats have] got every other source of news on their side. And so that is a lot of what's driving it. If you take—Marco Rubio's getting his ass kicked. Who's my Rubio fan here? We talked about it. He's getting destroyed! By Mark Levin, by Rush Limbaugh, and a few others. He's trying to find a legitimate, long-term effective solution to immigration that isn't the traditional Republican approach, and talk radio is killing him. That's what's causing this thing underneath. And too many politicians in Washington are playing coy.  After the leak, Luntz announced that he would no longer fund a scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania. The scholarship, which was in his father's name, supported student trips to Washington D.C.   == Bibliography == Candidates, Consultants, and Campaigns: The Style and Substance of American Electioneering. New York: Blackwell, 1988. Words That Work: It's Not What You Say, It's What People Hear New York: Hyperion, 2007. What Americans Really Want...Really New York: Hyperion, 2009. Win: The Key Principles to Take Your Business from Ordinary to Extraordinary New York: Hyperion, 2011.   == References ==   == External links == Luntz Global, Luntz's communications company Works by or about Frank Luntz in libraries (WorldCat catalog) Appearances on C-SPAN

Friedrich Robert Helmert (July 31, 1843 – June 15, 1917) was a German geodesist and an important writer on the theory of errors.   == Career == Helmert was born in Freiberg, Kingdom of Saxony. After schooling in Freiberg and Dresden, he entered the Polytechnische Schule, now Technische Universität, in Dresden to study engineering science in 1859. Finding him especially enthusiastic about geodesy, one of his teachers, August Nagel, hired him while still a student to work on the triangulation of the Erzgebirge and the drafting of the trigonometric network for Saxony. In 1863 Helmert became Nagel's assistant on the Central European Arc Measurement. After a year's study of mathematics and astronomy Helmert obtained his doctor's degree from the University of Leipzig in 1867 for a thesis based on his work for Nagel. In 1870 Helmert became instructor and in 1872 professor at RWTH Aachen, the new Technical University in Aachen. At Aachen he wrote Die mathematischen und physikalischen Theorieen der höheren Geodäsie (Part I was published in 1880 and Part II in 1884). This work laid the foundations of modern geodesy. See history of geodesy. Part I is devoted to the mathematical aspects of geodesy and contains a comprehensive summary of techniques for solving for geodesics on an ellipsoid. The method of least squares had been introduced into geodesy by Gauss and Helmert wrote a fine book on least squares (1872, with a second edition in 1907) in this tradition, which became a standard text. In 1876 he discovered the chi-squared distribution as the distribution of the sample variance for a normal distribution. This discovery and other of his work was described in German textbooks, including his own, but was unknown in English, and hence later rediscovered by English statisticians – the chi-squared distribution by Karl Pearson (1900), and the application to the sample variance by 'Student' and Fisher. From 1887 Helmert was professor of advanced geodesy at the University of Berlin and director of the Geodetic Institute. In 1916 he had a stroke and died of its effects the following year in Potsdam.   == Honours == Helmert received many honours. He was president of the global geodetic association of "Internationale Erdmessung", member of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1905, and recipient of some 25 German and foreign decorations. The lunar crater Helmert was named in his honor, approved by the IAU in 1973.   == See also == Helmert transformation (in geodesy) Helmert's equation coordinate system Helmert–Wolf blocking national survey terrestrial gravity field Geodesics on an ellipsoid   == References ==   == External links == Royal Society citation 1908 (very succinct) There is an obituary at MNRAS 78 (1918) 256 There is a photograph of Helmert at Helmert on the Portraits of Statisticians page and three more at Helmert See also memorial stone The first edition of Helmert's textbook on least squares is available at the GDZ site Die Ausgleichsrechnung nach der Methode der kleinsten Quadrate A partial scan of Die mathematischen und physikalischen Theorieen der höheren Geodäsie (Part I) is available on the site Friedrich Robert Helmert (1841–1917) English translations (by the Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis) of Parts I and II of Die mathematischen und physikalischen Theorieen der höheren Geodäsie are available at doi:10.5281/zenodo.32050 doi:10.5281/zenodo.32051 There is an account of Helmert's work on the theory of errors in section 10.6 of Oscar Sheynin Theory of Probability: A Historical Essay For eponymous terms in statistics see Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics: A for the Abbe–Helmert criterion and Earliest known uses of some of the words of mathematics: H for the Helmert transformation.

Gareth Owen Roberts FRS (born 1964) is a statistician and applied probabilist. He is Professor of Statistics in the Department of Statistics and Director of the Centre for Research in Statistical Methodology (CRiSM) at the University of Warwick. He is an established authority on the stability of Markov chains, especially applied to Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) theory methodology for a wide range of latent statistical models with applications in spatial statistics, infectious disease epidemiology and finance.   == Education == Roberts was educated at Jesus College, Oxford, graduating in 1985 in Mathematics  and subsequently went on to complete in 1988 a PhD thesis on Some boundary hitting problems for diffusion processes under the supervision of Saul Jacka at the University of Warwick.   == Career == Following his PhD, Roberts held various academic positions at the University of Nottingham, the University of Cambridge and Lancaster University before returning to the University of Warwick.   == Awards and honours == 2013 - Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society 2010 - Editor of Journal of the Royal Statistical Society (Series B) 2009 - Institute of Mathematical Statistics Medallion 2008 - Royal Statistical Society's Guy medal in Silver 2004 - ISI highly cited researcher  (Mathematics: Ranked 16th ) 1999 - Rollo Davidson Prize of the University of Cambridge 1997 - Royal Statistical Society's Guy medal in Bronze 1995 - Raybould Fellowship His nomination to become a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2013 reads:  "Gareth Roberts is distinguished for his work spanning Applied Probability, Bayesian Statistics and Computational Statistics. He has made fundamental contributions to the theory, methodology and application of Markov Chain Monte Carlo and related methods in Statistics. He has developed crucial convergence and stability theory, constructed a theory of optimal scaling for Metropolis–Hastings algorithms, and has introduced and explored the theory of adaptive MCMC algorithms. He has made pioneering contributions to infinite dimensional simulation problems and inference in stochastic processes. His work has already found practical application in the study of epidemics such as Avian Influenza and Foot and Mouth disease."   == References ==

Genichi Taguchi (田口 玄一, Taguchi Gen'ichi) (January 1, 1924 - June 2, 2012) was an engineer and statistician. From the 1950s onwards, Taguchi developed a methodology for applying statistics to improve the quality of manufactured goods. Taguchi methods have been controversial among some conventional Western statisticians, but others have accepted many of the concepts introduced by him as valid extensions to the body of knowledge.   == Biography == Taguchi was born and raised in the textile town of Tokamachi, in Niigata prefecture. He initially studied textile engineering at Kiryu Technical College with the intention of entering the family kimono business. However, with the escalation of World War II in 1942, he was drafted into the Astronomical Department of the Navigation Institute of the Imperial Japanese Navy. After the war, in 1948 he joined the Ministry of Public Health and Welfare, where he came under the influence of eminent statistician Matosaburo Masuyama, who kindled his interest in the design of experiments. He also worked at the Institute of Statistical Mathematics during this time, and supported experimental work on the production of penicillin at Morinaga Pharmaceuticals, a Morinaga Seika company. In 1950, he joined the Electrical Communications Laboratory (ECL) of the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation just as statistical quality control was beginning to become popular in Japan, under the influence of W. Edwards Deming and the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers. ECL was engaged in a rivalry with Bell Labs to develop cross bar and telephone switching systems, and Taguchi spent his twelve years there in developing methods for enhancing quality and reliability. Even at this point, he was beginning to consult widely in Japanese industry, with Toyota being an early adopter of his ideas. During the 1950s, he collaborated widely and in 1954-1955 was visiting professor at the Indian Statistical Institute, where he worked with C. R. Rao, Ronald Fisher and Walter A. Shewhart. While working at the SQC Unit of ISI, he was introduced to the orthogonal arrays invented by C. R. Rao - a topic which was to be instrumental in enabling him to develop the foundation blocks of what is now known as Taguchi methods. On completing his doctorate at Kyushu University in 1962, he left ECL, though he maintained a consulting relationship. In the same year he visited Princeton University under the sponsorship of John Tukey, who arranged a spell at Bell Labs, his old ECL rivals. In 1964 he became professor of engineering at Aoyama Gakuin University, Tokyo. In 1966 he began a collaboration with Yuin Wu, who later emigrated to the U.S. and, in 1980, invited Taguchi to lecture. During his visit there, Taguchi himself financed a return to Bell Labs, where his initial teaching had made little enduring impact. This second visit began a collaboration with Madhav Phadke and a growing enthusiasm for his methodology in Bell Labs and elsewhere, including Ford Motor Company, Boeing, Xerox and ITT. Since 1982, Genichi Taguchi has been an advisor to the Japanese Standards Institute and executive director of the American Supplier Institute, an international consulting organisation. His concepts pertaining to experimental design, the loss function, robust design, and the reduction of variation have influenced fields beyond product design and manufacturing, such as sales process engineering.   == Contributions ==  Taguchi has made a very influential contribution to industrial statistics. Key elements of his quality philosophy include the following: Taguchi loss function, used to measure financial loss to society resulting from poor quality; The philosophy of off-line quality control, designing products and processes so that they are insensitive ("robust") to parameters outside the design engineer's control; and Innovations in the statistical design of experiments, notably the use of an outer array for factors that are uncontrollable in real life, but are systematically varied in the experiment.   == Honours == 1986 - Willard F. Rockwell Medal of the International Technology Institute 1989 - Indigo Ribbon from the Emperor of Japan 1990 - Honoured as a Quality Guru by the British Department of Trade and Industry 1995 - Honorary member of the Japanese Society of Quality Control 1997 - Automotive Hall of Fame Inductee 1998 - Honorary member of the American Society for Quality 1998 - Honorary member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers 1999 - Honorary president of the Robust Quality Engineering Society (Japan)   == Book == Genichi Taguchi (August 1992). Taguchi on Robust Technology Development: Bringing Quality Engineering Upstream. ASME Press. ISBN 978-0791800287.  Genichi Taguchi, Subir Chowdhury, Shin Taguchi (October 1999). Robust Engineering: Learn How to Boost Quality while Reducing Costs & Time to Market. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0071347822.  Genichi Taguchi, Subir Chowdhury, Yuin Wu (August 2000). The Mahalanobis-Taguchi System. McGraw Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0071362634.  Genichi Taguchi, Rajesh Jugulum (2002). The Mahalanobis-Taguchi Strategy : A Pattern Technology System. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0471023333.  Genichi Taguchi, Rajesh Jugulum, Shin Taguchi (2004). Computer-Based Robust Engineering: Essential For DFSS. Amer Society for Quality. ISBN 978-0873896221.  Genichi Taguchi, Subir Chowdhury, Yuin Wu (2005). Taguchi's Quality Engineering Handbook. John Wiley. ISBN 978-0471413349.    == References == ^ "ASI Mourns the Loss of Dr. Genichi Taguchi". Asiusa.com. 2012-03-28. Retrieved 2012-06-26.  ^ Wadsworth, Harrison M. (1997). Handbook of statistical methods for engineers and scientists (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.  ^ Smith, Gerald F. (1998). Quality problem solving. American Society for Quality. pp. 250?251.  ^ a b c d "Genichi Taguchi". American Society for Quality.  ^ a b Jayaswal, Bijay K.; Peter C. Patton (2006). Design for Trustworthy Software: Tools, Techniques, and Methodology of Developing Robust Software. Prentice Hall. p. 44.  ^ Taguchi, Genichi (June 1995). "Quality engineering (Taguchi methods) for the development of electronic circuit technology". IEEE Transactions on Reliability (IEEE Reliability Society) 44 (2): 225?229. doi:10.1109/24.387375. ISSN 0018-9529.  ^ Gen'ichi TAGUCHI (March 1962). Studies on mathematical statistics for quality control. Doctoral thesis. Kushu University.  ^ "About ASI". American Supplier Institute. Retrieved 2009-04-22.  ^ Selden, Paul H. (1997). Sales Process Engineering: A Personal Workshop. Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press. pp. 156?158, 169, 237.    == External links == Photograph of Dr. Genichi Taguchi

Georg Rasch (21 September 1901 - 19 October 1980) was a Danish mathematician, statistician, and psychometrician, most famous for the development of a class of measurement models known as Rasch models. He studied with R.A. Fisher and also briefly with Ragnar Frisch, and was elected a member of the International Statistical Institute in 1948. In 1919, Rasch began studying mathematics at the University of Copenhagen. He completed a masters degree in 1925 and received a doctorate in science with thesis director Niels Erik Nørlund in 1930. Rasch married in 1928. Unable to find work as a mathematician in the 1930s, he turned to work as a statistical consultant. In this capacity he worked on a range of problems, including problems of biological growth.   == Contributions to psychometrics == Georg Rasch is best known for his contributions to psychometrics. His work in this field began when he used the Poisson distribution to model the number of errors made by students when reading texts. He referred to the model as the multiplicative Poisson model. He later developed the Rasch model for dichotomous data, which he applied to response data derived from intelligence and attainment tests including data collected by the Danish military. At the same epoch, American scientists independently developed item response theory (IRT). Within IRT, the Rasch model is one of the most simple response models. In contrast to other simple models, the Rasch model has a distinctive mathematical property: the model parameters (item difficulties, examinee ability) are sufficient statistics. Rasch demonstrated that his approach met criteria for measurement deduced from an analysis of measurement in the physical sciences. He also proposed generalizations of his model (Rasch, 1960/1980, 1977). Today, the Rasch model is used extensively in assessment in education and educational psychology, particularly for attainment and cognitive assessments.   == Major publications == Rasch, G. (1960/1980). Probabilistic models for some intelligence and attainment tests.(Copenhagen, Danish Institute for Educational Research), expanded edition (1980) with foreword and afterword by B.D. Wright. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. Rasch, G. (1961). On general laws and the meaning of measurement in psychology, pp. 321–334 in Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, IV. Berkeley: University of Chicago Press, 1980. Rasch, G. (1977). On Specific Objectivity: An attempt at formalizing the request for generality and validity of scientific statements. The Danish Yearbook of Philosophy, 14, 58-93.   == Obituary == Andersen, E. B. (1982) Georg Rasch (1901–1980), Psychometrika, 47,(4), 375-376.   == References ==   == External links == Lina Wøhlk Olsen, Essays on Georg Rasch and his contributions to statistics, PhD thesis Univ. of Copenhagen, in part online here, in part published elsewhere. Institute for Objective Measurement - some Georg Rasch papers online here

George Alfred Barnard (23 September 1915 – 9 August 2002) was a British statistician known particularly for his work on the foundations of statistics and on quality control.   == BiographyEdit == George Barnard was born in Walthamstow, London. His father was a cabinet maker and his mother had been a domestic servant. George's sister Dorothy Wedderburn became a sociologist and eventually Principal of Royal Holloway, University of London. George attended the local grammar school, the Monoux School, and from there he won a scholarship to St John's College, Cambridge to read mathematics. In 1937 he went on to Princeton University to do graduate work on mathematical logic with Alonzo Church. Barnard was on holiday in Britain when the Second World War started and he never went back to Princeton to finish his PhD. The war made Barnard into a statistician as it did for many mathematicians of his generation. In 1940 he joined an engineering firm, Plessey, as a mathematical consultant. In 1942 he moved to the Ministry of Supply to apply quality control and sampling methods to the products for which they were responsible. It was there that Barnard began doing statistics. The group he was put in charge of included Peter Armitage, Dennis Lindley and Robin Plackett. Lindley recalls that they were like students working for a doctorate with Barnard as supervisor. Abraham Wald was in a similar group in the United States. Both groups developed sequential methods of sampling. At the end of the war, Barnard went to Imperial College London, as a lecturer, becoming a reader in 1948 and professor of mathematical statistics in 1954. In 1966 he moved to the newly created University of Essex, from which he retired in 1975. Barnard, however, kept on doing statistics until he died aged 86. Until 1981 he spent much of each year at the University of Waterloo, Canada, and after that he continued writing papers and corresponding with colleagues all over the world. Barnard's best known contribution is probably his 1962 paper on likelihood inference but the paper he thought his best was the 1949 paper in which he first espoused the likelihood principle. He had originally described the principle in the context of optional stopping. A statement by Savage brings out how surprising the principle first seemed (Foundations of Statistical Inference, 1961, p. 75)  I learned the stopping rule principle from Professor Barnard in ... 1952. Frankly, I then thought it a scandal that anyone in the profession could advance an idea so patently wrong, even as today I can scarcely believe that some people resist an idea so patently right.  In an interview Barnard recalled, "my main interest above everything was politics from about 1933 until 1956. Well, that’s not true—until the end of the war it would be fair to say." At school he proposed the motion to the school debating society that "Socialism is preferable to Capitalism." He joined the Communist Party in 1933 and he took part in anti-fascist marches in the east end of London. A fellow activist recalls him as a "lean-and-and-hungry-looking mathematician from a working class family" who served as the "student Party's chief local commissar." At Plessey he was chairman of the shop stewards. Barnard served terms as president of three societies, the Royal Statistical Society in 1971-2, the Operational Research Society in 1962-4 and the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications in 1970-1. He was awarded the Guy Medal in Gold by the Royal Statistical Society in 1975. In May 1986 Barnard was awarded an honorary degree by the Open University as Doctor of the University and in 1994 he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by the University of Essex. Lindley wrote in The Statistician, "We have lost a great statistician and a delightful human being."   == Personal lifeEdit == He married first, Helen J. B. Davis in 1942 and they had three sons. He married second, Mary M. L. Jones in 1949 and they had one son. He was the brother of the social scientist Dorothy Wedderburn.   == PublicationsEdit == G A Barnard (1945) "A New Test for 2X2 Tables", Nature, 156, 177 & 783. G A Barnard (1946) "Sequential Tests in Industrial Statistics", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Supplement, 8, 1-26. Barnard, G A (1949). "Statistical Inference". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 11: 115–149.  Barnard, G A (195). "Control charts and stochastic processes". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B B (21): 239–71.  Barnard, G A; Jenkins, G.M.; Winsten, C.B. (1962). "Likelihood Inference and Time Series". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 125 (3): 321–372. doi:10.2307/2982406.  There is a bibliography (containing 109 articles) up to 1989: Seymour Geisser et al. (eds) Bayesian and Likelihood Methods in Statistics and Econometrics : Essays in Honor of George A. Barnard, North-Holland 1990. This contains a review of Barnard's work by Lindley. The volume was one of a series honouring Bayesian heroes. In 1990 he made a book out of manuscripts left by his friend Egon Pearson: E. S. Pearson (1990) ‘Student’, A Statistical Biography of William Sealy Gosset, Edited and Augmented by R. L. Plackett with the Assistance of G. A. Barnard, Oxford: University Press. After 1990 Barnard published little, although he kept up his letter writing. In 1996 however he produced a review of Barndorff-Nielsen and Cox After observing that, "A great virtue of the book is that it raises perhaps as many questions as it answers," Barnard went on to give his answer to one of those questions: Review of Inference and Asymptotics. by O. E. Barndorff-Nielsen; D. R. Cox Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 159, (1996), 178-179.   == See alsoEdit == Barnardisation   == ReferencesEdit ==  Lindley, D. V. (2003). "Professor George A. Barnard (1915-2002)". The Statistician 52: 231–234. doi:10.1111/1467-9884.00355_1.  M. H. DeGroot (1988). "A Conversation with George A. Barnard". Statistical Science 3 (2): 196–212. doi:10.1214/ss/1177012905. JSTOR 2245568.  (Obituary)   == External linksEdit == George Alfred Barnard at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Briefer obituary by Lindley in IMS Bulletin Obituary on p. 8 George Alfred Barnard portrait on the Portraits of Statisticians page. Statistical Inference and Analysis, Selected Correspondence of R.A. Fisher Edited by J.H. Bennett. Barnard’s correspondence with Fisher School Debate 1932. Barnard the school debater A Conversation with V.P. Godambe. Barnard the PhD supervisor London Review of Books, 29 July 1999. Barnard the letter writer

George Chalmers (1742 – 31 May 1825) was a Scottish antiquarian and political writer.   == Biography == Chalmers was born at Fochabers, Moray; his father, James Chalmers, was a grandson of George Chalmers of Pittensear in Lhanbryde. After completing a course at King's College, Aberdeen, he studied law at the University of Edinburgh for several years. Two uncles on the father's side had settled in British North America, and Chalmers visited Maryland in 1763, apparently to assist in recovering a tract of land about which a dispute had arisen. He began practising as a lawyer at Baltimore. As a Loyalist, however, at the outbreak of the American War of Independence, he abandoned his professional prospects and returned to Great Britain. Several years then passed before he found adequate employment. In August 1786, Chalmers was appointed chief clerk to the committee of Privy Council on matters relating to trade, following its re-establishment. He retained this position for the rest of his life. It left him time to write. Chalmers was a fellow of the Royal Society and the Society of Antiquaries of London, an honorary member of the Antiquarian Society of Scotland, and a member of other learned societies. His library was left to his nephew, at whose death in 1841 it was sold and dispersed.   == Controversialist == A dogmatic writer, Chalmers became involved in numerous liteary controversies. Among his avowed opponents were Edmond Malone and George Steevens, the Shakespeare editors; Thomas James Mathias, the author of the Pursuits of Literature; Dr John Jamieson, the Scottish lexicographer; John Pinkerton, the historian; David Irving, the biographer of the Scottish poets; and James Currie of Liverpool.   == Works ==   === Caledonia === Chalmers's major work was his Caledonia, which he left incomplete. The first volume appeared in 1807, and is introductory to the others. It is divided into four books, treating successively of the Roman, the Pictish, the Scottish and the Scoto-Saxon periods, from 80 to 1306 AD. The books present, in a condensed form, with an account of the people, the language and the civil and ecclesiastical history, as well as the agricultural and commercial state of Scotland during the first thirteen centuries of the Common Era. The chapters on the Roman period are marred by the author's having accepted as genuine Charles Bertram's forgery De Situ Britanniae. The second volume, published in 1810, gives an account of the seven southeastern counties of Scotland — Roxburgh, Berwick, East Lothian ("Haddington"), Edinburgh/Midlothian (all as "Edinburgh"), West Lothian ("Linlithgow"), Peebles and Selkirk — each covered by name, situation and extent, natural objects, antiquities, establishment as shires, civil history, agriculture, manufactures and trade, and ecclesiastical history. In 1824 the third volume appeared, giving, under the same headings, a description of the seven south-western counties — Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Wigtown, Ayr, Lanark, Renfrew and Dumbarton. In the preface to this volume the author stated that the materials for the history of the central and northern counties were collected.   === Early works (1776-1786) === Before his Privy Council appointment, Chalmers applied himself to investigating the history and establishment of the English colonies in North America, based on his access to the state papers and other documents of what were then termed the plantation records. His work, Political Annals of the present United Colonies from their Settlement to the Peace of 1763, (1780), was to have formed two volumes; but the second, for the period between 1688 and 1763, never appeared. The first volume traces the original settlement of the different American colonies, and the changes in their constitutions and forms of government, as affected by British politics. Chalmers next wrote An Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Britain during the Present and Four Preceding Reigns (1782), which passed through several editions.   === Mature works (1786-1824) === Chalmers wrote biographical sketches of Daniel Defoe, Sir John Davies, Allan Ramsay, Sir David Lyndsay, Thomas Churchyard and others, for editions of their works. The British government also paid Chalmers £500 to write a hostile biography of Thomas Paine; he published it under the assumed name of Francis Oldys, A.M., of the University of Pennsylvania. A life of Thomas Ruddiman, whom he admired, combined praise for the subject with an attack on the reputation of his contemporary James Anderson. In 1818 Chalmers published a life of Mary, Queen of Scots, based on a manuscript left by John Whitaker, but rewritten. Mary's history occupied much of his attention, and his last work, A Detection of the Love Letters lately attributed in Hugh Campbell's work to Mary Queen of Scots, is an exposure of an attempt to represent as genuine some fictitious letters said to have passed between Mary and Bothwell. He had also prepared for the press a detailed history of the life and reign of David I of Scotland. In his later researches he was assisted by his nephew James, son of Alexander Chalmers, writer in Elgin. Apology for the Believers in the Shakespeare Papers which were exhibited in Norfolk Street, appeared in 1797, followed by other tracts by Chalmers on the same subject, relating to the Ireland Shakespeare forgeries. He also took part in the controversy on the identity of Junius, and in The Author of Junius Ascertained, from a Concatenation of Circumstances amounting to Moral Demonstration (1817) asserted that the Junius letters were written by Hugh Boyd. In 1824 he published The Poetical Remains of some of the Scottish Kings, now first collected; and in the same year he edited, for the Bannatyne Club, Robene and Makyne and the Testament of Cresseid, by Robert Henryson. Political writings by Chalmers included: Collection of Treaties between Great Britain and other Powers (1790); Vindication of the Privileges of the People in respect to the Constitutional Right of Free Discussion, etc. (1796), published anonymously; A Chronological Account of Commerce and Coinage in Great Britain from the Restoration till 1850 (1810); Opinions of Eminent Lawyers on various points of English Jurisprudence, chiefly concerning the Colonies, Fisheries, and Commerce of Great Britain (1814); Comparative Views of the State of Great Britain before and since the War (1817).   == Chalmers' works online == Political annals of the present United Colonies: ... (1779) An Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Britain during the Present and Four Preceding Reigns (1782) The Life of Thomas Ruddiman (1794) An Apology for the Believers in the Shakespeare Papers which were exhibited in Norfolk Street (1797) The Life of Mary, Queen of Scots, Derived from State Papers Volume1 Volume 2 (1818)   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: James Macdonald (1911). "Chalmers, George". In Chisholm, Hugh. Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == Notes ==   == External links == Works by George Chalmers at Project Gutenberg Works by or about George Chalmers at Internet Archive "Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen" Portraits of George Chalmers at the National Portrait Gallery, London Archival material relating to George Chalmers listed at the UK National Archives

George Bernard Dantzig (November 8, 1914 – May 13, 2005) was an American mathematical scientist who made important contributions to operations research, computer science, economics, and statistics. Dantzig is known for his development of the simplex algorithm, an algorithm for solving linear programming problems, and his work with linear programming. In statistics, Dantzig solved two open problems in statistical theory, which he had mistaken for homework after arriving late to a lecture of Jerzy Neyman. Dantzig was the Professor Emeritus of Transportation Sciences and Professor of Operations Research and of Computer Science at Stanford.   == BiographyEdit == Born in Portland, Oregon, George Bernard Dantzig was named after George Bernard Shaw, the Irish writer. His father, Tobias Dantzig, was a Baltic German mathematician and linguist, and his mother, Anja Dantzig (née Ourisson), was a French linguist. Dantzig's parents met during their study at the Sorbonne University in Paris, where Tobias studied mathematics under Henri Poincaré, after whom Dantzig's brother was named. The Dantzigs immigrated to the United States, where they settled in Portland, Oregon. Early in the 1920s the Dantzig family moved from Baltimore to Washington. His mother became a linguist at the Library of Congress, and his father became a math tutor at the University of Maryland, College Park, George attended Powell Junior High School and Central High School; one of his friends there was Abraham Seidenberg, who also became a professional mathematician. By the time he reached high school he was already fascinated by geometry, and this interest was further nurtured by his father, challenging him with complicated problems, particularly in projective geometry. George Dantzig earned bachelor's degrees in mathematics and physics from the University of Maryland in 1936, and his master's degree in mathematics from the University of Michigan in 1938. After a two-year period at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, he enrolled in the doctoral program in mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, where he studied statistics under Jerzy Neyman. With the outbreak of World War II, George took a leave of absence from the doctoral program at Berkeley to join the U.S. Air Force Office of Statistical Control. In 1946, he returned to Berkeley to complete the requirements of his program and received his Ph.D. that year. Although he had a faculty offer from Berkeley, he returned to the Air Force as mathematical advisor to the comptroller. In 1952 Dantzig joined the mathematics division of the RAND Corporation. By 1960 he became a professor in the Department of Industrial Engineering at UC Berkeley, where he founded and directed the Operations Research Center. In 1966 he joined the Stanford faculty as Professor of Operations Research and of Computer Science. A year later, the Program in Operations Research became a full-fledged department. In 1973 he founded the Systems Optimization Laboratory (SOL) there. On a sabbatical leave that year, he headed the Methodology Group at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria. Later he became the C. A. Criley Professor of Transportation Sciences at Stanford, and kept going, well beyond his mandatory retirement in 1985. He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. George was the recipient of many honors, including the first John von Neumann Theory Prize in 1974, the National Medal of Science in 1975, an honorary doctorate from the University of Maryland, College Park in 1976. The Mathematical Programming Society honored Dantzig by creating the George B. Dantzig Prize, bestowed every three years since 1982 on one or two people who have made a significant impact in the field of mathematical programming. Dantzig died on May 13, 2005, in his home in Stanford, California, of complications from diabetes and cardiovascular disease. He was 90 years old.   == WorkEdit == Freund wrote further that "through his research in mathematical theory, computation, economic analysis, and applications to industrial problems, [Dantzig] has contributed more than any other researcher to the remarkable development of linear programming". Dantzig's seminal work allows the airline industry, for example, to schedule crews and make fleet assignments. Based on his work tools are developed "that shipping companies use to determine how many planes they need and where their delivery trucks should be deployed. The oil industry long has used linear programming in refinery planning, as it determines how much of its raw product should become different grades of gasoline and how much should be used for petroleum-based byproducts. It is used in manufacturing, revenue management, telecommunications, advertising, architecture, circuit design and countless other areas".   === Mathematical statisticsEdit === An event in Dantzig's life became the origin of a famous story in 1939 while he was a graduate student at UC Berkeley. Near the beginning of a class for which Dantzig was late, professor Jerzy Neyman wrote two examples of famously unsolved statistics problems on the blackboard. When Dantzig arrived, he assumed that the two problems were a homework assignment and wrote them down. According to Dantzig, the problems "seemed to be a little harder than usual", but a few days later he handed in completed solutions for the two problems, still believing that they were an assignment that was overdue. Six weeks later, Dantzig received a visit from an excited professor Neyman, who was eager to tell him that the homework problems he had solved were two of the most famous unsolved problems in statistics. He had prepared one of Dantzig's solutions for publication in a mathematical journal. As Dantzig told it in a 1986 interview in the College Mathematics Journal:  A year later, when I began to worry about a thesis topic, Neyman just shrugged and told me to wrap the two problems in a binder and he would accept them as my thesis.  Years later another researcher, Abraham Wald, was preparing to publish a paper which arrived at a conclusion for the second problem, and included Dantzig as its co-author when he learned of the earlier solution. This story began to spread, and was used as a motivational lesson demonstrating the power of positive thinking. Over time Dantzig's name was removed and facts were altered, but the basic story persisted in the form of an urban legend, and as an introductory scene in the movie Good Will Hunting.   === Linear programmingEdit === Linear programming is a mathematical method for determining a way to achieve the best outcome (such as maximum profit or lowest cost) in a given mathematical model for some list of requirements represented as linear relationships. Linear programming arose as a mathematical model developed during World War II to plan expenditures and returns in order to reduce costs to the army and increase losses to the enemy. It was kept secret until 1947. Postwar, many industries found its use in their daily planning. The founders of this subject are Leonid Kantorovich, a Russian mathematician who developed linear programming problems in 1939, Dantzig, who published the simplex method in 1947, and John von Neumann, who developed the theory of the duality in the same year. Dantzig's original example of finding the best assignment of 70 people to 70 jobs exemplifies the usefulness of linear programming. The computing power required to test all the permutations to select the best assignment is vast; the number of possible configurations exceeds the number of particles in the universe. However, it takes only a moment to find the optimum solution by posing the problem as a linear program and applying the Simplex algorithm. The theory behind linear programming drastically reduces the number of possible optimal solutions that must be checked. In 1963, Dantzig’s Linear Programming and Extensions was published by Princeton University Press. Rich in insight and coverage of significant topics, the book quickly became “the bible” of linear programming.   == PublicationsEdit == Books by George Dantzig: 1953. Notes on linear programming. RAND Corporation. 1956. Linear inequalities and related systems. With others. Edited by H.W. Kuhn and A.W. Tucker. Princeton University Press. 1963. Linear programming and extensions. Princeton University Press and the RAND Corporation. pdf from RAND 1966. On the continuity of the minimum set of a continuous function. With Jon H. Folkman and Norman Shapiro. 1968. Mathematics of the decision sciences. With Arthur F. Veinott, Jr. Summer Seminar on Applied Mathematics 5th : 1967 : Stanford University. American Mathematical Society. 1969. Lectures in differential equations. A. K. Aziz, general editor. Contributors: George B. Dantzig and others. 1970. Natural gas transmission system optimization. With others. 1973. Compact city; a plan for a liveable urban environment. With Thomas L. Saaty. 1974. Studies in optimization. Edited with B.C. Eaves. Mathematical Association of America. 1985. Mathematical programming : essays in honor of George B. Dantzig. Edited by R.W. Cottle. Mathematical Programming Society. 1997. Linear programming 1: Introduction. G.B.D. and Mukund N. Thapa. Springer-Verlag. 2003. Linear programming 2: Theory and Extensions. G.B.D. and Mukund N. Thapa. Springer-Verlag. 2003. The Basic George B. Dantzig. Edited by Richard W. Cottle. Stanford Business Books, Stanford University Press, Stanford, California. Book chapters: Dantzig, George B. (1960), "General convex objective forms", in Arrow, Kenneth J.; Karlin, Samuel; Suppes, Patrick, Mathematical models in the social sciences, 1959: Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium, Stanford mathematical studies in the social sciences, IV, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, pp. 151–158, ISBN 9780804700214.  Articles, a selection: Dantzig, George B. (June 1940). "On the Non-Existence of Tests of 'Student's' Hypothesis Having Power Functions Independent of σ". The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 11 (2): 186–92. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177731912. JSTOR 2235875.  Wood, Marshall K.; Dantzig, George B. (1949). "Programming of Interdependent Activities: I General Discussion". Econometrica 17 (3/4): 193–9. doi:10.2307/1905522. JSTOR 1905522.  Dantzig, George B. (1949). "Programming of Interdependent Activities: II Mathematical Model". Econometrica 17 (3): 200–211. doi:10.2307/1905523.  Dantzig, George B. (1955). "Optimal Solution of a Dynamic Leontief Model with Substitution". Econometrica 23 (3): 295–302. doi:10.2307/1910385.    == See alsoEdit ==  Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition Knapsack problem Maximum flow problem Optimization (mathematics) Travelling salesman problem   == NotesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Cottle, Richard; Johnson, Ellis; Wets, Roger (March 2007). "George B. Dantzig (1914–2005)" (PDF). Notices of the American Mathematical Society 54 (3): 344–62.  "Professor George Dantzig: Linear Programming Founder Turns 80", SIAM News, November 1994 O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "George Dantzig", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Dantzig, George B. (1990). "The Diet Problem". Interfaces 20 (4): 43–7. doi:10.1287/inte.20.4.43. JSTOR 25061369.  Cottle, Richard W. (2005). "George B. Dantzig: a legendary life in mathematical programming". Mathematical Programming 105 (1): 1–8. doi:10.1007/s10107-005-0674-4. ISSN 0025-5610.    == External linksEdit == Works by or about George Dantzig in libraries (WorldCat catalog) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "George Dantzig", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Obituaries of George Dantzig Interview with George B. Dantzig: The Father of Linear Programming - The College Mathematical Journal, 1986 INFORMS George Dantzig Memorial Website George Dantzig at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

George Horace Gallup (November 18, 1901 – July 26, 1984) was an American pioneer of survey sampling techniques and inventor of the Gallup poll, a successful statistical method of survey sampling for measuring public opinion.   == Biography ==  Gallup was born in Jefferson, Iowa. He was the son of George Henry Gallup, a dairy farmer. As a teen, George Jr., known then as "Ted", would deliver milk and used his salary to start a newspaper at the high school, where he also played football. His higher education took place at the University of Iowa, where he was a football player, a member of the Iowa Beta chapter of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, and editor of The Daily Iowan, an independent newspaper which serves the university campus. He earned his B.A. in 1923, his M.A. in 1925 and his Ph.D. in 1928. He then moved to Des Moines, Iowa, where he served as head of the Department of Journalism at Drake University until 1931. That year, he moved to Evanston, Illinois, as a professor of journalism and advertising at Northwestern University. The next year, he moved to New York City to join the advertising agency of Young and Rubicam as director of research (later as vice president from 1937 to 1947). He was also professor of journalism at Columbia University, but he had to give up this position shortly after he formed his own polling company, the American Institute of Public Opinion (Gallup Poll), in 1935. Gallup is often credited as the developer of public polling. In 1932, Gallup did some polling for his mother-in-law, Ola Babcock Miller, a candidate who was a long-shot from winning a position as Iowa Secretary of State. With the Democratic landslide of that year, she won a stunning victory, furthering Gallup's interest in politics. In 1936, his new organization achieved national recognition by correctly predicting, from the replies of only 50,000 respondents, that Franklin Roosevelt would defeat Alf Landon in the U.S. Presidential election. This was in direct contradiction to the widely respected Literary Digest magazine whose poll based on over two million returned questionnaires predicted that Landon would be the winner. Not only did Gallup get the election right, he correctly predicted the results of the Literary Digest poll as well using a random sample smaller than theirs but chosen to match it. Twelve years later, his organization had its moment of greatest ignominy, when it predicted that Thomas Dewey would defeat Harry S. Truman in the 1948 election, by five to fifteen percentage points. Gallup believed the error was mostly due to ending his polling three weeks before Election Day. In 1947, he launched the Gallup International Association, an international association of polling organizations. In 1948, with Claude E. Robinson, he founded Gallup and Robinson, Inc., an advertising research company. In 1958, Gallup grouped all of his polling operations under what became The Gallup Organization. Gallup died in 1984 of a heart attack at his summer home in Tschingel, a village in the Bernese Oberland of Switzerland. He was buried in Princeton Cemetery. His wife died in 1988, and their son, writer and pollster George Gallup, Jr., died in 2011.   == See also == Approval rating The Gallup Organization Gallup & Robinson George H. Gallup House Gallup International Association   == References ==   == Bibliography == Cantril, Hadley. Gauging Public Opinion (1944) Cantril, Hadley and Mildred Strunk, eds. Public Opinion, 1935–1946 (1951), massive compilation of many public opinion polls from US, UK, Canada, Australia, and elsewhere. Converse, Jean M. Survey Research in the United States: Roots and Emergence 1890–1960 (1987), the standard history Doktorov, Boris Z. "George Gallup: Biography and Destiny." Moscow: (2011) Foley, Ryan J., Gallup Papers Give Glimpse into US Polling History, Associated Press (2012) Gallup, George. Public Opinion in a Democracy (1939) Gallup, Alec M. ed. The Gallup Poll Cumulative Index: Public Opinion, 1935–1997 (1999) lists 10,000+ questions, but no results Gallup, George Horace, ed. The Gallup Poll; Public Opinion, 1935–1971 3 vol (1972) summarizes results of each poll. Hawbaker, Becky Wilson. "Taking 'the Pulse of Democracy': George Gallup, Iowa, and the Origin of the Gallup Poll." The Palimpsest 74(3) 98–118. Description of Gallup's Iowa years and their impact on his development. Lavrakas, Paul J. et al. eds. Presidential Polls and the News Media (1995) Moore, David W. The Superpollsters: How They Measure and Manipulate Public Opinion in America (1995) Ohmer, Susan (2006). George Gallup in Hollywood. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12133-0.  Rogers, Lindsay. The Pollsters: Public Opinion, Politics, and Democratic Leadership (1949) Traugott, Michael W. The Voter's Guide to Election Polls 3rd ed. (2004) Young, Michael L. Dictionary of Polling: The Language of Contemporary Opinion Research (1992)   == External links == The Gallup Legacy, from Gallup & Robinson website TIME profile from 1948

Sir George Handley "The Knibb" Knibbs CMG (13 June 1858 – 30 March 1929) was an Australian scientist, the first Commonwealth Statistician and the first director of the Commonwealth Institute of Science and Industry, predecessor to the CSIRO. Knibbs was born in Sydney son of John Handley Knibbs, foreman, and his wife Ellen, née Curthoys. Knibbs joined the New South Wales Land Survey Department in 1877 and in January 1878 was appointed a licensed surveyor. In 1889 Knibbs resigned to take up private practice as a surveyor, and in 1890 became lecturer in surveying at the University of Sydney. Knibbs was elected a member of the Royal Society of New South Wales in 1881, became a member of the council in 1894, from 1896 to 1906 was almost continuously honorary secretary, and in 1898-9 was president. Knibbs was also taking an active interest in other societies, and was president of the Institution of Surveyors at Sydney for four years in the period between 1892 and 1901, and president of the New South Wales branch and a fellow of the British Astronomical Society in 1897-8. Knibbs had begun contributing papers to the Royal Society of New South Wales at an early age, at first on matters arising out of surveying, and then on problems of physics. In his presidential address delivered on 3 May 1899 Knibbs showed that he had spent time studying mathematics. In 1902 and 1903, as a royal commissioner on education, Knibbs travelled through Europe and furnished a valuable report, which led to his being appointed Director of Technical Education for New South Wales in 1905. He was also in this year acting professor of physics at the University of Sydney. In 1906 the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics was created and Knibbs became its first director. During World War I Knibbs was on the Royal Commission dealing with problems of trade and industry, and was a consulting member of the committee on munitions of war. In 1920 Knibbs played a leading role at the British Empire Statistical Conference in London. In March 1921 he was made director of the newly founded Institute of Science and Industry, a forerunner to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). At the 1921 meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science Knibbs was president of the Social and Statistical Science Section, and took as the subject of his address "Statistics in regard to World and Empire development". Two years later he was president of the association and spoke on "Science and its service to man". Knibbs resigned his directorship of the Institute of Science and Industry in 1926, and lived in retirement until his death of coronary vascular disease at Camberwell, Victoria, a suburb of Melbourne, on 30 March 1929. Knibbs was created a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG) in 1911 and was knighted in 1923. He contributed 29 papers to the Royal Society of New South Wales, and several of his monographs, largely on statistical subjects, were published as pamphlets. In 1913 he published a volume of verse, Voices of the North and Echoes of Hellas, largely translations, carefully written but not important as poetry, and in 1928 appeared a work on population, The Shadow of the World's Future.   == References ==  Serle, Percival (1949). "Knibbs, George Handley". Dictionary of Australian Biography. Sydney: Angus and Robertson. Retrieved 2009-08-24.

George Pólya /ˈpoʊl.jə/ (Hungarian: Pólya György, pronounced [ˈpoːjɒ ˈɟørɟ]; December 13, 1887 – September 7, 1985) was a Hungarian mathematician. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Zürich and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He made fundamental contributions to combinatorics, number theory, numerical analysis and probability theory. He is also noted for his work in heuristics and mathematics education.   == Life and works == He was born as Pólya György in Budapest, Austria-Hungary to Anna Deutsch and Jakab Pólya, Roman Catholics who converted from Judaism in 1886. Although his parents were religious and he was baptized into the Roman Catholic Church, George Pólya grew up to be an agnostic. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Zürich in Switzerland and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He remained Stanford Professor Emeritus for the rest of his life and career. He worked on a range of mathematical topics, including series, number theory, mathematical analysis, geometry, algebra, combinatorics, and probability. He died in Palo Alto, California, USA.   == Heuristics == Early in his career, Pólya wrote with Gábor Szegő two influential problem books Problems and Theorems in Analysis (I: Series, Integral Calculus, Theory of Functions and II: Theory of Functions. Zeros. Polynomials. Determinants. Number Theory. Geometry). Later in his career, he spent considerable effort to identify systematic methods of problem-solving to further discovery and invention in mathematics for students, teachers, and researchers. He wrote five books on the subject: How to Solve It, Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning (Volume I: Induction and Analogy in Mathematics, and Volume II: Patterns of Plausible Inference), and Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning, and Teaching Problem Solving (volumes 1 and 2). In How to Solve It, Pólya provides general heuristics for solving a gamut of problems, including both mathematical and non-mathematical problems. The book includes advice for teaching students of mathematics and a mini-encyclopedia of heuristic terms. It was translated into several languages and has sold over a million copies. Russian physicist Zhores I. Alfyorov, (Nobel laureate in 2000) praised it, noting that he was a fan. The book is still used in mathematical education. Douglas Lenat's Automated Mathematician and Eurisko artificial intelligence programs were inspired by Pólya's work. In addition to his works directly addressing problem solving, Pólya wrote another short book called Mathematical Methods in Science, based on a 1963 work supported by the National Science Foundation, edited by Leon Bowden, and published by the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) in 1977. As Pólya notes in the preface, Professor Bowden carefully followed a tape recording of a course Pólya gave several times at Stanford in order to put the book together. Pólya notes in the preface "that the following pages will be useful, yet they should not be regarded as a finished expression."   == Legacy == There are three prizes (whose names are confused with one another) named after Pólya. In 1969 the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) established the George Pólya Prize, given alternately in two categories for "a notable application of combinatorial theory" and for "a notable contribution in another area of interest to George Pólya." In 1976 the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) established the George Pólya Award "for articles of expository excellence" published in the College Mathematics Journal. In 1987 the London Mathematical Society (LMS) established the Pólya Prize for "outstanding creativity in, imaginative exposition of, or distinguished contribution to, mathematics within the United Kingdom." A mathematics center has been named in Pólya's honor at the University of Idaho in Moscow, Idaho. The mathematics center focuses mainly on tutoring students in the subjects of algebra and calculus.   == Selected publications ==   === Books === Aufgaben und Lehrsätze aus der Analysis, 1st edn. 1925. ("Problems and theorems in analysis“). Springer, Berlin 1975 (with Gábor Szegő). Reihen. 1975, 4th edn., ISBN 3-540-04874-X. Funktionentheorie, Nullstellen, Polynome, Determinanten, Zahlentheorie. 1975, 4th edn., ISBN 3-540-05456-1. Mathematik und plausibles Schliessen. Birkhäuser, Basel 1988, Induktion und Analogie in der Mathematik, 3rd edn., ISBN 3-7643-1986-0 (Wissenschaft und Kultur; 14). Typen und Strukturen plausibler Folgerung, 2nd edn., ISBN 3-7643-0715-3 (Wissenschaft und Kultur; 15). - English translation: Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning, Princeton University Press 1954, 2 volumes (Vol. 1: Induction and Analogy in Mathematics, Vol. 2: Patterns of Plausible Inference) Schule des Denkens. Vom Lösen mathematischer Probleme ("How to solve it“). 4th edn. Francke Verlag, Tübingen 1995, ISBN 3-7720-0608-6 (Sammlung Dalp). - English translation: How to solve it, Princeton University Press 2004 (with foreword by John Horton Conway and added exercises) Vom Lösen mathematischer Aufgaben. 2nd edn. Birkhäuser, Basel 1983, ISBN 3-7643-0298-4 (Wissenschaft und Kultur; 21). - English translation: Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning and Teaching Problem Solving, 2 volumes, Wiley 1962 (published in one vol. 1981) Collected Papers, 4 volumes, MIT Press 1974 (ed. Ralph P. Boas). Vol. 1: Singularities of Analytic Functions, Vol. 2: Location of Zeros, Vol. 3: Analysis, Vol. 4: Probability, Combinatorics with R. C. Read: Combinatorial enumeration of groups, graphs, and chemical compounds, Springer Verlag 1987 (English translation of Kombinatorische Anzahlbestimmungen für Gruppen, Graphen und chemische Verbindungen, Acta Mathematica, vol. 68, 1937, pp. 145-254) with Godfrey Harold Hardy: John Edensor Littlewood Inequalities, Cambridge University Press 1934 Mathematical methods in Science, MAA, Washington D. C. 1977 (ed. Leon Bowden) with Gordon Latta: Complex Variables, Wiley 1974 with Robert E. Tarjan, Donald R. Woods: Notes on introductory combinatorics, Birkhäuser 1983 with Jeremy Kilpatrick: The Stanford mathematics problem book: with hints and solutions, New York: Teachers College Press 1974 with several co-authors: Applied combinatorical mathematics, Wiley 1964 (ed. Edwin F. Beckenbach) with Gábor Szegő: Isoperimetric inequalities in mathematical physics, Princeton, Annals of Mathematical Studies 27, 1951   === Articles === "On the mean-value theorem corresponding to a given linear homogeneous differential equation". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc 24 (4): 312–324. 1922. MR 1501228.  "On Functions Whose Derivatives Do Not Vanish in a Given Interval". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 27 (4): 216–218. 1941. PMC 1078308.  "Sur l'existence de fonctions entières satisfaint à certaines conditions linéaires". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 50 (1): 129–139. 1941. MR 0004304.  with Ralph P. Boas, Jr.: "Generalizations of Completely Convex Functions". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 27 (6): 323–325. 1941. PMC 1078330.  "On converse gap theorems". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 52 (1): 65–71. 1942. MR 0006577.  with Norbert Wiener: "On the oscillation of the derivatives of a periodic function". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 52 (2): 249–256. 1942. MR 0007169.  "On the zeros of a derivative of a function and its analytic character". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 49, Part 1 (3): 178–191. 1943. MR 0007781.  "A Minimum Problem About the Motion of a Solid Through a Fluid". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 33 (7): 218–221. 1947. PMC 1079030.  "Remark on Weyl's Note "Inequalities Between the Two Kinds of Eigenvalues of a Linear Transformation". Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 36 (1): 49–51. 1950. PMC 1063130.    == See also == Landau–Kolmogorov inequality Multivariate Pólya distribution Pólya conjecture Polya distribution Pólya enumeration theorem Pólya–Vinogradov inequality Pólya inequality Polya urn model Pólya's proof that there is no "horse of a different color"   == References ==   == External links == The George Pólya Award O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "George Pólya", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . George Pólya at the Mathematics Genealogy Project George Pólya, Gábor Szegö, Problems and theorems in analysis (1998) PolyaPower—an introduction to Polya's Heuristics at the Wayback Machine (archived July 28, 2009) George Pólya on UIUC's WikEd Memorial Resolution George Pólya — Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences "Polya Guessing" on Vimeo

George John Shaw-Lefevre, 1st Baron Eversley PC, DL (12 June 1831 – 19 April 1928) was a British Liberal Party politician. In a ministerial career that spanned thirty years, he was twice First Commissioner of Works and also served as Postmaster General and President of the Local Government Board.   == Background and education == Eversley was the only son of Sir John Shaw-Lefevre and Rachel Emily, daughter of Ichabod Wright. He was born in Battersea, and was the nephew of Charles Shaw-Lefevre, 1st Viscount Eversley, Speaker of the House of Commons. He was educated at Eton and at Trinity College, Cambridge, and was called to the Bar, Inner Temple, in 1855.   == Political career == Eversley stood unsuccessfully as the Liberal candidate for Winchester in 1859 but was successfully returned for Reading in 1863, a seat he held until 1885. He carried a vote in House of Commons for arbitration of the Alabama Claims in 1868. He entered the government under Lord Russell as Civil Lord of the Admiralty in 1866, a post he held until the government fell the same year, and later served under William Ewart Gladstone as Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Trade from 1868 to 1871, as Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department from January to March 1871, as Parliamentary Secretary of the Admiralty from 1871 to 1874 and again in 1880, and as First Commissioner of Works from 1881 to 1885. He entered Gladstone's cabinet in November 1884 when he was appointed Postmaster-General. He relinquished the post of First Commissioner of Works in February 1885 but continued as Postmaster General until the Liberals lost power in June 1885. Eversley lost his seat in parliament at the 1885 general election and consequently did not serve in Gladstone's brief 1886 administration. He was able to return to the House of Commons in April 1886 when he was elected for Bradford Central in a by-election, which constituency he represented until 1895. He once again became First Commissioner of Works and a member of Gladstone's cabinet in 1892. When Lord Rosebery became Prime Minister in 1894 he was appointed President of the Local Government Board, which he remained until the following year. In 1897 he was elected a member of the London County Council as Progressive for the Haggerston Division. He was sworn of the Privy Council in 1880 and in 1906 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Eversley, of Old Ford in the County of London, a revival of the Eversley title held by his uncle. He made his last speech in the House of Lords in 1913.   == Other public positions == Eversley was also a Commissioner to negotiate a Convention on Fisheries with French Government in 1858, a member of Sea Fisheries Commission in 1862, President of the Statistical Society of London between 1878 and 1879 and Chairman of the Royal Commissions on the Loss of Life at Sea in 1885 and on the Agricultural Depression between 1893 and 1896. In 1865 he co-founded the Commons Preservation Society, becoming its first chairman and, in 1905, its president. He was appointed a Bencher of the Inner Temple in 1882. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1899.   == Family == Lord Eversley married Lady Constance Moreton, daughter of Henry Reynolds-Moreton, 3rd Earl of Ducie, in 1874. They had no children. He died in April 1928, aged 96, when the barony became extinct. He is buried in the graveyard at St Mary's Church, King's Worthy. Lady Eversley survived him by a year and died in February 1929. It is interesting that one of his sisters, Maria Louisa Shaw Lefevre, can be identified as the anonymous author of "The Notebooks Of A Spinster Lady, 1878-1903", published by Cassell in 1919. In her notebooks she tells amusing stories of life in the upper classes of society in England at the time, makes candid observations of contemporary people and recounts jokes she heard told. She records that she attended the funeral of her good friend Augustus Hare in 1903. The book's editor, also unnamed, says she died in 1908. Reference to "The Times" lists her in its report on the funeral and the death records confirm she died in 1908. Another sister, Madeleine Shaw-Lefevre, was the first Principal of Somerville Hall; and another Rachel married Arthur Hamilton-Gordon, son of the Prime Minister the 4th Earl of Aberdeen.   == Notes ==   == References == "The Notebooks Of A Spinster Lady", page 290, regarding her attendance at the funeral, and page 295 where the editor records that she died five years after 1903. The Times, 28 January page 10. "Among those present at the funeral...Miss Shaw Lefevre". First quarter 1908 her death record, East Preston folio 26 page 255.   == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by George Shaw-Lefevre Lundy, Darryl. "Photograph of Lord Eversley at thepeerage.com". The Peerage.

George Waddel Snedecor (October 20, 1881 – February 15, 1974) was an American mathematician and statistician. He contributed to the foundations of analysis of variance, data analysis, experimental design, and statistical methodology. Snedecor's F distribution and the George W. Snedecor Award of the American Statistical Association are named after him. Snedecor founded the first academic department of statistics in the United States, at Iowa State University. He also created the first statistics laboratory in the U.S. at Iowa State, and was a pioneer of modern applied statistics in the U.S. His 1938 textbook Statistical Methods  became an essential resource: "In the 1970s, a review of citations in published scientific articles from all areas of science showed that Snedecor's Statistical Methods was the most frequently cited book." Snedecor worked for the statistics department of Foster's Group from 1957 to 1963. He was involved in the elaboration of all production data. The "F" of Snedecor's F distribution is named in honor of Sir Ronald Fisher. Snedecor was awarded honorary doctorates in science by North Carolina State University in 1956 and by Iowa State University in 1958. Snedecor Hall, at Iowa State University, is the home of the Statistics Department. It was constructed in 1939. At Iowa State, he was an early user of John Vincent Atanasoff's Atanasoff-Berry Computer (maybe the first user of an electronic digital computer for real world production mathematics problem solutions). Born in Memphis, Tennessee, into a socially prominent and politically powerful, southern Democratic, Presbyterian family line, Snedecor grew up in Florida and Alabama where his lawyer father moved wife and children in order to fulfill a personal and radical religious calling to minister to, evangelize and educate the poor. George was the grandson of Memphis lawyer Bedford Mitchell Estes, he was the son of Emily Alston Estes and James G. Snedecor, and nephew of Ione Estes Dodd and William J. Dodd, the great midwest architect.   == References == ^ Snedecor, George W.; Cochran, William G. (1989). Statistical Methods (8th ed.). Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing Professional. ISBN 978-0-8138-1561-9. Retrieved 2011-08-05.  ^ David Salsburg, The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century, New York, W. H. Freeman, 2001; p. 196. ^ Unpublished memoir of Emily Alston Estes Snedecor completed in 1931   == Books == Calculation and interpretation of analysis of variance and covariance (1934) Statistical methods applied to experiments in agriculture and biology (1938)   == External links == George W. Snedecor biography Article from Amstat News (PDF) Mathematics Genealogy Project

Gheorghe Mihoc (July 7, 1906 – December 25, 1981) was a Romanian statistician. He was born in Brăila, the son of a worker. In 1908, his father moved the family to Bucharest. Here he attended elementary school and the Gheorghe Şincai high school. He enrolled at the University of Bucharest, Faculty of Sciences, and was awarded his degree in mathematics in June 1928. He then went to Italy and studied statistics and actuarial studies at the University of Rome; he earned a Doctor of Statistical and Actuarial Sciences in July 1930. In 1930 he was appointed professor in the School of Statistics, Actuarial Studies, and Calculation, which had been established that year (it later became an Institute). The school was headed by Octav Onicescu. There Mihoc taught courses in actuarial mathematics from 1930 to 1948. On April 28, 1934, he earned his Doctorate in Mathematics from the University of Bucharest, in front of a commission consisting of Dimitrie Pompeiu, as chairman, Anton Davidoglu, and Octav Onicescu. The subject of his thesis was On the general properties of interdependent statistical variables. From 1937, Mihoc went to the University of Bucharest as assistant to Octav Onicescu, first at mechanics, then at algebra and probabilities calculation (1937-1942). That same year (1937) he also taught general mathematics with the students from the preparation year of the Polytechnic University of Bucharest. Between 1942 and 1946 he was conference lecturer of general mathematics at the Faculty of physics-chemistry of Bucharest University. Then, in 1946 he was appointed professor at the Commercial academy from Bucharest, for financial mathematics (1946-1949). In 1948, after the reform of education in all degrees, he was appointed head of the department of probability calculation and mathematical statistics at the Faculty of mathematics and physics of Bucharest University, then as professor head of department of applied mathematics. From the autumn of 1962 he was again professor, head of the department of probability calculation and mathematical statistics (successor to professor Onicescu). As statistician and actuar, Gheorghe Mihoc was employed on April 15, 1929 at the Central house of social insurance. He worked here as director at the directorate of insurance (1939-1940), as director of the directorate of pensions (1940-1942), as director of the Office of studies and actuariat (1942-1945). He was administrator at the House of pensions of the writers (1940-1945) and administrator at the House of pensions of the composers, painters and sculptors (1940-1943). In 1945 he was appointed chief actuary of the Central house of social insurance. Gheorghe Mihoc was dean of the Faculty of mathematics and physics of the Bucharest University from 1951 until 1960, and from 1960 to 1963 he was prorector of the Bucharest University. In July 1963 he was appointed rector. He was a corresponding member of the Academy from 1955 until 1963, and on March 20 he became titular member at the section of mathematical sciences. In April 1964 he was appointed director of the Statistical Centre of the Academy. He was member in the old "Mathematical gazette" and member in the board of C.R.C.C.S. In November 1964 Mihoc was awarded the title of Honorary Professor. Being reputed as specialist in probability calculation, he was invited to different countries to give lectures in this field.   == References ==

Sir Gilbert Thomas Walker, CSI, FRS (14 June 1868 – 4 November 1958) was a British physicist and statistician of the 20th century. Walker studied mathematics and applied it to a variety of fields including aerodynamics, electromagnetism and the analysis of time-series data before taking up a teaching position at Cambridge University. Although he had no experience in meteorology, he was recruited for a post in the Indian Meteorological Department where he worked on statistical approaches to predict the monsoons. He developed the methods in the analysis of time-series data that are now called the Yule-Walker equations. He is known for his groundbreaking description of the Southern Oscillation, a major phenomenon of global climate, and for discovering what is named after him as the Walker circulation, and for greatly advancing the study of climate in general. He was also instrumental in aiding the early career of the Indian mathematical prodigy, Srinivasa Ramanujan.   == Early life and education == He was born in Rochdale, Lancashire on 14 June 1868, the fourth child and eldest son of Thomas Walker and Elizabeth Charlotte Haslehurst. Thomas was Borough Engineer of Croydon and had pioneered the use of concrete for town reservoirs. He attended Whitgift School where he showed an interest in mathematics and got a scholarship to study at St Paul's School. He obtained a degree in Metallurgy from Imperial College London and attended Trinity College, Cambridge where he was Senior Wrangler in 1889. His hard studies led to ill-health and he spent several winters recuperating in Switzerland where he learnt skating and became quite expert. He became a lecturer at Trinity College from 1895.   == Career == Walker was an established applied mathematician at the University of Cambridge when he took up a position as assistant to the meteorological reporter in 1903. He was elevated to the position of director general of observatories in India in 1904. Walker had never worked on meteorology but the previous director of the Indian Meteorological Department, John Eliot. Another predecessor in the Indian Meteorological Department, Henry Francis Blanford, had noticed the pattern that the summer monsoon in India and Burma was correlated with the spring snow cover in the Himalayas. In India, the failure of the Indian Ocean monsoon had brought severe famine to the country in 1899 and meteorology had great economic value. Walker developed Blanford's idea with quantitative rigour and came up with correlation measures (with a lag) and regression equations (or in time-series terminology, autoregression). The methods he introduced for time-series regression are now partly named after him (the other contributor was Udny Yule who studied sun-spot cycles) as the Yule-Walker equations. Analyzing vast amounts of weather data from India and lands beyond, over the next fifteen years he published the first descriptions of the great seesaw oscillation of atmospheric pressure between the Indian and Pacific Ocean, and its correlation to temperature and rainfall patterns across much of the Earth's tropical regions, including India. This is now called the El Niño Southern Oscillation. He was made a Companion of the Order of the Star of India in 1911. Walker also took an interest in several other fields. He made mathematical studies on bird flight and boomerangs. His interest in boomerangs came early in undergraduate years and he had earned the nickname of "Boomerang Walker". In Simla, he used to throw a boomerang on the grounds of Annadale attracting the attention even of the Viceroy of India. He published a summary of his ten years of research in Nature in 1901. Walker continued his studies of yearly weather and climate change even after his retirement from India (in 1924 when he was knighted) and acceptance of a professorship in meteorology at Imperial College London. He had only mixed success in his original goal, the prediction of monsoonal failures; however, his theories and broad body of supporting research represented an invaluable step forward, allowing his successors in climate study to move beyond local observation and forecasting toward comprehensive models of climate worldwide. He served as president of the Royal Meteorological Society from 1926 to 1927. Walker was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1904, long before his work on meteorology on the strength of his work in applied mathematics and applications to electromagnetism. Walker, with his talent for mathematics, was among the first to recognize the abilities of the Indian mathematical prodigy Srinivasa Ramanujan and wrote a letter to the University of Madras to support a scholarship. In a review of a book, Walker noted the growing insularity of specialists:  There is, to-day, always a risk that specialists in two subjects, using languages full of words that are unintelligible without study, will grow up not only, without knowledge of each other’s work, but also will ignore the problems which require mutual assistance.  Walker married Mary Constance Carter in 1908 and they had a son and a daughter. He died at Coulsdon, Surrey on 4 November 1958. He was 90 years old. The Walker Institute in the United Kingdom, established to study climate, is named in his honour.   == References ==   == External links == Biography of Walker from The Walker Institute

Gottfried Emanuel Noether (Karlsruhe, Grand Duchy of Baden, 1915 – August 22, 1991, Willimantic, Connecticut) was an American statistician and educator. He was the son of Fritz Noether, the nephew of Emmy Noether, and the grandson of Max Noether.   == Education and career == Noether emigrated to the United States in 1939, where he earned a bachelor's degree (1940) and a master's degree (1941). The following four years, during World War II, he served with US Army intelligence in England, France, and Germany. After the war, he earned a doctorate from Columbia University (1949). He worked in academia for the rest of his career, beginning at New York University. He moved to Boston University in 1952 where he worked until he joined the faculty of the University of Connecticut in 1968. There, he eventually became chairman of the department of statistics. He retired in 1985.   == Statistician == Noether served on a statistical advisory committee for the United States Office of Management and Budget and as an associate editor of The American Statistician. He was a fellow of the American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. As an expert on non-parametric statistics, he wrote over 50 articles and six books. He also wrote a brief biography of his father Fritz, who was executed in the Soviet Union in 1941.   == Honours == In 1999 the Gottfried E. Noether Awards were established to "recognize distinguished researchers and teachers and to support research in the field of nonparametric statistics." The initial recipients of the Gottfried E. Noether Senior Scholar Awards were Erich Leo Lehmann (2000) and Robert V. Hogg (2001), and Pranab K. Sen (2002).   == References == Hartford Courant (August 26, 1991). "Gottfried E. Noether". Hartford Courant. p. B6.  (obituary) New York Times (August 27, 1991). "Gottfried Noether, 76, Educator in Statistics". New York Times. p. 22.  (obituary) Noether, Gottfried E.; Marilynn Dueker (1990). Introduction to Statistics: The Nonparametric Way. Springer. ISBN 0-387-97284-6.  Noether, Gottfried E. (September 1985). "Fritz Noether (1884–194?)". Integral Equations and Operator Theory 8 (5): 573–576. doi:10.1007/BF01201702.  Parastaev, Andrei (March 1990). "Letter to the editor". Integral Equations and Operator Theory 13 (2): 303–305. doi:10.1007/BF01193762.    == External links == About the Gottfried E. Noether Awards, with photograph.

Gunnar Kulldorff (6 December 1927 – 25 June 2015) was a Swedish statistician, specializing in estimation theory, survey sampling and order statistics. From 1989 to 1991, he was the president of the International Statistical Institute.   == Biography ==   === Early life === Gunnar Kulldorff was born in Malmö, Sweden on 6 December 1927, as the son of Erik and Ebba Kulldorff. In 1946, he entered Lund University, where he studied mathematics, statistics and mechanics, obtaining his bachelors degree in 1949.   === Scientific career === In 1954 Kulldorff earned a licentiate degree from the Department of Statistics at Lund University. Taking a teaching positions in the same department, he did his doctoral studies under the supervision of Carl-Erik Quensel and Harald Cramér. Kulldorff's research led to a PhD in 1961 for his thesis "Contributions to the Theory of Estimation from Grouped and Partially Grouped Samples". His thesis was republished by John Wiley & Sons as well as by the Soviet Union in a Russian translation. In a review for the Journal of the American Statistical Association, W. Edwards Deming wrote that "here is a book that faces reality, carrying the reader, in a modest 144 pages, on a wondrous excursion into the problems of grouped data, in which the reader cannot fail to catch the contagious enthusiasm of the author" . In 1965, Kulldorff was appointed as the first professor of statistics at the newly established Umeå University, where he also became the first dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. In 1966, he was appointed professor of mathematical statistics, a position he held until retirement. During this time, he wrote papers on survey sampling and the optimum combinations of selected order statistics from various well known parametric distributions, in order to draw inference on population parameters. Kulldorff was president of the Swedish Statistical Society 1968-69 and 1985–87, and a member of the Statistics Sweden Scientific Advisory Board from 1988 to 2002. He was president of the Swedish professors union 1978-1980.   === International Statistical Work === A large portion of Kulldorff's work was devoted to the promotion of statistics at the international level. He was a guest researcher at Texas A&M University (1970), Purdue University (1971), Stanford University (1971), the University of Kentucky (1977), the University of Arizona (1983) and the University of Manitoba (1985). Elected to the International Statistical Institute in 1968, Kulldorff served as vice president of the organization 1981-1985, president elect 1987-1989 and president 1989-1991. Around this time, he made many trips to support statistics in Africa, Asia and Latin America. In 1991, just after their independence, Kulldorff visited the Baltic countries. Seeing a need for knowledge and education about survey statistics, which had been underdeveloped during the Soviet era, he initiated a scientific exchange program between the Baltic and Nordic countries. A few years later, this led to the creation of the Baltic-Nordic-Ukrainian Network on Survey Statistics, with annual conferences, workshops and/or summer schools. In 2006, he received an honorary doctorate from Vilnius University in Lithuania.   === YMCA Activities === From an early age, Kulldorff was an active scout and scout leader in Malmö YMCA, leading to a long commitment to the organization. He was a board member (1954–66) and vice president (1962–66) of YMCA Sweden, where he played a key role in joining YMCA and YWCA into one organization, YWCA-YMCA of Sweden. From 1957-1966, he was a member of the YMCA International Board, and in the 1970s he was president of the local YMCA chapter in Umeå.   == Notes ==   == References == Blom, Gunnar (2015). "Gunnar Kulldorff". Nationalencyklopedin.  Jagers, Peter; Bimal Sinha (2015). "Obituary: Gunnar Kulldorff" (PDF). Institute of Mathematical Statistics Bulletin 44 (6): 11.  Kulldorff, Gunnar (1961), Contributions to the Theory of Estimation from Grouped and Partially Grouped Samples, Almqvist & Wiksell / John Wiley & Sons  Kulldorff, Martin (2015-07-08), "Gunnar Kulldorff, Umeå", Västerbottens-Kuriren  Svensk Biografisk Handbok (1993), Kulldorff, Gunnar, Norstedts Förlag, p. 607    == External links == Gunnar Kulldorff at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Gunnar Kulldorff's publications indexed by Google Scholar, a service provided by Google

Gustav Theodor Fechner (/ˈfɛxnər/; German: [ˈfɛçnɐ]; April 19, 1801 – November 18, 1887), was a German philosopher, physicist and experimental psychologist. An early pioneer in experimental psychology and founder of psychophysics, he inspired many 20th century scientists and philosophers. He is also credited with demonstrating the non-linear relationship between psychological sensation and the physical intensity of a stimulus via the formula: , which became known as the Weber–Fechner law.   == Early life and scientific careerEdit == Fechner was born at Groß Särchen, near Muskau, in Lower Lusatia, where his father was a pastor. Despite being raised by his religious father, Fechner became an atheist in later life. He was educated first at Sorau (now Żary in Western Poland). In 1817 he studied of medicine at the Medizinisch-Chirurgische Akademie in Dresden and from 1818 at the University of Leipzig, the city in which he spent the rest of his life. In 1834 he was appointed professor of physics. But in 1839, he contracted an eye disorder while studying the phenomena of color and vision, and, after much suffering, resigned. Subsequently recovering, he turned to the study of the mind and its relations with the body, giving public lectures on the subjects dealt with in his books.   == ContributionsEdit == Gustav Fechner published chemical and physical papers, and translated chemical works by J. B. Biot and Louis Jacques Thénard from the French language. A different but essential side of his character is seen in his poems and humorous pieces, such as the Vergleichende Anatomie der Engel (1825), written under the pseudonym of "Dr. Mises." Fechner's epoch-making work was his Elemente der Psychophysik (1860). He starts from the monistic thought that bodily facts and conscious facts, though not reducible one to the other, are different sides of one reality. His originality lies in trying to discover an exact mathematical relation between them. The most famous outcome of his inquiries is the law known as the Weber–Fechner law which may be expressed as follows: "In order that the intensity of a sensation may increase in arithmetical progression, the stimulus must increase in geometrical progression." Though holding good within certain limits only, the law has been found to be immensely useful. Fechner's law implies that sensation is a logarithmic function of physical intensity, which is impossible due to the logarithm's singularity at zero; therefore, S. S. Stevens proposed the more mathematically plausible power-law relation of sensation to intensity in his famous 1961 paper entitled "To Honor Fechner and Repeal His Law." Fechner's general formula for getting at the number of units in any sensation is S = c log R, where S stands for the sensation, R for the stimulus numerically estimated, and c for a constant that must be separately determined by experiment in each particular order of sensibility. Fechner's reasoning has been criticized on the grounds that although stimuli are composite, sensations are not. "Every sensation," says William James, "presents itself as an indivisible unit; and it is quite impossible to read any clear meaning into the notion that they are masses of units combined."   === The Fechner color effectEdit ===  In 1838, he also studied the still-mysterious perceptual illusion of what is still called the Fechner color effect, whereby colors are seen in a moving pattern of black and white. The English journalist and amateur scientist Charles Benham, in 1894, enabled English-speakers to learn of the effect through the invention of the spinning top that bears his name. Whether Fechner and Benham ever actually met face to face for any reason is not known.   === The medianEdit === In 1878 Fechner published a paper in which he developed the notion of the median. He later delved into experimental aesthetics and thought to determine the shapes and dimensions of aesthetically pleasing objects. He mainly used the sizes of paintings as his data base. In his 1876 Vorschule der Aesthetik he used the method of extreme ranks for subjective judgements. Fechner is generally credited with introducing the median into the formal analysis of data.   === SynesthesiaEdit === In 1871 Fechner reported the first empirical survey of coloured letter photisms among 73 synesthetes. His work was followed in the 1880s by that of Francis Galton.   === Corpus callosum splitEdit === One of Fechner's speculations about consciousness dealt with brain. During his time, it was known that the brain is bilaterally symmetrical and that there is a deep division between the two halves that are linked by a connecting band of fibers called the corpus callosum. Fechner speculated that if the corpus callosum were split, two separate streams of consciousness would result - the mind would become two. Yet, Fechner believed that his theory would never be tested; he was incorrect. During the mid-twentieth century, Roger Sperry and Michael Gazzaniga worked on epileptic patients with sectioned corpus callosum and observed that Fechner's idea was correct.   === Golden Section hypothesisEdit === Fechner constructed ten rectangles with different ratios of width to length and asked numerous observers to choose the "best" and "worst" rectangle shape. He was concerned with the visual appeal of rectangles with different proportions. The rectangles chosen as "best" by the largest number of participants had a ratio of 0.62 (between 3:5 and 5:8). This became known as the "golden section" (or Golden ratio) and referred to the ratio of a rectangle's width to length that is most appealing to the eye. Carl Stumpf partook in this study as a participant. However, there has been some ongoing dispute on the experiment itself, as the fact that Fechner deliberately discarded results of the study ill-fitting to his needs became known, with many mathematicians including Mario Livio refuting the result of the experiment.   === The two-piece normal distributionEdit === In his posthumously published Kollektivmasslehre (1897), Fechner introduced the Zweiseitige Gauss'sche Gesetz or two-piece normal distribution, to accommodate the asymmetries he had observed in empirical frequency distributions in many fields. The distribution has been independently rediscovered by several authors working in different fields.   == InfluenceEdit == Fechner, along with Wilhelm Wundt and Hermann von Helmholtz, is recognized as one of the founders of modern experimental psychology. His clearest contribution was the demonstration that because the mind was susceptible to measurement and mathematical treatment, psychology had the potential to become a quantified science. Theorists such as Immanuel Kant had long stated that this was impossible, and that therefore, a science of psychology was also impossible. Though he had a vast influence on psychophysics, the actual disciples of his general philosophy were few. Ernst Mach was inspired by his work on psychophysics. William James also admired his work: in 1904, he wrote an admiring introduction to the English translation of Fechner's Büchlein vom Leben nach dem Tode (Little Book of Life After Death). Fechner's world concept was highly animistic. He felt the thrill of life everywhere, in plants, earth, stars, the total universe. Man stands midway between the souls of plants and the souls of stars, who are angels. God, the soul of the universe, must be conceived as having an existence analogous to men. Natural laws are just the modes of the unfolding of God's perfection. In his last work Fechner, aged but full of hope, contrasts this joyous "daylight view" of the world with the dead, dreary "night view" of materialism. Fechner's work in aesthetics is also important. He conducted experiments to show that certain abstract forms and proportions are naturally pleasing to our senses, and gave some new illustrations of the working of aesthetic association. Charles Hartshorne saw him as a predecessor on his and Alfred North Whitehead's philosophy and regretted that Fechner's philosophical work had been neglected for so long. Fechner's position in reference to predecessors and contemporaries is not very sharply defined. He was remotely a disciple of Schelling, learnt much from Baruch Spinoza, G.W. Leibniz, Johann Friedrich Herbart, Arthur Schopenhauer, and Christian Hermann Weisse, and decidedly rejected G.W.F. Hegel and the monadism of Rudolf Hermann Lotze.   === Fechner DayEdit === It is claimed that, on the morning of 22 October 1850, Fechner awoke with a sudden new insight into how to study the mind. Moving away from Wundtarian introspection and basing his work on that of Weber, he developed his psychophysical Fechner scale. Each year, psychophysicists celebrate 22 October as the anniversary of Fechner's new insight as Fechner Day. Celebrations to mark Fechner Day were organized by the International Society for Psychophysics and held in Fechner's home city of Leipzig in 2001.   == Family and later lifeEdit == Little is known of Fechner's later years, nor of the circumstances, cause, and manner of his death. Fechner was the brother of painter Eduard Clemens Fechner and of Clementine Wieck Fechner, who was the stepmother of Clara Wieck when Clementine became her father Friedrich Wieck's second wife.   == WorksEdit == Praemissae ad theoriam organismi generalem ("Advances in the general theory of organisms") (1823). (Dr. Mises) Stapelia mixta (1824). Internet Archive (Harvard) Resultate der bis jetzt unternommenen Pflanzenanalysen ("Results of plant analyses undertaken to date") (1829). Internet Archive (Stanford) Maassbestimmungen über die galvanische Kette (1831). (Dr. Mises) Schutzmittel für die Cholera ("Protective equipment for cholera") (1832). Google (Harvard) — Google (UWisc) Repertorium der Experimentalphysik (1832). 3 volumes. Volume 1. Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (Oxford) Volume 2. Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (Oxford) Volume 3. Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (Oxford)  (ed.) Das Hauslexicon. Vollständiges Handbuch praktischer Lebenskenntnisse für alle Stände (1834–38). 8 volumes. Das Büchlein vom Leben nach dem Tode (1836). 6th ed., 1906. Internet Archive (Harvard) — Internet Archive (NYPL) (English) On Life After Death (1882). Google (Oxford) — IA (UToronto) 2nd ed., 1906. Internet Archive (UMich) 3rd ed., 1914. IA (UIllinois) (English) The Little Book of Life After Death (1904). IA (UToronto) 1905, Internet Archive (UCal) — IA (Ucal) — IA (UToronto)  (Dr. Mises) Gedichte (1841). Internet Archive (Oxford) Ueber das höchste Gut ("Concerning the Highest Good") (1846). Internet Archive (Stanford) (Dr. Mises) Nanna oder über das Seelenleben der Pflanzen (1848). 2nd ed., 1899. 3rd ed., 1903. Internet Archive (UMich) 4th ed., 1908. Internet Archive (Harvard) Zend-Avesta oder über die Dinge des Himmels und des Jenseits (1851). 3 volumes. 3rd ed., 1906. Google (Harvard) Ueber die physikalische und philosophische Atomenlehre (1855). 2nd ed., 1864. Internet Archive (Stanford) Professor Schleiden und der Mond (1856). Google (UMich) Elemente der Psychophysik (1860). 2 volumes. Volume 1. Google (ULausanne) Volume 2. Internet Archive (NYPL) Ueber die Seelenfrage ("Concerning the Soul") (1861). Internet Archive (NYPL) — Internet Archive (UCal) — Internet Archive (UMich) 2nd ed., 1907. Google (Harvard) Die drei Motive und Gründe des Glaubens ("The three motives and reasons of faith") (1863). Google (Harvard) — Internet Archive (NYPL) Einige Ideen zur Schöpfungs- und Entwickelungsgeschichte der Organismen (1873). Internet Archive (UMich) (Dr. Mises) Kleine Schriften (1875). Internet Archive (UMich) Erinnerungen an die letzen Tage der Odlehre und ihres Urhebers (1876). Google (Harvard) Vorschule der Aesthetik (1876). 2 Volumes. Internet Archive (Harvard) In Sachen der Psychophysik (1877). Internet Archive (Stanford) Die Tagesansicht gegenüber der Nachtansicht (1879). Google (Oxford) 2nd ed., 1904. Internet Archive (Stanford) Revision der Hauptpuncte der Psychophysik (1882). Internet Archive (Harvard) Kollektivmasslehre (1897). Internet Archive (NYPL)   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Heidelberger, M. (2001), "Gustav Theodor Fechner" in Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 142–147. New York: Springer Verlag, 2001. Heidelberger, M. (2004), Nature From Within: Gustav Theodor Fechner and his Psychophysical Worldview (trans. Cynthia Klohr), Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2004. ISBN 0-822-9421-00 Robinson, David K. (2010), "Gustav Fechner: 150 years of Elemente der Psychophysik", in History of Psychology, Vol 13(4), Nov 2010, pp.409-410. [4] Stigler, Stephen M. (1986), The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 242–254.   == External linksEdit == Works by Gustav Theodor Fechner at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Gustav Fechner at Internet Archive William James on Fechner Works of Gustav Theodor Fechner at Projekt Gutenberg-DE. (German) Excerpt from Elements of Psychophysics from the Classics in the History of Psychology website. Robert H. Wozniak’s Introduction to Elemente der Psychophysik. Biography, bibliography and digitized sources in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Granville Stanley 1912 'Founders of modern psychology p. 125ff archive.org Gustav Theodor Fechner 1904 The Little Book of Life after Death Forward by William James Gustav Theodor Fechner 1908 The Living Word Gustav Theodor Fechner at statprob.com

Gwilym Meirion Jenkins (12 August 1932 – 10 July 1982) was a Welsh statistician and systems engineer, born in Gowerton (Welsh: Tregŵyr), Swansea, Wales. He is most notable for his pioneering work with George Box on autoregressive moving average models, also called Box–Jenkins models, in time-series analysis. He earned a first class honours degree in Mathematics in 1953 followed by a Ph.D. at University College London in 1956. After graduating, he married Margaret Bellingham and together they raised three children. His first job after university was junior fellow at the Royal Aircraft Establishment. He followed this by a series of visiting lecturer and professor positions at Imperial College London, Stanford University, Princeton University, and the University of Wisconsin–Madison, before settling in as a professor of Systems Engineering at Lancaster University in 1965. His initial work concerned discrete time domain models for Chemical Engineering applications. While at Lancaster, he founded and became managing director of ISCOL (International Systems Corporation of Lancaster). He remained in academia until 1974, when he left to start his own consulting company. He served on the Research Section Committee and Council of the Royal Statistical Society in the 1960s, founded the Journal of Systems Engineering in 1969, and briefly carried out public duties with the Royal Treasury in the mid-1970s. He was elected to the Institute of Mathematical Statistics and the Institute of Statisticians. He was a jazz and blues enthusiast and an accomplished pianist. He succumbed to Hodgkin's lymphoma in 1982.   == Books by G. M. Jenkins == Spectral analysis and its applications (with D. G. Watts) 1968 Time Series Analysis: Forecasting and Control (with G. E. P. Box and Gregory C. Reinsel) 2008 Practical experience with modelling and forecasting time series 1979 Case studies in time series analysis (with G. McLeod) 1983   == Obituary == G. E. P. Box (1983) G. M. Jenkins, 1933-1982 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), Vol. 146, No. 2, pp. 205–206.   == References ==   == External links == George Box's Interview for the International Journal of Forecasting G. M. Jenkins at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Halbert L. Dunn, M.D. (1896–1975) was the leading figure in establishing a national vital statistics system in the United States and is known as the "father of the wellness movement".   == Early life == Born in New Paris, Ohio, he attended the University of Minnesota where he earned his M.D. in 1922 and his Ph.D. in 1923. He served as an assistant in medicine at Presbyterian Hospital of New York City 1923-1924 and as fellow in medicine at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota (1924–1925).   == Work in statistics == In 1929, he was the first biostatistician hired by the Mayo Clinic and established its computer coding system for deriving medical statistics. He was Chief of the National Office of Vital Statistics from 1935 through 1960, first as part of the Bureau of the Census and later under the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, where it eventually became the National Center for Health Statistics in 1960. In his final year with the U.S. Public Health Service he was Assistant Surgeon General for aging. He was one of the founders of the National Association for Public Health Statistics and Information Systems (NAPHSIS) and of the Inter-American Statistics Institute (IASI). He was Secretary General of the IASI from 1941 to 1952. The Halbert L. Dunn Award, named in his honor, has been presented since 1981 by NAPHSIS in recognition of outstanding and lasting contributions to the field of vital and health statistics.   == Wellness == Dr. Dunn introduced the concept of wellness (or high-level wellness) in a series of twenty-nine lectures he gave at the Unitarian Church in Arlington County, Virginia in the late 1950s. Those lectures provided the basis for his book, High Level Wellness, which was published in 1961. The book was reissued in a number of editions but did not have a great deal of immediate impact. It did, however, come into the hands of a number of the future leaders of wellness and holistic health movement that bloomed more than a decade later, such as Don B. Ardell, Robert Russell, John Travis, and Elizabeth Neilson. Four events in the mid-1970s broadened the impact of Dunn's ideas. First, John Travis opened the first US wellness center (Mill Valley, CA, 1975). This center and other organizations were then described in Don Ardell's 1976 book, using Dunn's title (giving Dunn due credit for his origination of the title and concept). Then Elizabeth Neilson founded the journal Health Values: Achieving High Level Wellness (renamed the American Journal of Health Promotion in 1996), which was dedicated to Dunn and reprinted one of his papers in its first edition. Lastly, the publisher of Health Values, Charles B. Slack, Inc., published a reprint edition of Dunn's High Level Wellness that achieved a wider distribution and impact.   == References == Ardell, D. B. (1976). High Level Wellness: An Alternative to Doctors, Drugs and Disease. Emmaus, PA: Rodale. Ardell, D. B. (Dec. 29, 2000). A (very) brief history of the wellness concept. Wellness in the Headlines (Don's Report to the World). [1] Dunn, H.L. (1961). High-Level Wellness. Arlington, VA: Beatty Press. Dunn, H.L. (1977). High Level Wellness. Thorofare, NJ: Charles, B. Slack. Dunn, H.L. (1977). What High Level Wellness Means. Health Values, 1(1), 9-16. Neilson, E. A. (1988). Health Values: Achieving high level wellness—Origin, philosophy, purpose. Health Values, 12(3):3-5. Rice, S. A. (1967). Conception, gestation and birth of the IASI. The American Statistician, 21(3), 15-19 Travis, J. W., and Ryan, R. S. (1981, 1988, 2004) Wellness Workbook, Ten Speed Press/Celestial Arts

Harald Ludvig Westergaard (April 19, 1853 in Copenhagen – December 13, 1936 in Copenhagen) was a Danish statistician and economist known for his work in demography and the history of statistics. Harald Westergaard was born in Copenhagen and apart from a period studying in England and Germany in 1877-78 he lived there all his life. His subject at the University of Copenhagen was mathematics but he became interested in economics and, while he was in England, he seems to have met William Stanley Jevons. In the preface to the second edition (1879) of the Theory of Political Economy Jevons refers to Westergaard's mathematical suggestions. However, after this spectacular debut Westergaard seems not to have contributed further to mathematical economics. In 1880-2, Westergaard worked for the Danish Insurance Office and he developed an interest in demography. His international reputation was made by the publication of Die Lehre von der Mortalität und Morbilität (1881). This work won him a gold medal from the University and led to his appointment as a Lecturer in 1883. In 1886, he became a Professor at the early age of 33. He retired in 1924. Westergaard's late work Contributions to the History of Statistics (1932) described the history of vital and economic statistics up to the end of the nineteenth century. Statistical theory, whether of the Laplace or Pearson variety, is discussed but given a subordinate place. In the Introduction, Westergaard remarks, "For a long while ... the calculus of probabilities had less influence on statistics than might have been expected, the authors confining themselves to abstract theories which had little or nothing to do with reality." Westergaard was well-known and respected internationally. The obituary in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society of London, begins, "By [his] death Europe has lost her senior statistician" and ends, "This is not the place to write at length about his personal charm, marked by simplicity, helpfulness and friendliness; but it was this as much as his intellectual eminence that gave him a unique place in the society of economists and statisticians."   == Books by Harald Westergaard == Die Lehre von der Mortalität und Morbilität: Anthropologisch-statistische Untersuchungen. 1881 Grundzüge der Theorie der Statistik. 1890 Economic Development in Denmark before and during the World War. 1922 Contributions to the History of Statistics, 1932, reprinted 1969 New York: Kelley   == References == “ Westergaard, Harald Ludvig”, pp. 319–320 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. Obituary: Harald Westergaard, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 100, No. 1. (1937), pp. 149–150.   == External links == There is a photograph at Harald Ludvig Westergaard on the Portraits of Statisticians page. For his connection with Jevons, search for Westergaard in Jevons: The Theory of Political Economy

Harold Hotelling (/ˈhoʊtəlɪŋ/; September 29, 1895 – December 26, 1973) was a mathematical statistician and an influential economic theorist, known for Hotelling's law, Hotelling's lemma, and Hotelling's rule in economics, as well as Hotelling's T-squared distribution in statistics. He was Associate Professor of Mathematics at Stanford University from 1927 until 1931, a member of the faculty of Columbia University from 1931 until 1946, and a Professor of Mathematical Statistics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from 1946 until his death. A street in Chapel Hill bears his name. In 1972 he received the North Carolina Award for contributions to science.   == Statistics == Hotelling is known to statisticians because of Hotelling's T-squared distribution which is a generalization of the Student's t-distribution in multivariate setting, and its use in statistical hypothesis testing and confidence regions. He also introduced canonical correlation analysis. At the beginning of his statistical career Hotelling came under the influence of R.A. Fisher, whose Statistical Methods for Research Workers had "revolutionary importance", according to Hotelling's review. Hotelling was able to maintain professional relations with Fisher, despite the latter's temper tantrums and polemics. Hotelling suggested that Fisher use the English word "cumulants" for the Thiele's Danish "semi-invariants". Fisher's emphasis on the sampling distribution of a statistic was extended by Jerzy Neyman and Egon Pearson with greater precision and wider applications, which Hotelling recognized. Hotelling sponsored refugees from European anti-semitism and Nazism, welcoming Henry Mann and Abraham Wald to his research group at Columbia. While at Hotelling's group, Wald developed sequential analysis and statistical decision theory, which Hotelling described as "pragmatism in action". In the United States, Harold Hotelling is known for his leadership of the statistics profession, in particular for his vision of a statistics department at a university, which convinced many universities to start statistics departments. Hotelling was known for his leadership of departments at Columbia University and the University of North Carolina.   == Economics == Hotelling has a crucial place in the growth of mathematical economics; several areas of active research were influenced by his economics papers. While at the University of Washington, he was encouraged to switch from pure mathematics toward mathematical economics by the famous mathematician Eric Temple Bell. Later, at Columbia University (where during 1933-34 he taught Milton Friedman statistics) in the '40s, Hotelling in turn encouraged young Kenneth Arrow to switch from mathematics and statistics applied to actuarial studies towards more general applications of mathematics in general economic theory. Hotelling is the eponym of Hotelling's law, Hotelling's lemma, and Hotelling's rule in economics.   === Spatial economics === One of Hotelling’s most important contributions to economics was his conception of “spatial economics” in his 1929 article. Space was not just a barrier to moving goods around, but rather a field upon which competitors jostled to be nearest to their customers. Hotteling considers a situation in which there are two sellers at point A and B in a line segment of size l. The buyers are distributed uniformly in this line segment and carry the merchandise to their home at cost c. Let p1 and p2 be the prices charged by A and B, and let the line segment be divided in 3 parts of size a, x+y and b, where x+y is the size of the segment between A and B, a the portion of segment to the left of A and b the portion of segment to the right of B. Therefore a+x+y+b=l. Since the product being sold is a commodity, the point of indifference to buying is given by p1+cx=p2+cy. Solving for x and y yields:  Let q1 and q2 indicate the quantities sold by A and B. The sellers profit are:  By imposing profit maximization:  Hotteling obtains the economic equilibrium. Hotteling argues this equilibrium is stable even though the sellers may try to establish a price cartel.   === Non-convexities === Hotelling made pioneering studies of non-convexity in economics. In economics, non-convexity refers to violations of the convexity assumptions of elementary economics. Basic economics textbooks concentrate on consumers with convex preferences and convex budget sets and on producers with convex production sets; for convex models, the predicted economic behavior is well understood. When convexity assumptions are violated, then many of the good properties of competitive markets need not hold: Thus, non-convexity is associated with market failures, where supply and demand differ or where market equilibria can be inefficient.   ==== Producers with increasing returns to scale: Marginal cost pricing ==== In "oligopolies" (markets dominated by a few producers), especially in "monopolies" (markets dominated by one producer), non-convexities remain important. Concerns with large producers exploiting market power initiated the literature on non-convex sets, when Piero Sraffa wrote about firms with increasing returns to scale in 1926, after which Hotelling wrote about marginal cost pricing in 1938. Both Sraffa and Hotelling illuminated the market power of producers without competitors, clearly stimulating a literature on the supply-side of the economy.   ==== Consumers with non-convex preferences ==== When the consumer's preference set is non-convex, then (for some prices) the consumer's demand is not connected; A disconnected demand implies some discontinuous behavior by the consumer, as discussed by Hotelling:  If indifference curves for purchases be thought of as possessing a wavy character, convex to the origin in some regions and concave in others, we are forced to the conclusion that it is only the portions convex to the origin that can be regarded as possessing any importance, since the others are essentially unobservable. They can be detected only by the discontinuities that may occur in demand with variation in price-ratios, leading to an abrupt jumping of a point of tangency across a chasm when the straight line is rotated. But, while such discontinuities may reveal the existence of chasms, they can never measure their depth. The concave portions of the indifference curves and their many-dimensional generalizations, if they exist, must forever remain in unmeasurable obscurity.  according to Diewert. Following Hotelling's pioneering research on non-convexities in economics, research in economics has recognized non-convexity in new areas of economics. In these areas, non-convexity is associated with market failures, where any equilibrium need not be efficient or where no equilibrium exists because supply and demand differ. Non-convex sets arise also with environmental goods (and other externalities), and with market failures, and public economics. Non-convexities occur also with information economics, and with stock markets (and other incomplete markets). Such applications continued to motivate economists to study non-convex sets.   == Works == Hotelling, Harold (September 1925). "A general mathematical theory of depreciation". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 20 (151): 340–353. doi:10.1080/01621459.1925.10503499.  Hotelling, Harold (September 1927). "Differential equations subject to error, and population estimates". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 22 (159): 283–314. doi:10.1080/01621459.1927.10502963.  Hotelling, Harold (September 1927). "Statistical methods for research workers by R. A. Fisher". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis via JSTOR) 22 (159): 411–412. doi:10.2307/2276824. JSTOR 2276824.  Harold Hotelling’s review of Fishers’ Statistical methods for research workers. Hotelling, Harold; Working, Holbrook (March 1929). "Applications of the theory of error to the interpretation of trends". Journal of the American Statistical Association, special issue: Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 24 (165A): 73–85. doi:10.1080/01621459.1929.10506274.  Hotelling, Harold (March 1929). "Stability in competition". The Economic Journal (Taylor and Francis) 39 (153): 41–57. doi:10.2307/2224214. JSTOR 2224214.  Hotelling, Harold (April 1931). "The economics of exhaustible resources". Journal of Political Economy (The University of Chicago Press via JSTOR) 39 (2): 137–175. doi:10.1086/254195. JSTOR 1822328.  Hotelling, Harold (1931). "The generalization of student's ratio". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 2 (3): 360–378. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177732979.  Hotelling, Harold (October 1932). "Edgeworth's taxation paradox and the nature of demand and supply functions". Journal of Political Economy (The University of Chicago Press via JSTOR) 40 (5): 577–616. doi:10.1086/254387. JSTOR 1822600.  Hotelling, Harold (September 1933). "Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components". Journal of Educational Psychology (American Psychological Association) 24 (6): 417–441. doi:10.1037/h0071325.  Hotelling, Harold (October 1933). "Note on Edgeworth's taxation phenomenon and Professor Garver's additional condition on demand functions". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 1 (4): 408–409. doi:10.2307/1907332. JSTOR 1907332.  Hotelling, Harold (January 1935). "Demand functions with limited budgets". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 3 (1): 66–78. doi:10.2307/1907346. JSTOR 1907346.  Hotelling, Harold (February 1935). "The most predictable criterion". Journal of Educational Psychology (American Psychological Association) 26 (2): 139–142. doi:10.1037/h0058165.  Hotelling, Harold (December 1936). "Relation between two sets of variates". Biometrika (Oxford Journals) 28 (3–4): 321–377. doi:10.1093/biomet/28.3-4.321.  Hotelling, Harold; Pabst, Margaret R. (March 1936). "Rank correlation and tests of significance involving no assumption of normality". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 7 (1): 29–43. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177732543. JSTOR 2957508.  Hotelling, Harold (July 1938). "The general welfare in relation to problems of taxation and of railway and utility rates". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 6 (3): 242–269. doi:10.2307/1907054. JSTOR 1907054.  Hotelling, Harold (December 1940). "The teaching of statistics". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 11 (4): 457–470. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177731833.  Hotelling, Harold (1951). "A generalized T-Test and measure of multivariate dispersion". Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability (University of California Press): 23–41.  Hotelling, Harold (March 1951). "The impact of R. A. Fisher on statistics". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Taylor and Francis) 46 (253): 35–46. doi:10.1080/01621459.1951.10500765.  Hotelling, Harold (1988). "Golden oldies: classic articles from the world of statistics and probability: 'the teaching of statistics'". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 3 (1): 63–71. doi:10.1214/ss/1177013001.  Hotelling, Harold (1988). "Golden oldies: classic articles from the world of statistics and probability: 'the place of statistics in the university'". Annals of Mathematical Statistics (Institute of Mathematical Statistics) 3 (1): 72–83. doi:10.1214/ss/1177013002.    == Papers == "Harold Hotelling papers, 1910-1975.". Columbia University Libraries Archival Collections. Retrieved 2013-12-05.    == References ==  Kenneth J. Arrow, 1987, “Hotelling ,Harold" The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 670–71. I. Olkina and A. R. Sampsonb (2001). "Hotelling, Harold (1895–1973)," International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, pp. 6921–6925. Abstract.   == External links == Harold Hotelling at the Mathematics Genealogy Project New School: Harold Hotelling American Statistical Association: Harold Hotelling Harold Hottelling The following have photographs: Harold Hotelling on the Portraits of Statisticians page. National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

Harry Clyde Carver (December 4, 1890 – January 30, 1977) was an American mathematician and academic, primarily associated with the University of Michigan. He was a major influence in the development of mathematical statistics as an academic discipline. Born in Waterbury, Connecticut, Carver was educated at the University of Michigan, earning his B.S. degree in 1915, and the next year becoming an instructor in mathematics; he taught statistics in actuarial applications. At the time, the University of Michigan was only the second such institution in the United States to offer this type of course, after the pioneering Iowa State University. Carver was appointed assistant professor at Michigan in 1918, then associate professor (1921) and full professor (1936); during this period the University's program in mathematical statistics and probability underwent significant expansion. In 1930 Carver founded the journal Annals of Mathematical Statistics, which over time became an important periodical in the field. Financial support, however, was lacking in the midst of the Great Depression; in January 1934 Carver undertook financial responsibility for the Annals and maintained the existence of the journal at his own expense. In 1935 he helped to start the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, which in 1938 assumed control over the journal; Samuel S. Wilks succeeded Carver as editor in the same year. The Institute has named its Harry C. Carver Medal after him. With the coming of World War II, Carver devoted his energies to solving problems in aerial navigation, an interest he maintained for the remainder of his life. In one lecture titled "Let Us Own Data Science" given by Bin Yu in 2014 at Peking University, Carver was described as in the following formula: Turner + Carver = "Data Scientist".   == References ==   == Further reading == Craig, Cecil C. "Harry C. Carver, 1890-1977." Annals of Statistics, Vol. 6, No. 1 (Jan. 1978), pp. 1–4. Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century. New York, W. H. Freeman, 2001.   == External links == The Institute for Mathematical Statistics

Sir Harry Campion, KCB, CBE (20 May 1905 – 24 May 1996) was a British statistician and the first director of what was the Central Statistical Office of the United Kingdom. He was also first director of the United Nations Statistical Office. He played a leading role in the development of official statistics, nationally and internationally, after the Second World War.   == Background and early career == Harry Campion (later Sir Harry Campion) was born in Worsley, Lancashire, and was educated at Farnworth Grammar School and Manchester University. After leaving university, Campion joined the newly formed Cotton Trade Statistical Bureau, which collected data on output and sales of the cotton industry in the UK and also data on cotton industries of other countries and principal export markets and where he took part in the preparation of a regular digest of statistics. He spent 1932 in the United States, having been awarded a Rockefeller Foundation scholarship, then returned to Manchester University where he became Robert Ottley Reader in Statistics from 1933 to 1939 and set up an Economic Research Section carrying out applied research. While at Manchester he published research on the distribution of national capital using estate duty data and a book on public and private property. In 1939, Mr Campion joined the Central Economic Intelligence Service (CEIS), part of the War Cabinet Office, whose purpose was to provide economic and statistical material for a continuous survey of financial and economic plans and where Campion's role was to organise the statistics needed.   == Career at the Central Statistical Office == In January 1941, the Central Statistical Office was established to co-ordinate all statistics brought before the War Cabinet and soon after, Campion became its first director. The CSO became established as a permanent feature of government focusing on the development of national income accounts. After the war, Campion was seconded to the United Nations for a year to organise the creation of the United Nations Statistical Office. Following this secondment, Campion returned to the CSO until his retirement in March 1967. Some of the statistical products which first saw the light of day in the Harry Campion era are: Monthly Digest of Statistics, first published in 1946. Statistics of Trade Act 1947. Standard Industrial Classification, completed in 1947 and introduced in 1948. Annual Abstract, first post-war publication at beginning of 1948. Index of Industrial Production, first published in February 1948. Economic Trends, appeared in November 1953. Development of the National accounts including:  Employment Policy White Paper, first published in 1946. National Income and Expenditure Blue Book, first produced in September 1952. Sources and Methods, first edition published in 1956. quarterly estimates of national expenditure, first published in 1957. constant price estimates, appeared in 1959. seasonally adjusted estimates, appeared in 1960. quarterly balance of payments estimates and the Balance of Payments Pink Book, first published in 1960.  Financial Statistics, first appeared in 1962.   == United Nations == After the Second World War, the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) invited a number of prominent national statisticians, including Harry Campion, to form a 'Nuclear' Statistical Commission, which met from 1–14 May 1946 and made recommendations for the composition and terms of a permanent commission on statistics; the organisation of a statistical organisation; the disposition of existing statistical activities conducted by the League of Nations; the relationship between the statistical activities of the UN and specialised agencies; and the relationship between the statistical activities of the UN and other non-governmental organisations. Shortly afterward, Campion was seconded, at the request of the first Secretary General of the United Nations, Mr Trygve Lie, to the UN for a year to organise the creation of the United Nations Statistical Office.   == Death and bequests == Sir Harry Campion died in 1996 aged 91. On his death, Sir Harry Campion bequeathed half the residue of his estate to the Royal Statistical Society, who decided to commemorate him and the prominent part he played in the development of official statistics through a Fellowship. The Campion Fellowship ia awarded every two years with the maximum sum of money available on any occasion being £10,000, to Fellows of the Society to promote a specific piece of work or project that would make a significant contribution to the development, use or exposition of statistics on the economic or social well being of the population. The Manchester Statistical Society was also a beneficiary of the estate of Sir Harry Campion and similarly the bequest was placed into a trust fund to provide occasional modest grants to support research consistent with the Society's objective and history.   == Posts held == Director, Central Statistical Office, UK, 1941–1967. Member of the 'Nuclear' United Nations Statistics Commission, 1–15 May 1946. Director, United Nations Statistical Office, 1946–1947 Chairman, United Nations Statistics Commission, 1951 & 1953. President, Royal Statistical Society, 1957–1959. President, International Statistical Institute, 1963–1967. Vice-President, Manchester Statistical Society.   == Awards == CBE (1945). CB (1949). RSS Guy Medal in Silver (1950). KCB (1957). Honorary LLB, Manchester (1967).   == References ==   == Further reading == Ward, R & Doggett, T. (1991). Keeping Score: The First Fifty Years of the Central Statistical Office. London: HMSO. Obituary: Sir Harry Campion, 1905–96, W. Rudoe, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (Statistics in Society), Vol. 160, No. 1 (1997), pp. 148–151   == External links == Report to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations on the first session of the Statistics Commission held from 27 January to 7 February 1947, paragraph 7, page 4. United Nations Statistics Division "Monthly Digest of Statistics", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2006. "Statistics of Trade Act 1947", (as amended), ONS library service. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Introduction to UK Standard Industrial Classification of Economic Activities UK SIC(92)", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Annual Abstract of Statistics", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Index of Production – UK", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Economic Trends", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "United Kingdom National Accounts – The Blue Book", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "United Kingdom Balance of Payments – The Pink Book", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007. "Financial Statistics", ONS. Retrieved 15 June 2007.

Harry V. Roberts (1923–2004), American statistician, was a distinguished teacher and a pioneer in looking at the applications of Bayesian statistics to business decision making and in Total Quality Management. Roberts began teaching at the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business in 1949 as an instructor of statistics. He was promoted to assistant professor in 1951. He earned his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1955, and was appointed associate professor. He was made full professor in 1959, and was named Sigmund E. Edelstone Professor of Statistics and Quality Management in 1991. In 1997, Roberts was awarded the Norman Maclean Faculty Award from the University of Chicago for his contributions to teaching and to the student experience on campus. In recognition of his career achievements, the Chicago chapter of the American Statistical Association created the Harry V. Roberts Statistical Advocate Award, first given in January 2002. His varied research interests also included interactive computing; time series analysis; the relation between statistical theory and practical decision making; survey methodology and practice; and productivity and quality improvement. Roberts was the co-author of many influential publications, including two groundbreaking books: Basic Methods of Marketing Research (with James Lorie) and the textbook, Statistics: A New Approach (with W. Allen Wallis). He also co-authored an early work on the random walk hypothesis of stock market prices, “Differencing of Random Walks and Near Random Walks,” with Nicholas Gonedes, published in the Journal of Econometrics in 1977. Roberts was an early computer enthusiast, and was especially interested in developing computer methods for statistical analysis. In the late 1960s, Roberts, in collaboration with his wife June and Robert Ling, developed a statistics package called Interactive Data Analysis (IDA), used for statistical instruction at a number of top business schools. Toward the end of his career, Roberts helped develop a curriculum in Total Quality Management at Chicago GSB and co-authored Quality is Personal: A Foundation for Total Quality Management (with B. E. Sergesketter). This was a novel application of TQM methods to self-improvement, reminiscent of self-experimentation.   == External links == Univ. of Chicago Obituary Chicago Chapter of Amer. Statistical Association

Henry Heylyn Hayter CMG (28 October 1821 – 23 March 1895) was an English-born Australian statistician   == Life == Hayter was the son of Henry Hayter and his wife Eliza Jane née Heylyn, and was born at Eden Vale, Wiltshire, England. He was educated at Charterhouse School and at Paris, and entered the Merchant Navy as a midshipman. He emigrated to Victoria, Australia in December 1852. After five years in Australia, Hayter joined the Victorian registrar-general's department in 1857 and gave particular attention to the statistics of the colony. In 1862 he was put at the head of the statistical branch of the department. He was appointed secretary to a Royal Commission to inquire into the working of the public service of Victoria in 1870, and in 1872 compiled an exhaustive report, which was the basis of the Public Service Act. Towards the end 1872, he spent a short holiday in New Zealand, where he investigated, at the request of the Government, the working of the Registrar-General's department, and made suggestions for its improvement. All his suggestions were adopted. In May 1874 he was appointed Victorian Government Statist in charge of a separate department and immediately started the “Victorian Year Book”. In 1875 a conference of Australian statisticians met at Hobart, to consider setting up uniform methods of handling official statistics. In most cases it was decided to adopt the methods used by Hayter. He edited and wrote most of a “Precis of Information on the Colony of Victoria, and its Capabilities for Defence” for the Intelligence Department of the War Office in 1877. In 1879 Hayter visited England as secretary to the Graham Berry and Charles Henry Pearson mission to London, and twice gave evidence to a committee of the British House of Commons which was considering how the system of collecting British statistics should be organised. In 1888 Hayter was president of the section dealing with economic and social science and statistics at the first meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, and in his presidential address pointed out the need for the methods in the different colonies to be completely uniform. He had conducted the census in Victoria in 1871 and 1881, and had found that a departure by any one colony from the established practice of the others made it quite impossible to deal with some statistics for the whole of Australia. He had intended retiring in 1890 but at the request of the government conducted the 1891 census. Hayter wrote several works including Notes of a Tour in New Zealand, Notes on the Colony of Victoria, a short history and a geography of Victoria for use in Victorian State schools, and of a Handbook to the Colony of Victoria, as well as a Nosological Index used throughout Australasia for classifying the causes of death. He wrote many papers which were read before scientific societies in various parts of the world and also produced some poetical works. He was created C.M.G. in 1882. Hayter died at Armadale near Melbourne in 1895. Hayter married Susan Dodd, daughter of William Dodd, in 1855 and they had a son. Henry's brother Harrison Hayter was a distinguished civil engineer in England.   == References ==   == Sources ==  Harris, Charles Alexander (1901). "Hayter, Henry Heylyn". In Sidney Lee. Dictionary of National Biography, 1901 supplement​. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Henry Ludwell Moore (November 21, 1869 – April 28, 1958) was an American economist known for his pioneering work in econometrics. Moore was born in Charles County, Maryland, the first of 15 children. He received a B.A. from Randolph-Macon College in 1892 and a Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins University in 1896. His thesis was on von Thünen's theory of the natural wage. The visiting lecturers included Simon Newcomb and J. B. Clark and he may have learned some mathematical economics from them. While doing the Ph.D., he spent a year at the University of Vienna. At that time study in Europe was quite usual; Americans often went to Europe, usually to Germany, for their entire graduate education. Moore was an early U.S. Ph.D. His academic career proceeded through an instructorship and lectureship at Johns Hopkins, a professorship at Smith College from 1897 to 1902 and finally to positions at Columbia University. He retired from Columbia in 1929 due to ill health. Moore's earliest interest seems to have been in the history of economic thought but in 1901 he turned to the project of providing a "statistical complement to pure economics." Although he had studied with Carl Menger in Vienna, his "pure economics" belonged rather to the Marshallian and Walrasian branches of marginal economics. In 1903, 1909 and 1912, Moore visited Walras, Pareto and Bortkiewicz respectively. To improve his knowledge of statistical techniques, he attended the lectures of Karl Pearson in 1909 and 1913. Moore's first book, on testing the marginal productivity theory of wages, was well received as a pioneering venture, although Alfred Marshall refused to read it, telling Moore that "it proceeds on lines which I deliberately decided not to follow many years ago." Moore wrote two books on economic cycles, in which the economic cycle is presented as a reflection of a physical cycle. Economic Cycles argues that a rainfall cycle affects agricultural markets, which affect industrial markets. Generating Economic Cycles traces the rainfall cycle back to an astronomical cycle. There is a strong family resemblance between this cycle work and the earlier sunspot research of William Stanley Jevons. Moore's last book Synthetic Economics aimed to provide a statistical counterpart to Walras's general equilibrium theory. With his contemporaries, Wesley Mitchell and Irving Fisher, H. L. Moore pioneered new kinds of quantitative economics in the United States. Unlike them, Moore was not a great public figure. He was a private, sensitive person who suffered from long periods of illness. At the end of his essay on Moore, Stigler writes "In general one can say that Moore was as much a founder of this movement [statistical economics] as any one man is likely to be a founder of a great movement toward which a science has been steadily moving."   == Works == Laws of Wages: An Essay in Statistical Economics, 1911. Economic Cycles: Their Law and Cause, 1914. Forecasting the Yield and Price of Cotton, 1917. Generating Economic Cycles, 1923. Synthetic Economics, 1929 There is a full bibliography in Stigler's article below.   == Notes ==   == References == Stigler, George J. (1962). "Henry L. Moore and Statistical Economics". Econometrica 30 (1): 1–21. doi:10.2307/1911284. JSTOR 1911284.  Morgan, Mary S. (1990). A History of Econometric Ideas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-37398-0.    == External links == New School: Henry Ludwell Moore Two of Moore's books are available at the Archive for the History of Economic Thought Laws of Wages Economic Cycles  Columbia University Library: Henry Ludwell Moore Collection

Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne KG PC FRS (2 July 1780 – 31 January 1863), known as Lord Henry Petty from 1784 to 1809, was a British statesman. In a ministerial career spanning nearly half a century he notably served as Home Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer and was three times Lord President of the Council.   == Background and education == Lansdowne was the son of Prime Minister William Petty, 1st Marquess of Lansdowne (better known as the Earl of Shelburne) by his second marriage to Lady Louisa, daughter of John FitzPatrick, 1st Earl of Upper Ossory. He was educated at Westminster School, the University of Edinburgh, and Trinity College, Cambridge.   == Political career == He entered the House of Commons in 1802 as member for the family borough of Calne and quickly showed his mettle as a politician. In February 1806 he became Chancellor of the Exchequer in Lord Grenville's Ministry of All the Talents, being at this time member for the University of Cambridge, but he lost both his seat and his office in 1807. In 1809 he became Marquess of Lansdowne, and in the House of Lords and in society he continued to play an active part as one of the Whig leaders. His chief interest was perhaps in the question of Roman Catholic emancipation, a cause which he consistently championed, but he sympathised also with the advocates of the abolition of the slave-trade and with the cause of popular education. Lansdowne, who had succeeded his cousin, Francis Thomas Fitzmaurice, as 4th Earl of Kerry in 1818, took office with Canning in May 1827 and was Secretary of State for the Home Department from July of that year until January 1828. He was Lord President of the Council under Earl Grey and then under Lord Melbourne from November 1830 to August 1841, with the exception of the few months in 1835 when Sir Robert Peel was prime minister. He held the same office during the whole of Lord John Russell's ministry (1846–1852), and, having declined to become prime minister, sat in the cabinets of Lord Aberdeen and of Lord Palmerston, but without office. In 1857 he refused the offer of a dukedom, and he died on 31 January 1863. Lansdowne's social influence and political moderation made him one of the most powerful Whig statesmen of the time; he was frequently consulted by Queen Victoria on matters of moment, and his long official experience made his counsel invaluable to his party.   == Other public appointments == Lansdowne chaired the inaugural meeting of the London Statistical Society, and was its first president (1834–1836). He later served a second term (1842–1844). (See The Times 15 and 17 March 1834, and John Bibby (1987) HOTS: History of Teaching Statistics.)   == Family == Lord Lansdowne married Lady Louisa, daughter of the 2nd Earl of Ilchester, in 1808. She died in April 1851, aged 65. Lord Lansdowne died in January 1863, aged 82. His eldest son, the Earl of Kerry, had predeceased him and he was succeeded in the marquessate by his eldest surviving son Henry. The latter was the father of Henry Petty-FitzMaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne, who also became a distinguished statesman.   == References ==   == External links ==  Archival material relating to Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne listed at the UK National Archives  Obituary in Illustrated London News, 14 February 1863. Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by the Marquess of Lansdowne

Edward Hilton Young, 1st Baron Kennet GBE DSO DSC* PC (20 March 1879 – 11 July 1960) was a British politician and writer.   == Family and early life == Young was the youngest son of Sir George Young, 3rd Baronet (see Young baronets), a noted classicist and charity commissioner. Sir George's paternal grandmother was Emily Baring of the eponymous merchant banking dynasty. Hilton's mother, formerly Alice Eacy Kennedy, was of Dublin Irish Protestant background and had previously lived in India as Lady Lawrence, wife of Sir Alexander Lawrence, Bt, nephew to the Viceroy, Lord Lawrence. Widowed when Sir Alexander died in a bridge collapse, Alice returned to England, marrying Sir George in 1871. Hilton was the youngest of three sons and one daughter (who died aged 14) born to the couple. The oldest brother, also George, would become a diplomat and Ottoman scholar. The next brother, Geoffrey (see Geoffrey Winthrop Young), became a noted educator and mountaineer. Their childhood was spent at the family’s Thames-side ‘Formosa’ estate, at Cookham, Berkshire. On visits to their London house near Sloane Square, Hilton would often play in Kensington Gardens with the children of Sir George’s friend, Sir Leslie Stephen. In this way, he commenced a close friendship with his contemporary, Thoby Stephen, and became acquainted with Thoby’s siblings, Vanessa (see Vanessa Bell), Virginia (see Virginia Woolf) and Adrian. At his preparatory school, Northaw Place, in 1892 Young took pity on nine-year-old Clement Attlee on the latter's first day at school, offering the newcomer jam from his own pot. His secondary schooling commenced at Marlborough but incessant bullying saw him transferred to Eton where he joined the army stream which emphasised science rather than the classics. After two terms studying chemistry at University College London, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge in October 1897, emerging in 1900 with a 'first' in natural sciences and having achieved the office of president of the Union Society.   == Early career == Post-Cambridge he read for the Bar and was called by the Inner Temple in 1904. However, after receiving few briefs and suffering a nervous breakdown, he transferred to financial journalism. In 1908 he was appointed assistant editor of The Economist, resigning in 1910 to become city editor of The Morning Post. His 1912 work Foreign Companies and Other Corporations combined his legal and financial knowledge to examine the status of companies created in one national jurisdiction which operate in other jurisdictions. At Cambridge, through Thoby Stephen, he became acquainted with key members of what would become known as the ‘Bloomsbury group’. He attended the group’s early gatherings at Gordon Square and Fitzroy Square, and became attracted to Virginia Stephen, to whom he proposed on a punt on the Cam in May 1909, only to be rejected. Another Cambridge friendship, made through his brother Geoffrey, was with G. M. Trevelyan and in Spring 1906 he accompanied the historian during a retracement of the route of Garibaldi’s retreat which became the basis for Trevelyan’s Garibaldi trilogy. The second work in the trilogy — Garibaldi and the Thousand — was dedicated to the Young brothers and contained 15 photographs taken by Hilton.   == First World War == Enlisting in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve on 22 August 1914 and commissioned in September, he served in a wide variety of theatres and actions in the First World War, including the Grand Fleet at Scapa Flow, Harwich light cruisers, Admiral Troubridge’s mission to the Danube, naval siege guns at Flanders, the Zeebrugge Raid in which, commanding a rear gun on HMS Vindictive, he was severely wounded, necessitating the amputation of his right arm, and, finally, in the Russian campaign, commanding an armoured train on the line south of Archangel. These experiences were all recounted in his colourful 1920 war memoir, By Sea and Land. His war service also brought the awards of DSC and bar, DSO, Croix-de-Guerre and Serbian Silver Medal. Another literary consequence of his war service was A Muse at Sea, a compilation of his poems earlier published in the Ducal Weekly (the Iron Duke’s newspaper), the Morning Post, the Cornhill Magazine and the Nation. He also rendered other types of service to his friends Lytton Strachey and Clive Bell during the War. In 1908 he had bought a weekender cottage, the 'Lacket', at Lockeridge above Marlborough. During 1914–15 he rented the cottage to Strachey who drafted the first two chapters of his Eminent Victorians there. Facing a tribunal hearing to determine his claim for conscientious-objector status following the introduction of conscription, Bell appealed to Young in June 1916 for a testimonial which was duly provided. In May 1915, while serving on the HMS Iron Duke at Scapa Flow, the first edition of his System of National Finance appeared. Through further editions in 1924 and 1936, it remained the standard work on Westminster’s budgetary processes until well into the 1950s. Also while on active service, in February 1915 he was elected unopposed as a Liberal MP at a by-election for the seat of Norwich. Post-war he started his rise up the political ladder in February 1919 when he was appointed parliamentary private secretary to H.A.L. Fisher, president of the Board of Education. In April 1921 he was promoted to Financial Secretary to the Treasury. In this capacity he was the link between the government and the ‘Geddes axe’, the committee of business experts established by Lloyd George in the aftermath of World War I to undertake a fundamental review of government expenditure in the hope of identifying major savings.   == Post-war career == Out of office with the advent of Bonar Law’s Conservative administration in August 1922, he became Chief Whip for the Lloyd George Liberals and a Privy Counsellor. Losing his Norwich seat for 10 months during the political turmoil of 1923–4, he devoted the rest of the 1920s to furthering his personal and business interests, commencing with his 1922 marriage to sculptor Kathleen Scott, née Bruce, widow of Captain Robert Falcon Scott. With the marriage he became stepfather to Kathleen’s son, the future naturalist and yachtsman, Peter Scott. In August 1923 Kathleen, aged 45, gave birth to their son Wayland Young, who became a writer and Labour politician. Speaking at the Gresham's School prize-giving on 13 July 1923, Young "...recommended the boys to go in for great risks and dangerous deeds. Let them have adventure, and the madder the adventure, the better." Through Cambridge and Bloomsbury, Young had a longstanding friendship with E.M. Forster. Suffering writer’s block while working on A Passage to India, the novelist was Young’s guest at the Lacket in early May 1922. Shortly afterwards he wrote to Young declaring, “an unfinished novel’s before me now, and sometimes I work at it with distaste and despair…You certainly have done more than any individual I know to help me by direct remarks. Your knowledge of the business of creating seemed to me profounder than that possessed by so-called artists.” These comments suggest that Young gave Forster significant advice and encouragement at a crucial stage on work on the latter’s eventual masterpiece. In the City of London, Young became editor of the Financial News, 1926–29, when he introduced an Arts page which was continued by the Financial Times when they were merged in 1946. He also joined the boards of the Southern Railway, English Electric, and Hudson’s Bay companies. For Westminster he became a peripatetic financial- and political-troubleshooter, undertaking inter alia financial missions to Poland (1922–3) and Iraq (1925, 1930) intended to stabilise the financial positions of these countries, the former recreated and he latter newly created after World War I. The 1930 Iraq mission saw him recommend the establishment of an Iraq Currency Board to issue a national currency, the dinar, to replace Indian rupees issued as temporary currency when British forces displaced the Ottomans from the former Mesopotamia during World War I. The Iraqi government accepted Young’s recommendations in relation to the nation’s currency and he became the inaugural chairman of the Iraq Currency Board on 11 June 1931. He also chaired the 1925–6 Royal Commission on Indian Currency and Finance (at which his friend Maynard Keynes was a key witness) and the 1927–8 East African Commission on Closer Union. Young joined the Conservative Party in 1926 during his term as MP for Norwich. He served as a delegate to the Assembly of the League of Nations, 1926 and 1927. He became MP for Sevenoaks in 1929 and served as Minister for Export Credits from 1929 and Minister of Health between 1931 and 1935. The health portfolio also included responsibility for housing, including slum clearance and rehousing. Key items of legislation to which he contributed in this period were: the Town and Country Planning Act (1932) (which applied to all 'developable' land), the Housing Act (1935) (which laid down standards of accommodation) and the Restriction of Ribbon Development Act (1935) (which sought to consolidate urban development and restrict ribbon sprawl along major highways). He retired from politics in July 1935 and was created Baron Kennet of the Dene.   == After politics == Away from politics, he could now resume his life in business. By 1940, Lord Kennet was either chairman or a director of eight listed companies, which apart from the Southern Railway and timber merchants, Denny, Mott and Dickson Ltd, were engaged in the financial services and property sectors. In May 1940 he resumed his former role as chairman of the Iraq Currency Board when Leo Amery, who had replaced him as chairman in 1932, resigned on becoming a member of the wartime government. His political and financial experience made him a natural choice to chair the Capital Issues Committee during 1937–59. Responsible for advising the Chancellor of the Exchequer “on applications to issue capital for any purpose anywhere”, this committee was particularly important during World War II when it had to approve all issues of shares and securities with face values exceeding ₤10,000. He died at the Lacket on 11 July 1960 and was succeeded to the Kennet peerage by his son Wayland.   == References ==   == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Hilton Young Portraits of Edward Hilton Young, 1st Baron Kennet at the National Portrait Gallery, London

Holbrook Working (1895 – October 5, 1985) was an American professor of economics and statistics at Stanford University’s Food Research Institute known for his contributions on hedging, on the theory of futures prices, on an early theory of market maker behavior, and on the theory of storage (including the Working curve which plots the difference between short term and long term grain futures prices against current inventory).   == Biography == He was a native of Fort Collins, Colorado. Working earned his Ph.D. in Agricultural Economics from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1921. He taught at Cornell University and the University of Minnesota before he joined Stanford's Food Research Institute in 1925. His younger brother Elmer Working made a major contribution on the identification problem for demand curves in econometrics, with which Holbrook Working was also involved. Working disagreed with Keynes’s backwardation theory of futures prices, which argued that short hedgers (farmers) drive down futures prices because of their demand for price insurance. Working argued that there could be hedgers on both sides of the market and that hedging was essentially not a risk reduction technique, but "speculation in the basis" which allows informed traders and commodity dealers to profit from their knowledge of future changes in the difference between futures and spot prices. He was a founding member of the Econometric Society and was elected a Fellow of the American Agricultural Economics Association, the American Statistical Association, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1981 he was awarded the Wilks Memorial Award by the American Statistical Association.   == Notable papers == Working, Holbrook (August 1925). "The statistical determination of demand curves". The Quarterly Journal of Economics (Oxford Journals) 39 (4): 503–543. doi:10.2307/1883264.  Working, Holbrook (March 1928). "Business cycles: the problem and its setting, by Wesley C. Mitchell (book review)". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Sage) 23 (161): 89–109. doi:10.1080/01621459.1928.10503002.  Working, Holbrook; Hotelling, Harold (March 1929). "Applications of the theory of error to the interpretation of trends". Journal of the American Statistical Association, special issue: Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Sage) 24 (165A): 73–85. doi:10.1080/01621459.1929.10506274.  Working, Holbrook (March 1934). "A random-difference series for use in the analysis of time series". Journal of the American Statistical Association (Sage) 29 (185): 11–24. doi:10.1080/01621459.1934.10502683.  Working, Holbrook (October 1935). "Differential price behavior as a subject for commodity price analysis". Econometrica (The Econometric Society via JSTOR) 3 (4): 416–427. doi:10.2307/1905633. JSTOR 1912225.  Working, Holbrook (June 1953). "Futures trading and hedging". The American Economic Review (American Economic Association via JSTOR) 43 (3): 314–343. JSTOR 1811346.  Working, Holbrook (November 1953). "Hedging reconsidered". American Journal of Agricultural Economics (Oxford Journals) 35 (4): 544–561. doi:10.2307/1233368.  Working, Holbrook (June 1962). "New concepts concerning futures markets and prices". The American Economic Review (American Economic Association via JSTOR) 52 (3): 413–459. JSTOR 1810553.  Working, Holbrook (1967). "Tests of a theory concerning floor trading on commodity exchanges". Stanford University’s Food Research Institute (AgEcon search) 7 (s): 5–48.    == References ==

Howell Tong (simplified Chinese: 汤家豪; traditional Chinese: 湯家豪; pinyin: TANG JIA HAO; born 1944 in Hong Kong) is a pioneer and an acknowledged authority in the field of nonlinear time series analysis, linking it with deterministic chaos. He is the father of the threshold time series models, which have extensive applications in ecology, economics, epidemiology and finance. Since October 1, 2009, he has been an Emeritus Professor at the London School of Economics and was twice (2009, 2010) holder of the Saw Swee Hock Professorship of Statistics at the National University of Singapore. He was a Distinguished Visiting Professor of Statistics at the University of Hong Kong from 2005 to 2013. Tong left Wah Yan College S.J. 香港華仁書院 (founded in 1919) in Hong Kong in 1961 and went, under his father's direction, to complete his matriculation at the Barnsbury School for Boys in North London (-one of the earliest comprehensive schools in England, now no longer in existence). He got his Bachelor of Science in 1966 (with first class honours), Master of Science in 1969 and Doctor of Philosophy in 1972, all from the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST), where he studied under Maurice Priestley. Tong remained in UMIST first as a lecturer and then as a senior lecturer. While in Manchester, he started his married life with Mary. In 1982, he moved to the Chinese University of Hong Kong where he was the founding Chair of Statistics. Four years later, he returned to England to be Chair of Statistics at the University of Kent at Canterbury until 1999. From 1999 to September 2009, Tong was a Chair of Statistics at the London School of Economics and founded the Centre for the Analysis of Time Series. Between 1997 and 2004, Tong was also Chair Professor of Statistics, Founding Dean of the Graduate School and later Pro-Vice Chancellor, University of Hong Kong. Tong was elected a member of the International Statistical Institute in 1983. In 1986, he was the session organiser and an invited speaker of the session on time series analysis, at the First World Congress of the Bernoulli Society held at Tashkent in the former Soviet Union. In 1994, he was the Special Plenary Lecturer at the 15th Nordic Meeting in Mathematical Statistics held at Lund, Sweden. He was elected a Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in 1993, an Honorary Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries, England in 1999, and a Foreign Member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters in 2000. In 2000, he became the first statistician to win the (class II) National Natural Science Prize in China. In 2002, the University of Hong Kong gave him their then highest award, the Distinguished Research Achievement Award, carrying a sum of HK$1,000,000 per annum for three years. The Royal Statistical Society, UK, awarded him their Guy Medal in Silver in 2007 in recognition of his "...many important contributions to time series analysis over a distinguished career and in particular for his fundamental and highly influential paper "Threshold autoregression, limit cycles and cyclical data", read to the Society in 1980, which paved the way for a major body of work in non-linear time series modelling."  In 2012, the International Chinese Statistical Association awarded him the Distinguished Achievement Award. Tong has one son, one daughter and one granddaughter.   == Bibliography == Tong, H. (1983). Threshold Models in Non-linear Time Series Analysis. Springer Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90918-4.  Tong, H. (1990). Non-linear Time Series: A Dynamical System Approach. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-852224-X.  Chan, K.S. and Tong, H. (2001). Chaos: a statistical perspective. Springer Verlag.  Tong, Howell (2001). "A Personal journey through time series in Biometrika". Biometrika 88 (Biometrika Centenary): 195–218. doi:10.1093/biomet/88.1.195.  Tong, Howell (2001). "A Personal journey through time series in Biometrika". In D. M. Titterington and D. R. Cox. Biometrika: One Hundred Years. Oxford University Press. pp. 193–216. ISBN 0-19-850993-6.    == Notes ==   == External links == Web page in the University of Hong Kong Howell Tong at the Mathematics Genealogy Project An interview with Howell Tong (in Chinese) A conversation with Howell Tong and other papers Bruce E. Hansen (2011). "Threshold autoregression in economics" (PDF). Statistics and Its Interface 4: 123–127.

Hugh Scurfield is an English actuary of considerable note. He was born on 9 December 1935 in the County of Durham, England; the third of four children to William Russell Scurfield and Elizabeth Morton Scurfield (née Hedley). He graduated from Hertford College, Oxford with an M.A. in 1956. Scurfield is the past president of Institute of Actuaries (1990 - 1992), and past president of the International Congress of Actuaries (1998). Scurfield was the General Manager, Actuary, and Director of Norwich Union Insurance Group, now known as Aviva. Other notable positions held by Scurfield include: Director, Ecclesiastical Insurance Group (1994 - 2004); Member, International Actuarial Association (1998); Non-executive Director, Royal Shrewsbury Hospital NHS Trust (2003); Deputy Chairman, Help the Hospice (2002 -2006); appointed Vice President, Help The Hospice (May 2006); Trustee and Chairman of the Lottery for Severn Hospice. In 2008, Scurfield was appointed Chairman of The Development Trust (The King's School Worcester). Hugh married Ann Beverley Pocock, daughter of H R S Pocock, 11 Jul 1959 in Reigate, Surrey. He married Jill Charles-Edwards, daughter of Mervyn Charles-Edwards, 08 Dec 1978 in Bishops Castle following his divorce from Ann in 1977. The four children of Hugh and Ann are: Bryan Hugh Scurfield, b. 10 May 1960, Norwich; Jane Elizabeth Scurfield, b. 31 Aug 1962, Norwich; Mary Sara Scurfield, b. 22 May 1964, Norwich; and Clare Louise Scurfield, b. 19 Aug 1967, Norwich.   == Published papers == Address by the President of the Institute of Actuaries: Developing a Proactive Role, 25 June 1990. J.I.A. 118, 1-15 (1991) Lessons from Hospices: Past-president Hugh Scurfield develops a topic raised at the ageing population’s conference earlier in 2002   == See also == Institute of Actuaries   == References == Hertford College News, Issue 7, Autumn 2002 EcclesiasticalInsurance Group: REPORT AND ACCOUNTS 31 DECEMBER 2004 at the Wayback Machine (archived October 14, 2007) Photo of Hugh Scurfield, Chairman, The Development Trust

Isaac Max Rubinow (1875–1936) was a leading theorist on social insurance and one of the most influential writers on the subject. Rubinow was an MD, and held a Ph.D. in economics from Columbia University. His 1913 book, Social Insurance, was the most influential early work on social security. His work impacted a generation of social reformers, including President Theodore Roosevelt, who used Rubinow's work in drafting the Progressive Party platform in 1912. The Progressive Party was the first of its kind to call for social insurance. Rubinow was a Russian Jew who immigrated to the United States in 1893, at the age of 18. Attending Columbia University and New York University Medical School, he trained as a medical doctor. He grew so upset with the misery of his patients that he decided he could do more good for the common man by helping to alleviate their economic woes than he could as a physician. Employed as an economic expert in the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Bureau of Statistics, Division of Foreign Markets, Rubinow wrote several extensive analyses of the development of the Russian wheat market and the impact of growing Russian wheat exports on U.S. and world markets. Employed as an actuary, Rubinow was central to the formation of the Casualty Actuarial and Statistical Society of America in 1914, which is known today as the Casualty Actuarial Society. Rubinow was elected its first president (CAS 2008). Rubinow's 1934 book, The Quest for Security, established him as the most recognized theorist on social insurance in the first three decades of the twentieth century. Rubinow also authored a series of articles that appeared in the Journal of Political Economy, Journal of Home Economics, and Journal of Sociology on the so-called domestic service problem, and the difficulties that white middle-class women faced in finding an adequate supply of domestic servants. Rubinow argued that the reluctance and refusal of white native-born and immigrant women to enter domestic service reflected the feudal labor conditions that informed the occupation. In particular, Rubinow criticized mistresses for failing to open their homes to the same reforms that had been implemented in industrial workplace such as contracts, set hours, and other standardizations. Dr Rubinow married (1) Sophie Himwich. Their son, Raymond S. Rubinow (1905–1996), was a noted New York civic leader. Their daughter, Olga Rubinow Lurie (1907–2004), was a child psychologist and specialist in the emotional health of children. Raymond Rubinow married (2) Consuelo Kamholz (1909–1993).   == References == 1. Shvarts S., and Theodore Brown, "Kupat Holim, Dr. Isaac Max Rubinow, and the American Zionist Medical Unit's Experiment to Establish Health Care Services in Palestine 1918-1923", Bulletin of the History of Medicine,72(1)28-46, 1998 2. Shvarts S., Shehory-Rubin Z., "Hadassah" for the Health of the People, Samuel         Watchman's Sons Inc. & Dekel Academic Press, Tel Aviv, 2012, 298 pp. (Peer         review, scientific publication). http://www.amazon.com/dp/B008YUOMPM

Ian Castles AO OBE (20 February 1935 – 2 August 2010) was Secretary of the Australian Government Department of Finance (1979–86), the Australian Statistician (1986–94), and a Visiting Fellow at the Asia Pacific School of Economics and Government at the Australian National University, Canberra.   == Life and career == Castles was born in Kyneton, Victoria and educated at state schools in Sale, Wesley College, Melbourne and Melbourne University. in 1954, he joined the Australian Public Service in the archives division of the National Library of Australia, then located in Melbourne, and moved to Canberra in 1957. He joined the Treasury in 1958. He was appointed Secretary of the Department of Finance commencing from 2 January 1979. In 1986 he was appointed Australian Statistician. Between 1995 and 2000, he was Executive Director and Vice President of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and he was also President of the International Association of Official Statistics. He was a contributor to Online Opinion, appeared at events hosted by the Institute of Public Affairs and Centre for Independent Studies, and published papers with The Lavoisier Group. Ian Castles was a skeptic known for his criticism of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, particularly its Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. His interests included research into the information requirements for public policy (especially at the international level) and the history of economic thought. Ian Castles died on 2 August 2010, aged 75. His death was in Canberra Hospital, from complications following a heart attack.   == Honours == Ian Castles was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in June 1978, and an Officer of the Order of Australia in June 1987.   == Publications == His publications include: Ian Castles and David Henderson (2003) The IPCC emission scenarios: An economic-statistical critique, Energy & Environment, vol. 14: nos.2-3. Ian Castles and David Henderson (2003) Economics, emissions scenarios and the work of the IPCC, Energy & Environment, vol. 14, no. 4. Castles, Ian (2000) 'Reporting on Human Development: Lies, Damned Lies and Statistics', In Facts and Fancies of Human Development. Castles, Ian (eds.). Canberra: Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia.   == References ==   == External links == Ian Castles at Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia Ian Castles at Online Opinion Sourcewatch : Ian Castles Works by or about Ian Castles in libraries (WorldCat catalog)

İbrahim Sirkeci (born 1972) is a British Turkish management scientist, Ria Financial Professor of Transnational Studies and Marketing at the European Business School London, Regent's University London, and Director of Regent's Centre for Transnational Studies.   == Biography == Sirkeci received his BA in Political Science and Public Administration from Bilkent University, Ankara and PhD in Human Geography from the University of Sheffield. Prior to joining the European Business School London of Regent's University London, he worked as a Leverhulme Research Fellow at the Centre for the Study of Ethnicity and Citizenship, University of Bristol, and also as Assistant Professor at a private university in Ankara, Turkey. He is editor of several international peer-reviewed scholarly journals including Migration Letters, Transnational Marketing Journal, and Goc Dergisi. He authored several books including Cultures of Migration published by University of Texas Press in 2011, and The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany, was published by Edwin Mellen Press in 2006.   == Work == Sirkeci's research focuses on human mobility, remittances, transnational marketing, marketing of higher education, transnational consumers, ethnicity, segmentation, segregation and labour markets, conflict, international migration with particular reference to minorities in the UK, Turkish, Kurdish migration to Germany, Turkey and Iraq. He has written widely on transnational marketing, international migration, internal migration, population movements, labour market, segregation, ethnic conflict, minorities, Turks, Kurds, and remittances. Sirkeci also writes a weekly column for Turkish daily newspaper Birgun. His research is published in journals including Environment and Planning A, Sociological Research Online, Ethnic and Racial Studies, International Migration, and Journal of Biosocial Science., and Population Review   == Bibliography == Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Cohen, J. H.; Ratha, D. (2012). Migration and Remittances during the Global Financial Crisis and Beyond. Washington, DC, USA: The World Bank. p. 480. ISBN 978-0-8213-8826-6.  Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2013). Transnational Marketing and Transnational Consumers. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer. p. 72. ISBN 978-3-642-36774-8.  Cohen, J. H.; Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2011). Cultures of Migration. Austin, Texas, USA: Texas University Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-292-72685-7.  Milewski, Nadja; Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Yucesahin, M. M. (2015). Family and Human Capital in Turkish Migration. London, UK: Transnational Press London. p. 166. ISBN 978-1-910-78116-6.  Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Elcin, Doga; Seker, Guven (2015). Politics and Law in Turkish Migration. London, UK: Transnational Press London. p. 202. ISBN 978-1-910-78102-9.  Seker, B. Dilara; Sirkeci, Ibrahim & Yucesahin, M. Murat (2015). Göç ve Uyum. London, UK: Transnational Press London. p. 390. ISBN 978-1-910-78108-1.   Sirkeci, Ibrahim (9/8/2009). "Freelonya'da Daltonlar Acilimi". Istanbul: BirGün Gazetesi. p. 5.   Sirkeci, Ibrahim; Magnúsdóttir, L. B. (2011). "Understanding illegal music downloading in the UK: A multi-attribute model". Journal of Research in Interactive Marketing (UK: Emerald) 5 (1): 90–110. doi:10.1108/17505931111121543. ISSN 2040-7122.  Ratha, Dilip; Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2010). "Editorial: Remittances and the global financial crisis". Migration Letters (London, UK: Migration Letters & The London Publishers) 7 (2): 125–131. ISSN 1741-8992.  Johnston, Ron; Sirkeci, Ibrahim, Khattab, N. & Modood, T. (2010). "Ethno-religious categories and measuring occupational attainment in relation to Education in England and Wales: a multi-level analysis". Environment and Planning A (UK: Pion) 42 (3): 578–591. doi:10.1068/a42180. ISSN 1472-3409.   Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2006). The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany. New York: Edwin Mellen Press. p. 332. ISBN 0-7734-5739-9.  Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2005). Turkmen in Iraq and International Migration of Turkmen [Irak'tan Türkmen Göçleri ve Göç Eğilimleri]. Ankara: Global Strategy Institute. p. 88. ISBN 975-8975-02-1.  (bilingual: English and Turkish). Icduygu, A; Sirkeci, Ibrahim & Aydingün, I. (eds) (1998). Türkiye'de Içgöç [Internal Migration in Turkey]. Istanbul: Tarih Vakfi Yayinlari. ISBN 975-7306-31-2.  (in Turkish)   == See also == British Turks List of British Turks   == References ==   == External links == Direct Marketing, editorial advisory board Professor Ibrahim Sirkeci's talk at European Parliament Population Review, scientific review board Home page at EBSL Ibrahim Sirkeci, The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany, New York, Edwin Mellen Press, 2006, ISBN 978-0-7734-5739-3 BirGün columnists Ibrahim Sirkeci Londra Yazıları YOKSULLAR VE İŞÇİLER KONUŞULMADI, 28 Eylül 2008

Irénée-Jules Bienaymé (28 August 1796 – 19 October 1878), was a French statistician. He built on the legacy of Laplace generalizing his least squares method. He contributed to the fields of probability and statistics, and to their application to finance, demography and social sciences. In particular, he formulated the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality concerning the law of large numbers and the Bienaymé formula for the variance of a sum of uncorrelated random variables.   == BiographyEdit == With Irénée-Jules Bienaymé ends the line of great French probability thinkers that began with Pascal and Fermat, then continued with Laplace and Poisson. After Bienaymé, progress in statistics took place in the UK and Russia. His personal life was marked by bad fortune. He studied at the Lycée de Bruges and then at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris. After participating in the defense of Paris in 1814, he attended the École Polytechnique in 1815. Unfortunately that year's class was excluded in the following year by Louis XVIII because of their sympathy for Bonapartists. In 1818, he lectured on mathematics at the Académie militaire de Saint-Cyr but, two years later, he entered the Finance Ministry. He was rapidly promoted, first to inspector, then to inspector general. But the new Republican administration removed him in 1848 for his lack of support for the Republican regime. He became professor of probability at the Sorbonne, but he lost his position in 1851. He then became a consultant as an expert statistician for the government of Napoléon III. In 1852 he was admitted to the Académie des sciences. After 23 years, Bienaymé became the examiner for the attribution of the academy's prize in statistics. He was also a founding member of the Société Mathématique de France, holding its presidency in 1875.   == Contributions to mathematicsEdit == Bienaymé published only 23 articles, half of which appeared in obscure conditions. His first works concerned demographics and actuarial tables. In particular he studied the extinction of closed families (aristocratic families for instance) which declined even as the general population was growing. As a disciple of Laplace and under the influence of Laplace's Théorie analytique des probabilités (1812), he defended the latter's conceptions in a debate with Poisson on the size of juries and on the necessary majority for obtaining a conviction. He translated into French the works of his friend the Russian mathematician Pafnuty Chebyshev, and published the Bienaymé–Chebyshev inequality which gives a simple demonstration of the law of large numbers. He corresponded with Quételet, and also had links with Lamé. Bienaymé criticized Poisson's "law of large numbers" and was involved in a controversy with Cauchy. Both Bienaymè and Cauchy published regression methods at about the same time. Bienaymé had generalized the method of ordinary least squares. The dispute within the literature was over the superiority of one method over the other. It is now known that ordinary least squares is the best linear unbiased estimator provided errors are uncorrelated and homoscedastic. At the time, this was not known. Cauchy developed the Cauchy distribution to show a case where the method of ordinary least squares resulted in a perfectly inefficient estimator. This is due to the fact that the Cauchy distribution has no defined variance to minimize. This is the first direct appearance of the Cauchy distribution in the academic literature. The curve had been previously studied by others, though in the English language as the Witch of Agnesi.   == ReferencesEdit ==  « Actes de la journée du 21 juin 1996 consacrée à Irénée-Jules Bienaymé », 'Cahiers du Centre d'Analyse et de Mathématiques Sociales', n° 138, Série Histoire du Calcul des Probabilités et de la Statistique, n° 28, Paris, E.H.E.S.S.-C.N.R.S Stephen M. Stigler (1974) Studies in the history of probability and statistics. XXXIII: Cauchy and the witch of Agnesi: An historical note on the Cauchy distribution. Biometrika Vol. 61 No. 2 pp. 375–380   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Irénée-Jules Bienaymé", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Ivan Peter Fellegi, OC (Hungarian: Fellegi Péter Iván; born June 22, 1935) is a Hungarian-Canadian statistician and was the Chief Statistician of Canada from 1985 to 2008. Born in Szeged, Hungary, Ivan Fellegi was in his third year of studying mathematics at the Eötvös Loránd University, when the Hungarian uprising was crushed in 1956. He arrived in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, that year and soon began working for Statistics Canada (then known as the Dominion Bureau of Statistics), which is widely regarded as one of the best statistical agencies in the world. He completed his studies with night courses at Carleton University. In 1958 he was the first Carleton University student to receive a Master of Science degree. Upon completing his doctoral studies in mathematical statistics in 1961 he became Carleton's first Ph.D. graduate. In 1961 he was appointed Director of Sampling Research and Consultation staff, and Director General of the Methodology and systems Branch in 1971. He was promoted to Assistant Chief Statistician in 1973, and became Deputy Chief Statistician in 1984. On September 1, 1985, with close to 30 years experience, Ivan Fellegi was appointed Chief Statistician of Canada. He announced his retirement as Chief Statistician on February 15, 2008. In 1992, he was made a Member of the Order of Canada and was promoted to Officer in 1998. He is an honorary member of the International Statistical Institute and an honorary Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society. He provided advice on statistical matters to his native Hungary following its transition to democracy, and in 2004 he was awarded the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary.   == References == A newspaper profile from the Statistics Canada website Characteristics of an Effective Statistical System Carleton University Alumni Ottawa Citizen, February 16, 2008: A few less surveys, a few more poems Canadian Who's Who 1997 Statistics Canada (1993). 75 Years and Counting: A History of Statistics Canada. Ottawa: Minister Responsible for Statistics Canada. (Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 11-531).

Jahar Saha is a professor and former director of the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad, a position he held from 1998 to 2002.   == Biography == Jahar Saha was born on 14 December 1943 at Kaladi in Matlab (now in Bangladesh). While his grandparents were in business, his father was a lawyer who later became a school teacher. His elder brother was a senior government official and his younger sister is a professor in a medical college at Kolkata.   == Education == Saha did a four-year professional degree in Statistics (B.Stat.), Masters in Statistics (M.stat), and a one-year Post-Graduate Diploma in Statistical Quality Control and Operations Research from the Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata. Jahar Saha obtained his Ph.D. in Operations Research from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. His Ph.D. thesis was titled "Some Problems in Railway Networks" which focused on two kinds of problems in railway networks: (i) scheduling trains, (ii) selecting an optimal configuration for railway networks. Many of the problems were structured mathematical programming problems and Saha made attempts to develop efficient algorithms to the problems.   == Career == Saha started his career as a Trainee Technical Officer of SQC Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Mumbai. He also worked as a Junior System Consultant with a consulting company in Mumbai. Since 1975, Saha has been teaching in the Production and Quantitative Methods Area of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (lIMA). During his tenure at the Institute, he held the position of Director between 1998 and 2002. He had also taught at Lake Erie College, USA and had been Visiting Associate Professor at the University ofNew Brunswick, Canada. Professor Saha has been associated with the development of first-year courses on Mathematics and Statistics for Management (MSM). He also developed second-year courses on Linear Programming, Applications of Operations Research, Advanced Topic in Operations Research and Selected Topics in Operations Research, and Quality Management. He is a member of the Operations research Society of India.   == References ==   == External links == Profile at the Operations research Society of India, Ahmedabad Chapter website

James Howard Goodnight (born January 6, 1943) is an American businessman and software programmer. He and several other faculty members of North Carolina State University left the university in 1976 to co-found SAS Institute. Since the first day of incorporation (July 1, 1976) he has served as the company's CEO. His leadership style and the work environment he created at SAS, now a multi-billion dollar company, have been studied by other businesses and by academics.   == Early life and careerEdit == Goodnight was born to Albert Goodnight and Dorothy Patterson in Salisbury, NC, on January 6, 1943. He lived in Greensboro, NC, until he was 12, when his family moved to Wilmington. In his youth, he often worked at his father's hardware store. Mathematics and chemistry were Goodnight's strongest subjects in school, thanks in part, he says, to a "wonderful chemistry teacher" at New Hanover High School. Goodnight's career with computers began when he took a computer course his sophomore year at North Carolina State University. At the time, he said, “a light went on, and I fell in love with making machines do things for other people.” The following summer he got a job writing software programs for the agricultural economics department. With contributions from other alumni, Goodnight was responsible for the construction of a new fraternity house in 2002. Goodnight received a Master's in statistics in 1968. While working on his Master's, his curiosity was piqued over the prospect of a man being sent to the moon. His programming skills helped him land a position at a company building electronic equipment for the ground stations that communicated with the Apollo space capsules. While working on the Apollo program, Goodnight experienced a work environment that had an annual turnover rate of approximately 50 percent. This shaped his views on corporate culture and his future role as an employer. Goodnight returned to North Carolina State University after working on the Apollo project. He earned a PhD in statistics with thesis titled Quadratic unbiased estimation of variance components in linear models with an emphasis on the one-way classification under the supervision of Robert James Monroe and became a faculty member from 1972 to 1976.   == CareerEdit ==  Goodnight joined another faculty at North Carolina State in a research project to create a general purpose statistical analysis system (SAS) for analyzing agricultural data. The project was operated by a consortium of eight land-grant universities and funded primarily by the USDA. Goodnight along with another faculty member Anthony James Barr became project leaders for the development of the early version of SAS. When the software had 100 customers in 1976, Goodnight and three others from the University left the college to form SAS Institute in an office across the street. Goodnight remained CEO of SAS Institute for more than 35 years as the company grew from $138,000 its first year in business, to $420 million in 1993 and $2.43 billion by 2010. Under his leadership, the company grew each year. Goodnight became known for creating and defending SAS’ corporate culture, often described by the media as "utopian." He rejected acquisition offers and chose against going public to protect the company's work environment. Goodnight has maintained a flat organizational structure with about 27 people who report directly to him and three organizational layers.  HSM Global described Goodnight's leadership style in a framework of three pillars: "help employees do their best work by keeping them intellectually challenged and by removing distractions; Make managers responsible for sparking creativity; eliminate arbitrary distinctions between 'suits' and 'creatives'; Engage customers as creative partners to help deliver superior products." In 2004, Goodnight was named a Great American Business Leader by Harvard; that same year he was named one of America's 25 Most Fascinating Entrepreneurs by Inc. Magazine. He has also been a frequent speaker and participant at the World Economic Forum.   == PersonalEdit == Goodnight met his wife, Ann, while he was a senior at North Carolina State University and she was attending Meredith College. They have three children. Goodnight was America's 61st richest individual, with a net worth of approximately $7.3 billion, as of 2014. Goodnight has an interest in improving the state of education, particularly elementary and secondary education. In 1996, Goodnight and his wife, along with his business partner, John Sall and his wife Ginger, founded an independent prep school Cary Academy. Both of the Goodnights are also involved in the local Cary, NC, community. He owns Prestonwood Country Club and The Umstead Hotel and Spa situated on the edge of the SAS campus. His wife also opened An Cuisines, an Asian fusion restaurant in Cary, NC.   == See alsoEdit == SAS (software) SAS Institute List of Americans by net worth List of Tau Kappa Epsilon brothers Prestonwood Country Club   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Oral History Interview with Jim Goodnight, Oral Histories of the American South  Karklgaard, Rich. "Jim Goodnight: King of Analytics". Forbes.    == External linksEdit == Jim Goodnight's Official Bio

James Joseph Sylvester FRS (3 September 1814 – 15 March 1897) was an English mathematician. He made fundamental contributions to matrix theory, invariant theory, number theory, partition theory and combinatorics. He played a leadership role in American mathematics in the later half of the 19th century as a professor at the Johns Hopkins University and as founder of the American Journal of Mathematics. At his death, he was professor at Oxford.   == Biography == Sylvester was born James Joseph in London, England. His father, Abraham Joseph, was a merchant. James adopted the surname Sylvester when his older brother did so upon emigration to the United States—a country which at that time required all immigrants to have a given name, a middle name, and a surname. At the age of 14, Sylvester was a student of Augustus De Morgan at the University of London. His family withdrew him from the University after he was accused of stabbing a fellow student with a knife. Subsequently he attended the Liverpool Royal Institution. Sylvester began his study of mathematics at St John's College, Cambridge in 1831, where his tutor was John Hymers. Although his studies were interrupted for almost two years due to a prolonged illness, he nevertheless ranked second in Cambridge's famous mathematical examination, the tripos, for which he sat in 1837. However, Sylvester was not issued a degree, because graduates at that time were required to state their acceptance of the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, and Sylvester, being an adherent of Judaism, refused to do so. For the same reason, he was unable to compete for a Fellowship or obtain a Smith's prize. In 1838 Sylvester became professor of natural philosophy at University College London. In 1841, he was awarded a BA and an MA by Trinity College, Dublin. In the same year he moved to the United States to become a professor at the University of Virginia for about six months, and returned to England in November 1843. On his return to England he studied law, alongside fellow British lawyer/mathematician Arthur Cayley, with whom he made significant contributions to matrix theory while working as an actuary. One of his private pupils was Florence Nightingale. He did not obtain a position teaching university mathematics until 1855, when he was appointed professor of mathematics at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, from which he retired in 1869, because the compulsory retirement age was 55. The Woolwich academy initially refused to pay Sylvester his full pension, and only relented after a prolonged public controversy, during which Sylvester took his case to the letters page of The Times. One of Sylvester's lifelong passions was for poetry; he read and translated works from the original French, German, Italian, Latin and Greek, and many of his mathematical papers contain illustrative quotes from classical poetry. Following his early retirement, Sylvester (1870) published a book entitled The Laws of Verse in which he attempted to codify a set of laws for prosody in poetry. In 1872, he finally received his B.A. and M.A. from Cambridge, having been denied the degrees due to him being a Jew. In 1876 Sylvester again crossed the Atlantic Ocean to become the inaugural professor of mathematics at the new Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland. His salary was $5,000 (quite generous for the time), which he demanded be paid in gold. After negotiation, agreement was reached on a salary that was not paid in gold. In 1878 he founded the American Journal of Mathematics. The only other mathematical journal in the US at that time was the Analyst, which eventually became the Annals of Mathematics. In 1883, he returned to England to take up the Savilian Professor of Geometry at Oxford University. He held this chair until his death, although in 1892 the University appointed a deputy professor to the same chair. Sylvester invented a great number of mathematical terms such as "matrix", "graph" (combinatorics) and "discriminant". He coined the term "totient" for Euler's totient function φ(n). His collected scientific work fills four volumes. In 1880, the Royal Society of London awarded Sylvester the Copley Medal, its highest award for scientific achievement; in 1901, it instituted the Sylvester Medal in his memory, to encourage mathematical research after his death in Oxford. In Discrete geometry he is remembered for Sylvester's Problem and a result on the orchard problem. Sylvester House, a portion of an undergraduate dormitory at Johns Hopkins University, is named in his honor. Several professorships there are named in his honor also.   == See also == List of things named after James Joseph Sylvester   == Publications == Sylvester, James Joseph (1870), The Laws of Verse Or Principles of Versification Exemplified in Metrical Translations: together with an annotated reprint of the inaugural presidential address to the mathematical and physical section of the British Association at Exeter, London: Longmans, Green and Co, ISBN 978-1-177-91141-2  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1904], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester I, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-3654-5  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1908], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester II, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-4719-0  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1904], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester III, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-4720-6  Sylvester, James Joseph (1973) [1904], Baker, Henry Frederick, ed., The collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester IV, New York: AMS Chelsea Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8218-4238-6    == Notes == ^ a b "Sylvester, James Joseph (SLVR831JJ)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge.  ^ Bell, Eric Temple (1986). Men of Mathematics. Simon Schuster.  ^ "Preliminary Outline of Instructions for the Session Beginning October 3, 1876". Johns Hopkins University. Official Circulars. No. 5. September 1876.  ^ Hawkins, Hugh (1960). Pioneer: A History of the Johns Hopkins University, 1874-1889. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. pp. 41–43.  ^ Matrices and determinants, The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive ^ See: J. J. Sylvester (February 7, 1878) "Chemistry and algebra," Nature, 17 : 284. From page 284: "Every invariant and covariant thus becomes expressible by a graph precisely identical with a Kekuléan diagram or chemicograph." J. J. Sylvester (1878) "On an application of the new atomic theory to the graphical representation of the invariants and covariants of binary quantics, — with three appendices," American Journal of Mathematics, Pure and Applied, 1 (1) : 64-90. The term "graph" first appears in this paper on page 65.  ^ J. J. Sylvester (1851) "On a remarkable discovery in the theory of canonical forms and of hyperdeterminants," Philosophical Magazine, 4th series, 2 : 391–410; Sylvester coins the word "discriminant" on page 406. ^ J. J. Sylvester (1879) "On certain ternary cubic-form equations," American Journal of Mathematics, 2 : 357–393; Sylvester coins the term "totient" on page 361: "(the so-called Φ function of any number I shall here and hereafter designate as its τ function and call its Totient)" ^ a b Dickson, L. E. (1909). "Review: Sylvester's Mathematical Papers, vols. I & II, ed. by H. F. Baker". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 15 (5): 232–239. doi:10.1090/S0002-9904-1909-01746-X.  ^ Dickson, L. E. (1911). "Review: Sylvester's Mathematical Papers, vol. III, ed. by H. F. Baker". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 17 (5): 254–255. doi:10.1090/S0002-9904-1911-02040-7.    == References == Grattan-Guinness, I. (2001), "The contributions of J. J. Sylvester, F.R.S., to mechanics and mathematical physics", Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 55 (2): 253–265, doi:10.1098/rsnr.2001.0142, MR 1840760 . Macfarlane, Alexander (2009) [1916], Lectures on Ten British Mathematicians of the Nineteenth Century, Mathematical monographs 17, Cornell University Library, ISBN 978-1-112-28306-2  Parshall, Karen Hunger (1998), James Joseph Sylvester. Life and work in letters., The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-850391-0, MR 1674190, Review  Parshall, Karen Hunger (2006), James Joseph Sylvester. Jewish mathematician in a Victorian world, Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-8291-3, MR 2216541   Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Sylvester, James Joseph". Encyclopædia Britannica 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   Lee, Sidney, ed. (1898). "Sylvester, James Joseph". Dictionary of National Biography 55. London: Smith, Elder & Co.  Parshall, Karen Hunger. "Sylvester, James Joseph (1814–1897)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/26872.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "James Joseph Sylvester", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . James Joseph Sylvester at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Collected papers – from the University of Michigan Historical Math Collection J.J.Sylvester home page Selected Poetry of James Joseph Sylvester

James M. Robins is an epidemiologist and biostatistician best known for advancing methods for drawing causal inferences from complex observational studies and randomized trials, particularly those in which the treatment varies with time. He is the 2013 recipient of the Nathan Mantel Award for lifetime achievement in statistics and epidemiology. He graduated in medicine from Washington University in 1976. He is currently Mitchell L. and Robin LaFoley Dong Professor of Epidemiology at Harvard School of Public Health. He has published over 100 papers in academic journals and is an ISI highly cited researcher.   == Biography == Robins attended Harvard College with the class of 1971, concentrating in mathematics and philosophy. He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa in his junior year, but did not graduate. He went on to attend Washington University School of Medicine, and practiced Occupational Medicine for several years. While working in occupational medicine, he attended basic courses in applied medical statistics at the Yale School of Public Health, but quickly came to the conclusion that the methodology used at the time was insufficiently rigorous to support causal conclusions.   == Research == In 1986, Robins published the paper "A New Approach to Causal Inference in Mortality Studies", which introduced a new framework for drawing causal inference from observational data. In this paper and in other articles published around the same time, Robins showed that in non-experimental data, exposure is almost always time-dependent, and that standard methods such as regression are therefore almost always biased. This framework is mathematically very closely related to Judea Pearl's graphical framework Non-Parametric Structural Equations Models, which Pearl developed independently around the same time. In his original paper on causal inference, Robins described two new methods for controlling for confounding bias, which can be applied in the generalized setting of time-dependent exposures: The G-formula and G-Estimation of Structural Nested Models. Later, he introduced a third class of models, Marginal Structural Models, in which the parameters are estimated using inverse probability of treatment weights. He has also contributed significantly to the theory of dynamic treatment regimes, which are of high significance in comparative effectiveness research and personalized medicine.   == Notes ==   == References == James Robins — Mitchell L. and Robin LaFoley Dong Professor of Epidemiology. Harvard School of Public Health (Accessed 15 March 2008). Dr. James M. Robins — Bibliography Harvard School of Public Health (Accessed 15 March 2008). Gehrman, Elizabeth (March 23, 2006) James Robins makes statistics tell the truth: Numbers in the service of health. Harvard University Gazette.   == Selected publications == Robins, J.M. (1989). "The control of confounding by intermediate variables". Statistics in Medicine 8 (6): 679–701. doi:10.1002/sim.4780080608. PMID 2749074.  Robins, J.M.; Tsiatis, A.A. (1991). "Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using rank preserving structural failure time models". Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods 20 (8): 2609–2631. doi:10.1080/03610929108830654.  Robins, J.M. (1994). "Correcting for non-compliance in randomized trials using structural nested mean models". Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods 23 (8): 2379–2412. doi:10.1080/03610929408831393.  Robins, J.M. (1997). "Causal inference from complex longitudinal data". In M. Berkane. Latent Variable Modeling and Applications to Causality. Lecture notes in statistics 120. Springer-Verlag. pp. 69–117.  Robins, J.M.; Ritov, Y. (1997). "Toward A Curse Of Dimensionality Appropriate (CODA) Asymptotic Theory For Semi-parametric Models". Statistics in Medicine 16 (3): 285–319. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19970215)16:3<285::AID-SIM535>3.3.CO;2-R. PMID 9004398.  Robins, J.M. (1998). "Correction for non-compliance in equivalence trials". Statistics in Medicine 17 (3): 269–302. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19980215)17:3<269::AID-SIM763>3.0.CO;2-J. PMID 9493255.  Robins, J.M.; Hernan, M.A.; Brumback, B. (2000). "Marginal Structural Models and Causal Inference in Epidemiology". Epidemiology 11 (5): 550–560. doi:10.1097/00001648-200009000-00011. JSTOR 3703997. PMID 10955408.  Van Der Laan, M.J.; Robins, J.M. (2003). Unified Methods for Censored Longitudinal Data and Causality. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer. ISBN 0-387-95556-9.

James Tobin (March 5, 1918 – March 11, 2002) was an American economist who served on the Council of Economic Advisers and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and taught at Harvard and Yale Universities. He developed the ideas of Keynesian economics, and advocated government intervention to stabilize output and avoid recessions. His academic work included pioneering contributions to the study of investment, monetary and fiscal policy and financial markets. He also proposed an econometric model for censored endogenous variables, the well-known "Tobit model". Tobin received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1981. Outside of academia, Tobin was widely known for his suggestion of a tax on foreign exchange transactions, now known as the "Tobin tax". This was designed to reduce speculation in the international currency markets, which he saw as dangerous and unproductive.   == Life and career ==   === Early life === Tobin was born on March 5, 1918 in Champaign, Illinois. His father was Louis Michael Tobin, (b. 1879) a journalist working at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His father had fought in World War I, was a member of the first Greek organization at Illinois (Delta Tau Delta fraternity Beta Upsilon chapter), and was credited as the inventor of 'Homecoming'. His mother, Margaret Edgerton Tobin (b. 1893), was a social worker. Tobin followed primary school at the University Laboratory High School of Urbana, Illinois, a laboratory school in the university's campus. In 1935, on his father's advice, Tobin took the entrance exams for Harvard University. Despite no special preparation for the exams, he passed and was admitted with a national scholarship from the university. Here among the faculty, he would meet Joseph Schumpeter, Alvin Hansen, Gottfried Haberler, Sumner Slichter, Seymour Harris, Edward Mason, Edward Chamberlin, John Kenneth Galbraith and Wassily Leontief. During his studies he first read Keynes' The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, published in 1936. Tobin graduated summa cum laude in 1939 with a thesis centered on a critical analysis of Keynes' mechanism for introducing equilibrium "involuntary" unemployment. His first published article, in 1941, was based on this senior's thesis. Tobin immediately started graduate studies, also at Harvard, earning his M.A. degree in 1940. His fellow graduate students included Paul Samuelson, Lloyd Metzler, Abram Bergson, Richard Musgrave and Richard M. Goodwin. In 1941, he interrupted graduate studies to work for the Office of Price Administration and Civilian Supply and the War Production Board in Washington, D.C.. The next year, after the United States entered World War II, he enlisted in the US Navy, spending the war as an officer on a destroyer. At the end of the war he returned to Harvard and resumed studies, receiving his Ph.D. in 1947 with a thesis on the consumption function written under the supervision of Joseph Schumpeter. In 1947 Tobin was elected a Junior Fellow of Harvard's Society of Fellows, which allowed him the freedom and funding to spend the next three years studying and doing research.   === Academic activity and consultancy === In 1950 Tobin moved to Yale University, where he remained for the rest of his career. He joined the Cowles Foundation, which moved to Yale in 1955, also serving as its president between 1955–1961 and 1964-1965. His main research interest was to provide microfoundations to Keynesian economics, with a special focus on monetary economics. In 1957 he was appointed Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale. Besides teaching and research, Tobin was also strongly involved in the public life, writing on current economic issues and serving as an economic expert and policy consultant. During 1961–62, he served as a member of John F. Kennedy's Council of Economic Advisors, under the chairman Walter Heller, then acted as a consultant between 1962–68. Here, in close collaboration with Arthur Okun, Robert Solow and Kenneth Arrow, he helped design the Keynesian economic policy implemented by the Kennedy administration. Tobin also served for several terms as a member of the Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System Academic Consultants and as a consultant of the US Treasury Department. Tobin was awarded the John Bates Clark Medal in 1955 and, in 1981, the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics. He was a fellow of several professional associations, holding the position of president of the American Economic Association in 1971. In 1972 Tobin, along with fellow Yale economics professor William Nordhaus, published Is Growth Obsolete?, an article that introduced the Measure of Economic Welfare as the first model for economic sustainability assessment, and economic sustainability measurement. In 1988 Tobin formally retired from Yale, but continued to deliver some lectures as Professor Emeritus and continued to write. He died on March 11, 2002, in New Haven, Connecticut. Tobin was a trustee of Economists for Peace and Security.   === Personal life === James Tobin married Elizabeth Fay Ringo, a former M.I.T. student of Paul Samuelson, on September 14, 1946. They had four children: Margaret Ringo (born in 1948), Louis Michael (born in 1951), Hugh Ringo (born in 1953) and Roger Gill (born in 1956). In late June, 2009, the family announced via a private email that Tobin's wife had died at the age of 90.   === Legacy === In August 2009 in a roundtable interview in Prospect magazine, Adair Turner supported the idea of new global taxes on financial transactions, warning that the “swollen” financial sector paying excessive salaries had grown too big for society. Lord Turner’s suggestion that a “Tobin tax” – named after James Tobin – should be considered for financial transactions made headlines around the world. Tobin's Tobit model of regression with censored endogenous variables (Tobin 1958a) is a standard econometric technique. His "q" theory of investment (Tobin 1969), the Baumol-Tobin model of the transactions demand for money (Tobin 1956), and his model of liquidity preference as behavior toward risk (the asset demand for money) (Tobin 1958b) are all staples of economics textbooks. In his 1958 article Tobin also led the way in showing how to deal with utility maximization under uncertainty with an infinite number of possible states. As Palda explains "One way to get out of the mess of figuring out asset prices using a model of maximizing the expected utility of investing in stocks is to make assumptions about either preferences or the probabilities of the different possible states of the world. Nobellist James Tobin (1958) took this line and discovered that in some cases you do not need to worry about the utility of income in thousands of states, and the attached probabilities, to solve the consumer’s choice on how to spread income among states. When preferences contain only a linear and a squared term (a case of diminishing returns) or the probabilities of different stock returns follow a normal distribution (an equation that contains a linear and squared terms as parameters), a simple formulation of a person’s investment choices becomes possible. Under Tobin’s assumptions we can reformulate the person’s decision problem as being one of trading off risk and expected return. Risk, or more precisely the variance of your investment portfolio creates spread in the returns you expect. People are willing to assume more risk only if compensated by a higher level of expected return. One can thus think of a tradeoff people are willing to make between risk and expected return. They invest in risky assets to the point at which their willingness to trade off risk and return is equal to the rate at which they able to trade them off. It is difficult to exaggerate how brilliant is the simplification of the investment problem that flows from these assumptions. Instead of worrying about the investor’s optimization problem in potentially millions of possible states of the world, one need only worry about how the investor can trade off risk and return in the stock market."   == Publications == Tobin, James (1941). "A note on the money wage problem". Quarterly Journal of Economics 55 (3): 508–516. doi:10.2307/1885642. JSTOR 1885642.  Tobin, James (1955). "A Dynamic Aggregative Model". Journal of Political Economy 63.2 (2): 103–15. doi:10.1086/257652.  Tobin, James (1956). "The Interest-Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash," Review of Economics and Statistics, 38(3), pp 241–247. Tobin, James (1958a). "Estimation of relationships for limited dependent variables". Econometrica (The Econometric Society) 26 (1): 24–36. doi:10.2307/1907382. JSTOR 1907382  Tobin, James (1958b). "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk". Review of Economic Studies 25.1: 65–86.  Tobin, James (1961). "Money, Capital, and Other Stores of Value," American Economic Review, 51(2), pp. 26–37. Reprinted in Tobin, 1987, Essays in Economics, v. 1, pp. 217–27. MIT Press. Tobin, James (1969). "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory". Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 1.1 (1): 15–29.  Tobin, James (1970). "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(2), pp. 301–317. Tobin, James and William C. Brainard (1977a). "Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital". In Richard Nelson and Bela Balassa, eds., Economic Progress: Private Values and Public Policy (Essays in Honor of William Fellner), Amsterdam: North-Holland, 235-62. Tobin, James (1977b). "How Dead is Keynes?". Economic Inquiry XV (4): 459–468.  Tobin, James (1992). “money,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Finance and Money, v. 2, pp. 770–79 & in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. 2008, 2nd Edition. Table of Contents and Abstract. Reprinted in Tobin (1996), Essays in Economics, v. 4, pp. 139–63. MIT Press. Tobin, James, Essays in Economics, MIT Press: v. 1 (1987), Macroeconomics. Scroll to chapter-preview links. v. 2 Consumption and Economics. Description. v. 3 (1987). Theory and Policy (in 1989 paperback as Policies for Prosperity: Essays in a Keynesian Mode). Description and links. v. 4 (1996). National and International. Links. Tobin, James, with Stephen S. Golub (1998). Money, Credit, and Capital. Irwin/McGraw-Hill. TOC. Tobin, James (2008). "Monetary Policy". In David R. Henderson (ed.). Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty. ISBN 978-0865976658. OCLC 237794267.    == See also == Basic income Guaranteed minimum income Q Ratio (Tobin's Q ratio) Tobit model (Tobin's model for censored endogenous variables) Tobin tax   == References ==   == External links == James Tobin at the Cowles Foundation site Short biography at nobel-winners.com IDEAS/RePEc John Mihaljevic's Equities and Tobin's Q Report The Q Ratio Sends a Modestly Bearish Long-Term Signal (July 2009) Tobin's Q Moderately Bullish on U.S. Equities (as of March 2009) The Manual of Ideas Launches Tobin's Q Research Service Based on James Tobin's Q Indicator Robert Huebscher on "The Market Valuation Q-uestion" James Tobin (1918–2002). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.

Jan Czekanowski (October 8, 1882, Głuchów–July 20, 1965, Szczecin) was a Polish anthropologist, statistician and linguist. Czekanowski is known for having played an important role in saving the Polish-Lithuanian branch of the Karaim people from Holocaust extermination. In 1942 he managed to convince a German "race scientists" that the Karaim were of Turkic origin although professing Judaism and using Hebrew as a liturgical language. This helped the Karaim people escape the tragic destiny of other European Jews and the Romas.   == Life == Czekanowski attended school in Warsaw but was transferred to Latvia, where he finished his education in 1901. He then entered a university in Zurich in 1902; there, he studied anthropology, mathematics, anatomy, and ethnography as a pupil of Swiss anthropologist Rudolph Martin, author of the popular anthropology textbook Lehrbuch der Anthropologie. In 1907 Czekanowski defended his PhD. dissertation. For the dissertation's research he traveled to the Royal Museum in Berlin and to Middle Africa from 1906-1907. While in Africa, he led a team into the Congo to collect ethnographic materials. While working on studying the societies of Africa, he developed various statistical methods and contributed to the field of taxonomy. The research he made in Africa has since been published in five volumes and sent in 1910 to Saint Petersburg ethnography. He then became a professor at the University of Lwów and University of Poznań. While working he introduced an innovative take on mathematical statistics. He worked in these universities from 1913 to 1945 and in the period 1923-1924 he was a president of Polish Copernicus Society of Naturalists. In addition, he worked at the University of Poznań from 1937-1946, where he researched the dynamics of evolution in human populations. He played numerous scientific roles at the University of Poznań, including vice-chairman of the Polish Social Statistic Company.   == Racial classification == Czekanowski classified Europe into four pure races. The four pure races were the Nordic, Mediterranean (Ibero-Insular), Lapponoid and Armenoid. The Lapponoid included the central and eastern Europeans along Europe longitudely as well as the Sami people of Northern Europe. Czekanowski classified six subraces in Europe which were mixed types of the pure races. The six mixed racial subraces were: the Northwestern (Nordic and Mediterranean), the Subnordic (Nordic and Lapponoid), Alpine (Lapponoid and Armenoid), the Littoral (Mediterranean and Armenoid), Sublapponoid (Mediterranean and Lapponoid) and the Dinaric (Nordic and Armenoid). The Sublapponoid subrace (also called Pile Dwelling race) lived around the Swiss lakes.   == Linguistics == Czekanowski introduced numerical taxonomy into comparative linguistics, thus founding the discipline of computational linguistics. He developed (1913) a still much-used index of similarity between two samples. He applied it to phonemes and words in text corpora of different languages. It was later introduced in analysis of ecological communities.   == Books == Zarys metod statystycznych w zastosowaniu do antropologii [An outline of statistical methods applied in anthropology]. Warszawa: Towarzystwo Naukowe Warszawskie (1913) Człowiek w czasie i przestrzeni (1934) Polska - Słowiańszczyzna. Perspektywy antropologiczne (1948)   == See also == List of Poles   == External links == Czekanowski's Diagram: a Method of Multidimensional Clustering   == References ==

Jan Piekałkiewicz (19 September 1892 – 19 February 1943) was a Polish economist and statistician, politician and the Polish Underground State's Government Delegate.   == Biography == He was born on the 19 September 1892 in Kursk, to a Polish intelligentsia family. He studied in St. Petersburg and in Poznań. He was an employee of the Central Statistical Office, and was one of the organizers of the Polish census of 1921. From 1923 to 1924 he was a professor at the University of Lwów. From 1924 to 1939 he lectured in the Main Political School in Warsaw, and published over 50 works on finances, economics (in particular, econometrics) and statistics. He was a member of the Polish Statistical Society, and on 1927 he became a member of the International Statistical Institute. He worked with the Statistical Commission of the League of Nations. He was considered a leading Polish expert on economical statistics. He was a member of the Polish People's Party "Piast" (PSL "Piast", from 1926) and People's Party (Stronnictwo Ludowe, from 1931). From 1938 to 1939 he was a member of the Main Council of the People's Party. Following the German invasion of Poland, from 1940 he was a member of the underground arm of the People's Party, the People's Party "Roch" (Stronnictwo Ludowe "Roch"). In December 1940 he became Deputy to the Polish Underground State's Government Delegate and on 2 August (or 17 September - sources vary) 1942 he replaced Cyryl Ratajski as Delegate. As Delegate, he confirmed the creation of the Council to Aid Jews Żegota and extension of full aid to Polish political prisoners. He also ordered the full documentation of the Nazi crimes against ethnic Poles and the Jews. He informed the Western Allies about the Holocaust. He supported the studies on the creation of the post-war Polish-German border on Lusatian Neisse and Oder. In his speeches to the nation, published in Biuletyn Informacyjny, he called up everyone to join in the civil struggles and warned collaborators that they faced the death penalty for betraying the Polish nation. He also wanted to establish cooperation between the Polish Underground State, loyal to the Polish government in exile in London, and the communist Polish Workers Party (PPR). As Delegate, he was succeeded by Jan Stanisław Jankowski. He was arrested by the Germans on 19 February 1943, tortured, then murdered on 19 June 1943. In 1995 he was posthumously awarded the Order of the White Eagle.   == Works == Atlas statystyczny Polski, with Ignacy Weinfeld and Edward Szturm de Sztrem, tome 1 in 1924, tome 2 in 1925 O programie gospodarczym Polski, with Brunon Balukiewicz La Pologne contemporaine : atlas statistique, 1926 Bilans płatniczy polski = La Balance des payements de la Pologne, 1926 Okrȩgi gospodarcze Polski : Les régions économiques de la Pologne, 1927 Długi samorządu terytorjalnego = Les dettes des administrations autonomes territoriales, 1929 Le service statistique des banques de crédit agricole hypothécaire, 1931 La statistique de l'activité économique des entreprises d'état, 1933 Statistique du crédit hypothécaire, 1933 Sprawozdanie z badań skladu ludności robotniczej w Polsce metoda̜ reprezentacyjna̜, 1934   == See also == Janusz Piekałkiewicz, nephew   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Janusz Gmitruk, Jan Piekałkiewicz - bohater zapomniany, Muzeum Historii Polskiego Ruchu Ludowego, 2009, ISBN 978-83-60093-36-8   == External links == Photo of Jan Piekałkiewicz Jan Piekałkiewicz (in the middle) on a 1988 Polish stamp

Jan Visman (2 July 1914, Deventer – 19 February 2006) was a Dutch statistician who played a key role in building a bridge between sampling theory with its homogeneous populations and sampling practice with its heterogeneous sampling units and sample spaces. Visman studied mining engineering at the Delft University of Technology, and was employed at the Dutch State Mines during the Second World War. He surfaced after the war with a massive amount of test results determined in samples selected from heterogeneous sampling units of coal. In fact, he had gathered so much valuable information that he was encouraged to write a PhD thesis on the sampling of coal. Jan Visman defended his PhD thesis titled “De Monsterneming van Heterogene Binomiale Korrelmengsels, in het Bijzonder Steenkool” at the Technical University of Delft on December 17, 1947. Visman proved that the variance of the primary sample selection stage (the sampling variance) is the sum of the composition variance and the distribution variance. The composition variance is a measure for variability between particles within primary increments. The distribution variance, in contrast, is a measure for variability between primary increments in a sampling unit, and, thus, for its degree of heterogeneity. He described a simple experiment to estimate the composition and distribution components of the sampling variance. The distribution heterogeneity causes spatial dependence between measured values in ordered sets determined in sampling units and sample spaces. Visman worked briefly in Ottawa after immigrating to Canada in 1951. Until his retirement in 1976, he headed the Western Regional Laboratories of the Department of Mines and Technical Surveys, which is nowadays known as Energy, Mines & Resources. These laboratories were located in Calgary until 1955 when they moved to Edmonton and are still operating alongside the Alberta Research Council at the Coal Research Centre in Devon, Alberta. Visman wrote Towards a Common Basis for the Sampling of Materials, Mines Branch Research Report R 93, which was published in July 1962. He participated in ASTM Committees D-5 on Coal and Coke and E-11 on Statistics. ASTM D 2234 Standard Practice for Collection of a Gross Sample of Coal was the first internationally recognized standard to specify a precision estimate for a measured variable. Visman’s sampling experiment with small and large increments is described in ASTM D 2234, Annex A1. Test Method for Determining the Variance Components of a Coal. Visman’s paper titled A General Sampling Theory was published in the November 1969 issue of Materials Research & Standards. Jan Visman was an accidental sampling expert because his true calling was coal processing but he became interested in sampling because of his need to understand this process. His innovative work inspired a great deal of progress in sampling theory and practice in many scientific disciplines. His brilliant mind succumbed long before he died on February 19, 2006. Jan Visman’s contribution to the bridging of the breach between sampling theory and sampling practice for materials in bulk should be remembered.   == References == Various authors, Approaches in Material Sampling, Bastiaan Geelhoed, Editor, IOS Press, 2010 Gy, P, "L’Ếchantillonnage des Minerais en Vrac, Tome 1 Théorie Générale", Jan 1967, Revue de L’Industrie Minérale Gy, P, "L’Ếchantillonnage des Minerais en Vrac, Tome 2, Théorie Générale Erreurs Opératoires Complements", Sep 1971, Revue de L’Industrie Minérale Merks, J W, Sampling and Weighing of Bulk Solids, Trans Tech Publications, Claustall-Zellerfeld, 1985 Merks, J and Merks, E, Precision Estimates for Ore Reserves, 1991, Erzmetall, October Merks, J and Merks, E, Metrology in Mineral Exploration, 2009, APCOM, September Visman, J, De monsterneming van heterogene binomiale korrelmengsels, in het bijzonder steenkool, PhD Thesis, Delft, 1947 Visman, J, Towards a Common Basis for the Sampling of Materials, Research Report R93, Department of Mines, Ottawa, 1962 Visman, J, "A General Sampling Theory", Materials Research and Standards, Vol 9, No 11, 1969   == External links == Visman's sampling equations Visman's sampling theory in practice

Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg (August 4, 1876, Helsinki – December 12, 1932, Helsinki) was a Finnish mathematician known for work on the central limit theorem.   == Life and work == Lindeberg was son of a teacher at the Helsinki Polytechnical Institute and at an early age showed mathematical talent and interest. The family was well off and later Jarl Waldemar would prefer to be a reader than a full professor. Lindeberg's career centred on the University of Helsinki. His early interests were in partial differential equations and the calculus of variations but from 1920 he worked in probability and statistics. In 1920 he published his first paper on the central limit theorem. His result was similar to that obtained earlier by Lyapunov whose work he did not then know. However, their approaches were quite different; Lindeberg's was based on a convolution argument while Lyapunov used the characteristic function. Two years later Lindeberg used his method to obtain a stronger result: the so-called Lindeberg condition. His work on probability led to him becoming involved in applied fields. He developed what we know as Kendall's tau and he found the first two moments of its sampling distribution. Lindeberg used line transect methods in forestry, and when in 1926 determining the necessary number of transects to obtain a sufficiently precise confidence interval, he seems to have rediscovered Student's t-distribution. The Swedish mathematician Harald Cramér met Lindeberg in 1922. He later recalled this story about Lindeberg and the beautiful farm he owned. "When he was reproached for not being sufficiently active in his scientific work, he said 'Well, I am really a farmer.' And if somebody happened to say that his farm was not properly cultivated, his answer was 'Of course my real job is to be a professor.' I was very fond of him and saw him often during the following years." Lindeberg's work wasn't known by Alan Turing, who proved the central limit theorem in his disseration in 1935.   == Writing available on the web == J. W. Lindeberg, Eine neue Herleitung des Exponentialgesetzes in der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung, Mathematische Zeitschrift, 15 (1922) 211-225.   == Commentary == L. Le Cam (1986) The Central Limit Theorem Around 1935, Statistical Science, Vol. 1, No. 1. (Feb), pp. 78-91. Gustav Elfving (1981) The History of Mathematics in Finland 1828-1918. Societas Scientarium Fennica, Helsinki.   == Biography == G. Elfving (2001) Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg, Statisticians of the Centuries (ed. C. C. Heyde and E. Seneta) pp. 318-321. New York: Springer. Harald Cramér (1976) Half a Century with Probability Theory: Some Personal Recollections, Annals of Probability, Vol. 4, No. 4. (Aug.), pp. 509-546.   == Notes ==   == External links == Photograph of Lindeberg on the Portraits of Statisticians page ISI: Milestones of the history of statistics in Finland Tore Schweder: Early Statistics in the Nordic Countries

Jayanta Kumar Ghosh or Jaẏanta Kumāra Ghosha (Bengali: জয়ন্ত কুমার ঘোষ, born May 23, 1937) is an Indian statistician, currently emeritus professor at Indian Statistical Institute and a professor of statistics at Purdue University.   == Education == He obtained a B.S. from Presidency College, then affiliated with the University of Calcutta, and subsequently a M.A. and a Ph.D. from the University of Calcutta. He started his research career in the early 1960s, studying sequential analysis as a graduate student in the department of statistics at the University of Calcutta.   == Research == Among his best-known discoveries are the Bahadur–Ghosh–Kiefer representation (with R. R. Bahadur and Jack Kiefer) and the Ghosh–Pratt identity along with John W. Pratt. His research contributions fall within the fields of: Bayesian inference Asymptotics Modeling and model selection High dimensional data analysis Nonparametric regression and density estimation Survival analysis Statistical genetics   == Awards/Honors == Elected Member of the International Statistical Institute Advisory Editor, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics Fellow of the Indian National Science Academy Life Member and Director of the Calcutta Statistical Association Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences Japanese Society for Promotion of Sciences Fellowship, 1978 Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize for Science and Technology, 1981 President, Statistics Section of the Indian Science Congress Association, 1991 President, International Statistical Institute, 1993 Mahalanobis Gold Medal of Indian Science Congress Association, 1998 P. V. Sukhatme Prize for Statistics, 2000 Mahalanobis Memorial Lecture, State Science and Technology Congress, W. Bengal, 2003 D.Sc. (h.c.), B.C. Roy Agricultural University, W. Bengal, India, 2006 Padma Shree (2014) by the Government of India   == Bibliography == He has published over 50 research papers. He has also published four books, which are: Invariance in Testing and Estimation (Lecture Notes), 1967, published by Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. Higher Order Asymptotics (based on CBMS-NSF lecture), published jointly by Institute of Mathematical Statistics and American Statistical Association, 1994. (with R.V. Ramamoorthi) Bayesian Nonparametrics (Springer 2003). (with Mohan Delampady and Tapas Samanta) An Introduction to Bayesian Analysis - Theory and Methods, Springer 2006.   == References ==   == External links == Indian Statistical Institute Statistics Department homepage Dr. Ghosh's profile at Purdue University

Jerzy Neyman ForMemRS (April 16, 1894 – August 5, 1981), born Jerzy Spława-Neyman, was a Polish mathematician and statistician who spent the first part of his professional career at various institutions in Warsaw, Poland and then at University College London, and the second part at the University of California, Berkeley. Neyman first introduced the modern concept of a confidence interval into statistical hypothesis testing and co-devised null hypothesis testing (in collaboration with Egon Pearson).   == Life and career == He was born into a Polish family in Bendery, Bessarabia in Imperial Russia, the fourth of four children of Czesław Spława-Neyman and Kazimiera Lutosławska. His family was Roman Catholic and Neyman served as an altar boy during his early childhood. Later, Neyman would become an agnostic. Neyman's family descended from a long line of Polish nobles and military heroes. He graduated from the Kamieniec Podolski gubernial gymnasium for boys in 1909 under the name Yuri Cheslavovich Neyman. He began studies at Kharkov University in 1912, where he was taught by Russian probabilist Sergei Natanovich Bernstein. After he read 'Lessons on the integration and the research of the primitive functions' by Henri Lebesgue, he was fascinated with measure and integration. In 1921 he returned to Poland in a program of repatriation of POWs after the Polish-Soviet War. He earned his Doctor of Philosophy degree at University of Warsaw in 1924 for a dissertation titled "On the Applications of the Theory of Probability to Agricultural Experiments". He was examined by Wacław Sierpiński and Stefan Mazurkiewicz, among others. He spent a couple of years in London and Paris on a fellowship to study statistics with Karl Pearson and Émile Borel. After his return to Poland he established the Biometric Laboratory at the Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology in Warsaw. He published many books dealing with experiments and statistics, and devised the way which the FDA tests medicines today. Neyman proposed and studied randomized experiments in 1923. Furthermore, his paper "On the Two Different Aspects of the Representative Method: The Method of Stratified Sampling and the Method of Purposive Selection", given at the Royal Statistical Society on 19 June 1934, was the groundbreaking event leading to modern scientific sampling. He introduced the confidence interval in his paper in 1937. Another noted contribution is the Neyman–Pearson lemma, the basis of hypothesis testing. In 1938 he moved to Berkeley, where he worked for the rest of his life. Thirty-nine students received their Ph.D's under his advisorship. In 1966 he was awarded the Guy Medal of the Royal Statistical Society and three years later the U.S.'s National Medal of Science. He died in Oakland, California in 1981.   == See also == List of Poles   == References ==   == Further references == Fisher, Ronald "Statistical methods and scientific induction" Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 17 (1955), 69—78. (criticism of statistical theories of Jerzy Neyman and Abraham Wald) Neyman, Jerzy (1956). "Note on an Article by Sir Ronald Fisher". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 18 (2): 288–294. JSTOR 2983716.  (reply to Fisher 1955) Reid, Constance, Jerzy Neyman—From Life, Springer Verlag, (1982), ISBN 0-387-90747-5   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Jerzy Neyman", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Jerzy Neyman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ASA biographical article by Chin Long Chiang Jerzy Neyman — Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences

Jessica Utts (born 1952) is a parapsychologist and statistics professor at the University of California, Irvine. She is known for her textbooks on statistics and her investigation into remote viewing.   == Statistics education == In 2003, Utts published an article in American Statistician, a journal published by the American Statistical Association, calling for significant changes to collegiate level statistics education. In the article she argued that curricula do a fine job of covering the mathematical side of statistics, but do a poor job of teaching students the skills necessary to properly interpret statistical results in scientific studies. The argument continues that common errors found in news articles, such as the common misinterpretation that correlative studies show causation, would be reduced if there were significant changes made to standard statistics courses. Utts was elected to serve as the 111th president of the American Statistical Association, with her term as President-Elect to commence in January 2015, followed by her term as president in 2016.   == Investigation of remote viewing == In 1995, the American Institutes for Research (AIR) appointed a panel consisting primarily of Utts and Ray Hyman to evaluate a project investigating remote viewing for espionage applications, the Stargate Project, which was funded by the Central Intelligence Agency and Defense Intelligence Agency, and carried out initially by Stanford Research Institute and subsequently by SAIC. A report by Utts claimed the results were evidence of psychic functioning, however Hyman in his report argued Utts' conclusion that ESP had been proven to exist, especially precognition, was premature and the findings had not been independently replicated. According to Hyman "the overwhelming amount of data generated by the viewers is vague, general, and way off target. The few apparent hits are just what we would expect if nothing other than reasonable guessing and subjective validation are operating." Funding for the project was stopped after these reports were issued. Jessica Utts also co-authored papers with the parapsychologist Edwin May, who took over Stargate in 1985. The psychologist David Marks noted that as Utts has published papers with May "she was not independent of the research team. Her appointment to the review panel is puzzling; an evaluation is likely to be less than partial when an evaluator is not independent of the program under investigation." Utts is on the executive board of the International Remote Viewing Association (IRVA).   == Publications ==   === Books === Seeing Through Statistics, 3rd edition (2005) - The use of statistical methods to solve real world problems, and to gain understanding from the application of statistics in addition to simply calculating them. Mind On Statistics, 4th edition (2012), with R.F. Heckard - Textbook for an introductory statistics course, with emphasis on understanding the use of statistics in everyday life.   === Papers === Utts, J. (1988). Successful replication versus statistical significance. Journal of Parapsychology, 52(4): 305-320. Radin, D. and J. Utts. (1989). Experiments investigating the influence of intention on random and pseudorandom events. Journal of Scientific Exploration, 3(1): 65-79. Utts, J. (1989). Randomness and randomization tests: A reply to Gilmore. Journal of Parapsychology, 53(4): 345-351. May, E. C., J. M. Utts, B. S. Humphrey, W. Luke, T.J. Frivold, and V. V. Trask. (1990). Advances in Remote Viewing, Journal of Parapsychology, 54(3), 193-228. Hansen G. P., J. M. Utts, and B. Markwick. (1992). Critique of the PEAR remote viewing experiments. Journal of Parapsychology, 56(2), 97-113. Utts, J. (1993). Analyzing free-response data--a progress report. In PSI Research Methodology--A Reexamination, ed. L. Coly and J. D. S. McMahon, Parapsychology Foundation, New York, 71-83.   == References ==   == Further reading == Ray Hyman. (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment. Statistical Science Vol. 6, No. 4. pp. 389–392. Robert L. Morris. (1991). Replication and Meta-Analysis in Parapsychology: Comment. Statistical Science Vol. 6, No. 4. pp. 393–395.   == External links == Jessica Utts's UC Irvine page Parapsychology papers by Jessica Utts

Jianqing Fan (Chinese: 范剑青; born 1962), is a statistician and financial econometrician. He is the current Frederick L. Moore '18 Professor of Finance, Professor of Statistics and Chairman of Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering (since 2012) at Princeton University. In 2000, he received the COPSS Presidents' Award. He is also a recipient of the Morningside Gold Medal of Applied Mathematics (2007)  (2007), Guggenheim Fellow  (2009), Pao-Lu Hsu Prize (2013) and Guy Medal in Silver (2014). He was elected to Academician from Academia Sinica in 2012.   == Research == Fan is interested in statistical theory and methods in data science, finance, economics, risk management, machine learning, computational biology, biostatistics, with particular skills on High-dimensional statistics, nonparametric modeling, longitudinal and functional data analysis, nonlinear time series, wavelets, among others.   == Career == Jianqing Fan is a co-editor of Journal of Econometrics and associate editor of Journal of the American Statistical Association (1996-). In addition, he was the co-editor(-in-chief) of The Annals of Statistics (2004-2006), a co-editor of Econometrics Journal (2007-2012) and an editor of Probability Theory and Related Fields (2003-2005), as well as a member of the editorial boards of a number of other journals. The latter includes, Annals of Statistics, Econometrica, and Journal of Financial Econometrics. He has served as President of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (2006-2009), and as President of the International Chinese Statistical Association (2008-2010). After receiving his Ph.D. in Statistics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1989, he was appointed assistant, associate, and full professor at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (1989–2003), and as professor at the University of California at Los Angeles (1997–2000), Professor of Statistics and Chairman at the Chinese University of Hong Kong (2000–2003), and as professor at the Princeton University (2003-). He has directed the Committee of Statistical Studies at Princeton since 2006 and currently chairs Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering (since 2012). He has coauthored two well-known books on Local Polynomial Modeling (1996) and Nonlinear time series: Parametric and Nonparametric Methods (2003) and authored or coauthored over 170 articles on finance, economics, computational biology, semiparametric and non-parametric modeling, statistical learning, nonlinear time series, survival analysis, longitudinal data analysis, and other aspects of theoretical and methodological statistics. He has been consistently ranked as a top 10 highly cited mathematical scientist since the existence of such a ranking. His published work on statistics, financial econometrics, and computational biology has been recognized by the 2000 COPSS Presidents' Award, given annually to an outstanding statistician under age 40, invited speaker at The 2006 International Congress for Mathematicians, The Humboldt Research Award for lifetime achievement in 2006, The Morningside Gold Medal of Applied Mathematics in 2007, honoring triennially an outstanding applied mathematician of Chinese descent, Guggenheim Fellow in 2009, Pao-Lu Hsu Prize (2013), presented every three years by the International Chinese Statistical Association to individuals under the age of 50, and Guy Medal in Silver (2014), presented once a year by Royal Statistical Society, and the election to the fellow of American Association for the Advancement of Science, Institute of Mathematical Statistics, and American Statistical Association. He was elected to Academician from Academia Sinica (Chinese: 中央研究院院士) in 2012. Fan has many affiliations within Princeton University and around worldwide. He has been on scientific advisory boards to many institutions. These include Institute of Economics, Academia Sinica  (08--), Academia Sinica, Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute  (08–14), Institute of Mathematical Sciences (11--) at National University of Singapore, Department of Business Statistics and Econometrics (co-chair, 09--), Center for Statistical Science (10--) at Peking University, Center for Applied Statistics and Economics(10--), Humboldt University, among others. His research on statistics theory and methods has been funded by various federal agencies, including NSF, NIH and NSA. He has been frequently invited to various professional conferences and workshops and played various leadership roles in statistics and finance communities.   == Honors and awards == COPSS Presidents' Award 2000, Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies. Guggenheim Fellow, 2009. Morningside Gold Medal for Applied Mathematics, 2007. Humboldt Research Awards, Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, 2006. Academician (Chinese: 中央研究院院士), Academia Sinica, 2012. Fellow, American Association for Advancement of Science. Fellow, Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Fellow, American Statistical Association. Elected Member, International Statistical Institute   == References ==   == External links == Jianqing Fan at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Joel Ephraim Cohen (born February 10, 1944) is a mathematical biologist. He is currently Abby Rockefeller Mauzé Professor of Populations at the Rockefeller University in New York City and at the Earth Institute of Columbia University, where he holds a joint appointment in the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, the Department of Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Biology, and the School of International and Public Affairs. He is also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.    == Education == Cohen grew up in Washington DC and Michigan and graduated from Cranbrook School in 1961. He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in applied mathematics from Harvard University in 1965, and earned a Ph.D. in applied mathematics from Harvard in 1970. In 1973, he received from Harvard another doctorate in population sciences and tropical public health. He received an honorary Master's degree from the University of Cambridge UK in 1974.   == Research == Cohen has since taught or lectured at Harvard University, Yale University, Stanford University, the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, the College of Notre Dame of Maryland, the National University of San Luis, Argentina, the Central University of Venezuela, and the University of California at Berkeley. He has also held numerous fellowships, including ones with the Harvard Society of Fellows, John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. He was named "One of America's Top 100 Young Scientists" by Science Digest in 1984. His research has won him numerous awards, including the Sheps Award from the Population Association of America in 1992, the Distinguished Statistical Ecologist Award in 1994, the first Olivia Schieffelin Nordberg Award "for excellence in writing in the population sciences" in 1997, the Fred L. Soper Prize in 1998 of the Pan American Health Organization for his collaborative work on Chagas' disease, and the Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement in 1999. He is also a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society and has served on the governing boards of all three organizations. He served as a Special Master and member of the Selection Panel in the silicone gel breast implant products liability litigation before the United States District Court, Northern District of Alabama (Southern Division) in 1996; and as a U.S. Federal Court-appointed neutral expert (under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 706) for projection of asbestos-related claims against the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust, in the combined asbestos litigation in the Eastern and Southern Districts of New York, 1991-1995. He was a consultant to the law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley and McCloy, New York, on the epidemiology of asbestos-related diseases from 1982 to 1986. Cohen was a member of the Board of Directors of The Nature Conservancy, Arlington, VA, 2000-2009, during which he co-chaired the Science Council, 2005-2009. He was also a member of the Board of Trustees of the New York State Nature Conservancy, 2001-2010, the Population Reference Bureau, Washington, DC, 2004-2010, and the Committee on Science, Technology and Law of the National Research Council, Washington, DC, 2000-2009.   == Personal life == He was married to Audrey J. Biller from 1970 to 2002. Their son is Adam Cohen, Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and of Physics at Harvard University. Their daughter is Zoe Cohen, a manager at WebMD in New York City.   == Publications == Cohen is the author or editor of 14 books and over 370 articles, including: Food webs and niche space How Many People Can the Earth Support? Comparison of Stochastic Matrices, with Applications in Information Theory, Statistics, Economics and Population Sciences  Forecasting Product Liability Claims: Epidemiology and Modeling in the Manville Asbestos Case Educating All Children: A Global Agenda International Perspectives on the Goals of Universal Basic and Secondary Education  Mathematics Is Biology's Next Microscope Human population: the next half century  The population biology of invasive species  Food web patterns and their consequences    == References ==   == External links == Video: Human population to 2050: problems and opportunities, Collège de France, Paris, France, 2009 Video interview at Big Think 2010 Video: How many people can the Earth support? Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC 2010 on YouTube

John Frederick MacGregor (b. 1943 in Ontario, Canada) is a statistician whose work in the field of statistical process control has received significant recognition. His pioneering work was in the area of latent variable/multivariate analysis (MVA) methods (principal components analysis and partial least squares) applied to industrial processes.   == Contributions == A latent variable framework for Model Predictive Control (MPC). Latent variable modeling, monitoring and control of batch processes. Differential Geometric control of polymer processes. Introduction of Stochastic states in the Extended Kalman Filter for integral action. Multivariate image analysis Model-based product development   == Education == He received his PhD degree in Statistics, and his M.S. degrees in both Statistics and in Chemical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin–Madison, and his Bachelor of Engineering degree from McMaster University in Canada. At Wisconsin, he worked under the statistician George EP Box.   == Honours and Awards == MacGregor is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, and has received many awards for his work in applied statistics and chemometrics, among them, the prestigious Shewhart Medal and the W.G. Hunter Award from the American Society for Quality, and the Herman Wold Medal from the Swedish Chemical Society. The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering dedicated the October 2008 edition to MacGregor in celebration of his 65th birthday. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research published a Festschrift in his honour in September 2013, in honour of his 70th birthday. He holds the title of “Distinguished University Professor” (the highest honor awarded to faculty at McMaster University) as well as the Dofasco Chair in Process Automation and Information Technology at McMaster University. He is a cofounder of the McMaster Advanced Control Consortium that is sponsored by many international companies.   == Industrial and Entrepreneurial Activities == In 2002, MacGregor established ProSensus Inc., a company that he spun off from the McMaster Advanced Control Consortium and incorporated in 2004. MacGregor continues to consult and teach courses through ProSensus.   == References ==   == External links == R.S. Jane Memorial Award, CSChE Faculty web page at McMaster University McMaster Advanced Control Consortium ProSensus John F. MacGregor at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

John Hajnal FBA (born Hajnal-Kónyi; 26 November 1924 – 30 November 2008), was a Hungarian-British academic in the fields of mathematics and economics (statistics).   == Biography == Hajnal was born in Darmstadt, at the time the capital of the People's State of Hesse in Weimar Germany, to a Hungarian Jewish family. In 1936 his parents left Nazi Germany, and placed him in a Quaker school in the Dutch countryside while they arranged to settle in Britain. In 1937, John was reunited with his parents in London, where he attended University College School, Hampstead. At age 16, he entered Balliol College, Oxford. He gained a first there in economics, philosophy and politics in 1943. His skills in academic-level mathematics were mostly autodidactical. After the war, Hajnal worked on demography for the United Nations in New York, and later for the Office of Population Research, Princeton University. He met Berlin-born Nina Lande in New York. They were married from 1950 until her death in 2008 and had three daughters and a son. Returning to the United Kingdom, he worked at Manchester University as a statistician from 1953. The family moved to London in 1956, when John was assured a lectureship at the London School of Economics. He was Professor of Statistics at the London School of Economics from 1975 until his retirement in 1986.   == Career == Hajnal is best known for identifying, in a landmark 1965 paper, the historical pattern of marriage of northwest Europe in which people married late and many adults remained single. The geographical boundary of this unusual marriage pattern is now known as the Hajnal line. Royal Commission on Population, 1944–48 United Nations, New York, 1948–51 Office of Population Research, Princeton University, 1951–53 Manchester University, 1953–57 London School of Economics, 1957–86. Reader, 1966–75, Professor of Statistics 1975-1986 Visiting Fellow Commoner, Trinity College, Cambridge, 1974–75 Visiting Professor, Rockefeller University, 1981 He was a member of the International Statistical Institute and was elected FBA in 1966.   == References ==  Who's Who (2006) The Palgrave Dictionary of Anglo-Jewish History, ed. W. D. Rubinstein, Palgrave Macmillan, 2011, p. 387. Obituary, The Jewish Chronicle, 5 February 2009.

John Law (baptised 21 April 1671 – 21 March 1729) was a Scottish economist who believed that money was only a means of exchange that did not constitute wealth in itself and that national wealth depended on trade. He was appointed Controller General of Finances of France under the Duke of Orleans, regent for the youthful king, Louis XV. In 1716 Law established the Banque Générale in France, a private bank, but three-quarters of the capital consisted of government bills and government-accepted notes, effectively making it the first central bank of the nation. He was responsible for the Mississippi Company bubble and a chaotic economic collapse in France, which has been compared to the early-17th century tulip mania in Holland. The Mississippi Bubble was contemporaneous with the South Sea Company bubble of England. Law was a gambler and a brilliant mental calculator. He was known to win card games by mentally calculating the odds. He originated economic ideas such as "The Scarcity Theory of Value" and the "real bills doctrine". Law’s views held that money creation will stimulate the economy, that paper money is preferable to metallic money, and that shares are a superior form of money since they pay dividends.   == Biography ==  Law was born into a family of bankers and goldsmiths from Fife; his father had purchased Lauriston Castle, a landed estate at Cramond on the Firth of Forth and was known as Law of Lauriston. Law joined the family business at age fourteen and studied the banking business until his father died in 1688. Law subsequently neglected the firm in favour of more extravagant pursuits and travelled to London, where he lost large sums of money in gambling. On 9 April 1694, John Law fought a duel with Edward Wilson in Bloomsbury Square in London. Wilson had challenged Law over the affections of Elizabeth Villiers. Law killed Wilson with a single pass and thrust of his sword. He was arrested, charged with murder and stood trial at the Old Bailey. He appeared before the infamously sadistic 'hanging-judge', Salathiel Lovell and was found guilty of murder, and sentenced to death. He was initially incarcerated in Newgate Prison to await execution. His sentence was later commuted to a fine, upon the ground that the offence only amounted to manslaughter. Wilson's brother appealed and had Law imprisoned, but he managed to escape to Amsterdam.  Law urged the establishment of a national bank to create and increase instruments of credit and the issue of banknotes backed by land, gold, or silver. The first manifestation of Law's system came when he had returned to Scotland and contributed to the debates leading to the Treaty of Union 1707. He published a text entitled Money and Trade Consider'd with a Proposal for Supplying the Nation with Money (1705). Law's propositions of creating a national bank in Scotland were ultimately rejected, and he left to pursue his ambitions abroad. He spent ten years moving between France and the Netherlands, dealing in financial speculations. Problems with the French economy presented the opportunity to put his system into practice. He had the idea of abolishing minor monopolies and private farming of taxes. He would create a bank for national finance and a state company for commerce, ultimately to exclude all private revenue. This would create a huge monopoly of finance and trade run by the state, and its profits would pay off the national debt. The council called to consider Law's proposal, including financiers such as Samuel Bernard, rejected the proposition on 24 October 1715. Law made his home in Place Louis-le-Grand, a royal square where he could host and entertain various Parisian nobles. Gaining the attention of such notable people as the Duke of Orleans, Law quickly found himself a regular in high-stakes gambling parties attended by only the most affluent of Paris. His tall stature and eloquent dress allowed Law to charm his way across Europe’s financial hubs, ranging from Amsterdam to Venice. These travels heavily influenced Law’s theories on monetary policies and the importance of paper money as credit. Law’s idea of a centralized bank which would deal in a new form of paper money was years ahead of its time. Despite this forward concept, Law still championed mercantilist beliefs with the promotion of monopolistic companies through government charters. The wars waged by Louis XIV left the country completely wasted, both economically and financially. The resultant shortage of precious metals led to a shortage of coins in circulation, which in turn limited the production of new coins. With the death of Louis XIV seventeen months after Law’s arrival, the Duke of Orleans finally presented Law with the opportunity to showcase his ingenuity. On May 1, 1716, Law presented a modified version of his centralized bank plan to the Banque Generale which approved a private bank that allowed investors to supply one-fourth of an investment in currency and the other parts in defunct government bonds. The second key feature of the proposal centered on the premise that this private bank was able to issue its own currency backed by Louis of gold. This enabled the currency to be redeemed by the weight of silver from the original deposit instead of the fluctuation of livres which had been devaluing rapidly. From this new banking platform, Law was able to pursue the monopoly companies he envisioned by having France bankroll the endeavor with 100 million livres’ in the form of company stock. As how the bank was financed, so too was the foundation of the Mississippi Company which was later renamed the Occident Company and eventually a part of the Company of the Indies. It was in this context that the regent, Philippe d'Orléans, appointed John Law as Controller General of Finances in 1720, effectively giving him control over external and internal commerce. The rapid ascension of this new global monopoly led to massive speculation and stock prices to balloon to over sixty times their original value. As Controller General, Law instituted many beneficial reforms (some of which had lasting effect, others of which were soon abolished). He tried to break up large land-holdings to benefit the peasants; he abolished internal road and canal tolls; he encouraged the building of new roads, the starting of new industries (even importing artisans but mostly by offering low-interest loans), and the revival of overseas commerce—and indeed industry increased 60% in two years, and the number of French ships engaged in export went from sixteen to three hundred. Since, following the devastating War of the Spanish Succession, France's economy was stagnant and her national debt was crippling, Law proposed to stimulate industry by replacing gold with paper credit and then increasing the supply of credit, and to reduce the national debt by replacing it with shares in economic ventures. Speculation gave way to panic as people flooded the market with future shares trading as high as fifteen thousand livres per share. By May 1720, prices fell to 4,000 livres per share, a 73% decrease within a year. The rush to convert paper money to coins led to sporadic bank hours and riots. Squatters now occupied the square of Palace Louis-le-Grand and openly attacked the financiers that inhabited the area. It was under these circumstances and the guise of night that John Law fled Paris some seven months later. The meteoric rise of a relatively unknown man came as fast as his descent as an economic power vacuum was left in the wake.Though they failed, his theories ironically live on 300 years later and "captured many key conceptual points which are very much a part of modern monetary theorizing".   === Company of the West === In May 1716, the Banque Générale Privée ("General Private Bank"), which developed the use of paper money, was set up by Law. It was one of only six such banks to have issued paper money, joining Sweden, England, Holland, Venice, and Genoa. Law would become the architect of what would later be known as "The Mississippi Bubble", an event that would begin with the consolidation of the trading companies of Louisiana into a single monopoly (The Mississippi Company), and ended with the collapse of the Banque Générale and subsequent devaluing of the Mississippi Company's shares.  In 1719, the French government allowed Law to issue 50,000 new shares in the Mississippi Company at 500 livres with just 75 livres down and the rest due in nineteen additional monthly payments of 25 livres each. The share price rose to 1,000 livres before the second installment was even due, and ordinary citizens flocked to Paris to participate. Based on this success, Law offered to pay off the national debt of 1.5 billion livres by issuing an additional 300,000 shares at 500 livres paid in ten monthly installments.  By mid-1719, the Mississippi Company had issued more than 600,000 shares and the par value of the company stood at 300 million livres. That summer, the share price skyrocketed from 1,000 to 5,000 livres and it continued to rise through year-end, ultimately reaching dizzying heights of 15,000 livres per share. The word millionaire was first used, and in January 1720 Law was appointed Controller General.  The spillover to the economy was immediate and most notable in food prices. By May 21 (1720), Law was forced to deflate the value of banknotes and cut the stock price. As the public rushed to convert banknotes to coin, Law was forced to close Banque Generale for ten days, then limit the transaction size once the bank reopened. But the queues grew longer, the Mississippi Company stock price continued to fall, and food prices soared by as much as 60 percent.  The fractional reserve ratio was one fifth, and a Royal edict to criminalise the sale of gold was decreed. A later Royal edict decreed that gold coin was illegal, which was soon reversed, leading 50 people to be stampeded to death. The company's shares were ultimately rendered worthless, and initially inflated speculation about their worth led to widespread financial stress, which saw Law dismissed at the end of 1720 from his sinecure as Controller General and his post as Chief Director of the Banque Générale.   == Later years == Law initially moved to Brussels in impoverished circumstances. He spent the next few years gambling in Rome, Copenhagen and Venice but never regained his former prosperity. Law realised he would never return to France when Orléans died suddenly in 1723 and Law was granted permission to return to London, having received a pardon in 1719. He lived in London for four years and then moved to Venice where he contracted pneumonia and died a poor man in 1729.   == Books == John Law: Economic Theorist and Policy-Maker by Antoin E. Murphy (Oxford University Press, 1997) is the most extensive account of Law's writings. It is given credit for completing the transformation of opinion about Law from a con man (see Mackay below) to an important economic theorist and successful financial leader. Letters to John Law by Gavin John Adams (Newton Page, 2012) is a collection of early eighteenth-century political propagandist pamphlets documenting the hysteria surrounding John Law's return to Britain after the collapse of his Mississippi Scheme and expulsion from France. It also contains a very useful chronology and extensive biographical introduction to John Law and the Mississippi Scheme (ISBN 9781934619087). Millionaire: The Philanderer, Gambler, and Duelist Who Invented Modern Finance by Janet Gleeson (2000). (ISBN 0-684-87295-1) is a straightforward biography. The Poker Face of Wall Street by Aaron Brown (John Wiley & Sons, 2006) credits Law for the inspiration of the modern futures exchange and also the game of Poker. John Law – The History of an Honest Adventurer by H. Montgomery Hyde (W. H. Allen, 1969) is one of the earliest favorable accounts of Law's ideas. John Law, the father of paper money by Robert Minton (Association Press, 1975) treats Law's financial innovations that led to modern paper money. Crime, Cash, Credit and Chaos by Colin McCall (Solcol, 2007) examines the events and circumstances that became Law's dramatic and tragic life. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds by Charles Mackay, published 1841, contains a colorful negative account of Law's financial activities in France. Available as a reprint and online, including as a free Kindle text. The Gamester by Rafael Sabatini (Houghton Mifflin Company Boston, 1949) is a sympathetic fictionalized account of Law's career as financial adviser to the Duke of Orléans, Regent under Louis XV.   == Films == Richard Condie's 1978 National Film Board of Canada (NFB) animated short John Law and the Mississippi Bubble is a humorous interpretation. The film was a collaboration between Condie and his sister, Sharon Condie, who had been inspired to make a film on the Mississippi Bubble after reading Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds. The film was produced by the NFB at its newly opened Winnipeg studio. It opened in Canadian cinemas starting in September 1979 and was sold to international broadcasters. The film received an award at the Tampere Film Festival.   == See also == Tulip mania (early 17th century) Mississippi Company Banque Royale Early modern France South Sea Company bubble (early 18th Century) Assignat, a bank note system of the French Revolution   == References ==   == External links == John Law Project Gutenberg Edition of Fiat Money Inflation in France: How ... John Law: Proto-Keynesian, by Murray Rothbard  Texts on Wikisource: "Law, John". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  "Law, John". The New Student's Reference Work. 1914.

John William Mauchly (August 30, 1907 – January 8, 1980) was an American physicist who, along with J. Presper Eckert, designed ENIAC, the first general purpose electronic digital computer, as well as EDVAC, BINAC and UNIVAC I, the first commercial computer made in the United States. Together they started the first computer company, the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation (EMCC), and pioneered fundamental computer concepts including the stored program, subroutines, and programming languages. Their work, as exposed in the widely read First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC (1945) and as taught in the Moore School Lectures (1946), influenced an explosion of computer development in the late 1940s all over the world.   == Moore School == In 1941 Dr. Mauchly took a course in wartime electronics at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering, part of the University of Pennsylvania. There he met J. Presper Eckert, a recent Moore School graduate. Mauchly accepted a teaching position at the Moore School, which was a center for wartime computing. Eckert encouraged Mauchly to believe that vacuum tubes could be made reliable with proper engineering practices. The critical problem that was consuming the Moore School was ballistics: the calculation of firing tables for the large number of new guns that the U.S. Army was developing for the war effort.   === ENIAC ===  In 1942 Mauchly wrote a memo proposing the building of a general-purpose electronic computer. The proposal, which circulated within the Moore School (but the significance of which was not immediately recognized), emphasized the enormous speed advantage that could be gained by using digital electronics with no moving parts. Lieutenant Herman Goldstine, who was the liaison between the United States Army and Moore School, picked up on the idea and asked Mauchly to write a formal proposal. In April 1943, the Army contracted with the Moore School to build the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC). Mauchly led the conceptual design while Eckert led the hardware engineering on ENIAC. A number of other talented engineers contributed to the confidential "Project PX". Because of its high-speed calculations, ENIAC could solve problems that were previously unsolvable. It was roughly a thousand times faster than the existing technology. It could add 5,000 numbers or do 357 10-digit multiplications in one second. ENIAC could be programmed to perform sequences and loops of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, square-root, input/output functions, and conditional branches. Programming was initially accomplished with patch cords and switches, and reprogramming took days. It was redesigned in 1948 to allow the use of stored programs with some loss in speed. In 2002, for his work on ENIAC he was inducted, posthumously, into the National Inventors Hall of Fame.   == EDVAC == The ENIAC design was frozen in 1944 to allow construction. Eckert and Mauchly were already aware of the limitations of the machine and began plans on a second computer, to be called EDVAC. By January 1945 they had procured a contract to build this stored-program computer. Eckert had proposed a mercury delay line memory to store both program and data. Later that year, mathematician John von Neumann learned of the project and joined in some of the engineering discussions. He produced what was understood to be an internal document describing the EDVAC. The term von Neumann architecture arose from von Neumann's paper, First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. Dated June 30, 1945, it was an early written account of a general purpose stored-program computing machine (the EDVAC). Goldstine, in a move that was to become controversial, removed any reference to Eckert or Mauchly and distributed the document to a number of von Neumann's associates across the country. The ideas became widely known within the very small world of computer designers. Besides the lack of credit, Eckert and Mauchly suffered additional setbacks due to Goldstine's actions. The ENIAC patent U.S. Patent 3,120,606, issued in 1964 was filed on June 26, 1947, and granted February 4, 1964, but the public disclosure of design details of EDVAC in the First Draft (which were also common to ENIAC) was later cited as one cause for the 1973 invalidation of the ENIAC patent.   == The Moore School Lectures ==  In March 1946, just after the ENIAC was announced, the Moore School decided to change their patent policy, in order to gain commercial rights to any future and past computer development there. Eckert and Mauchly decided this was unacceptable; they resigned. However they had already been contracted to do one more thing at the Moore School: to give a series of talks on computer design. The course "The Theory and Techniques for Design of Digital Computers", ran from July 8 to August 31, 1946. Eckert gave 11 of the lectures; Mauchly and Goldstine each delivered 6. "The Moore School Lectures", as they came to be known, were attended by representatives from the army, the navy, MIT, the National Bureau of Standards, Cambridge University, Columbia, Harvard, the Institute for Advanced Study, IBM, Bell Labs, Eastman Kodak, General Electric, and National Cash Register. A number of the attendees were to later go on to develop computers, such as Maurice Wilkes, of Cambridge, who built EDSAC.   == Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation == In 1947 Eckert and Mauchly formed the first computer company, the Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation (EMCC); Mauchly was president. They secured a contract with the National Bureau of Standards to build an "EDVAC II", later named UNIVAC. UNIVAC, the first computer designed for business applications, had many significant technical advantages such as magnetic tape for mass storage. As an interim product, the company created and delivered a smaller computer, BINAC, but were still in a shaky financial situation. They were purchased by Remington Rand and became the UNIVAC division.   == Software == Very early in the history of EMCC, John Mauchly assumed responsibility for programming, coding, and applications for the planned computer systems. His early interaction with representatives of the Census Bureau in 1944 and 1945, and discussion with people interested in statistics, weather prediction, and various business problems in 1945 and 1946 focused his attention on the need to provide new users with the software to accomplish their objectives. He knew it would be difficult to sell computers without application materials, and without training in how to use the systems. And so, EMCC began to assemble a staff of mathematicians interested in coding in early 1947. (from Norberg) Mauchly’s interest lay in the application of computers, as well as to their architecture and organization. His experience with programming the ENIAC and its successors led him to create Short Code (see "The UNIVAC SHORT CODE"), the first programming language actually used on a computer (predated by Zuse’s conceptual Plankalkul). It was a pseudocode interpreter for mathematical problems proposed in 1949 and ran on the UNIVAC I and II. Mauchly's belief in the importance of languages led him to hire Grace Murray Hopper to develop a compiler for the UNIVAC. John Mauchly has also been credited for being the first one using the verb "to program" in his 1942 paper on electronic computing, although in the context of ENIAC, not in its current meaning.   == Career == Dr. Mauchly stayed involved in computers for the rest of his life. He was a founding member and president of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and also helped found the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), serving as its fourth president. The Eckert-Mauchly Corporation was bought by Remington Rand in 1950 and for ten years Dr. Mauchly remained as Director of Univac Applications Research. Leaving in 1959 he formed Mauchly Associates, a consulting company that later introduced the critical path method (CPM) for construction scheduling by computer. In 1967 he founded Dynatrend, a computer consulting organization. In 1973 he became a consultant to Sperry Univac.   == Awards == Mauchly received numerous award and honors. He was a life member of the Franklin Institute, the National Academy of Engineering and the Society for Advancement of Management. He was elected a Fellow of the IRE, a predecessor society of IEEE, in 1957, and was a Fellow of the American Statistical Association. He received an LLD (Hon) degree from the University of Pennsylvania and aDSc(Hon) degree from Ursinus College. He was a recipient of the Philadelphia Award, the Scott Medal, the Goode Medal of AFIPS (American Federation of Information Processing Societies), the Pennsylvania Award, the Emanual R. Piore Award, the Howard N. Potts Medal, and numerous other awards.   == Patent controversy == Mauchly and Eckert's patent on the ENIAC was invalidated by U.S. Federal Court decision in October, 1973 for several reasons. Some had to do with the time between publication (the First Draft) and the patent filing date (1947). The federal judge who presided over the case ruled that "the subject matter was derived" from the earlier Atanasoff–Berry Computer (ABC). This statement has become the center of a controversy. Critics note that while the court said that the ABC was the first electronic digital computer, it did not define the term computer. It had originally referred to a person who computes, but was adapted to apply to a machine. Critics of the court decision also note that there is, at a component level, nothing in common between the two machines. The ABC was binary; the ENIAC was decimal. The ABC used regenerative drum memory; The ENIAC used electronic decade counters. The ABC used its tubes to implement a binary serial adder while the ENIAC used tubes to implement a complete set of decimal operations. The ENIAC's general-purpose instruction set, together with the ability to automatically sequence through them, made it a general-purpose computer. Proponents for the court decision emphasize that the testimony established that Mauchly definitely had complete access to Atanasoff's machine and the documents describing it. Letters he wrote to Atanasoff show that he was at one time at least considering building on Atanasoff's approach. Mauchly consistently maintained that it was the use of high-speed electronic flip-flops in cosmic-ray counting devices at Swarthmore College that gave him the idea for computing at electronic speeds.   == See also == Mauchly's sphericity test   == References ==  McCartney, Scott (1999). ENIAC: The Triumphs and Tragedies of the World's First Computer. Walker & Co. ISBN 0-8027-1348-3.  Shurkin, Joel N. (1996). Engines of the Mind: The Evolution of the Computer from Mainframes to Microprocessors. W.W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-01804-0.  Antonelli, Kathleen R. (April 1984). "John Mauchly's Early Years". Annals of the History of Computing 6 (2): 116–138. doi:10.1109/MAHC.1984.10022.  Stern, Nancy (1981). From ENIAC to UNIVAC: An Appraisal of the Eckert-Mauchly Computers. Bedford, Massachusetts: Digital Press. ISBN 0-932376-14-2.  Norberg, Arthur L. (2005-06-01). Computers and Commerce: A Study of Technology and Management at Eckert-Mauchly Computer Company, Engineering Research Associates, and Remington Rand, 1946-1957. The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-14090-X.    == External links == Oral history interview with J. Presper Eckert at Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Eckert, a co-inventor of the ENIAC, discusses its development at the University of Pennsylvania and the interaction of the personnel at the Moore School. John W. Mauchly and the Development of the ENIAC Computer - by Asaf Goldschmidt and Atsushi Akera, An Exhibition in the Department of Special Collections Van Pelt Library, University of Pennsylvania Mauchly: The Computer and the Skateboard. The only work to contain archival footage of John Mauchly speaking about the development of the ENIAC. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John Mauchly", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

John Ashworth Nelder FRS (8 October 1924 – 7 August 2010) was a British statistician known for his contributions to experimental design, analysis of variance, computational statistics, and statistical theory.   == Contributions == Nelder's work was influential in statistics. While leading research at Rothamsted Experimental Station, Nelder developed and supervised the updating of the statistical software packages GLIM and GenStat: Both packages are flexible high-level programming languages that allow statisticians to formulate linear models concisely. GLIM influenced later environments for statistical computing such as S-PLUS and R. Both GLIM and GenStat have powerful facilities for the analysis of variance for block experiments, an area where Nelder made many contributions. In statistical theory, Nelder and Wedderburn proposed the generalized linear model. Generalized linear models were formulated by John Nelder and Robert Wedderburn as a way of unifying various other statistical models, including linear regression, logistic regression and Poisson regression. They proposed an iteratively reweighted least squares method for maximum likelihood estimation of the model parameters. In statistical inference, Nelder (along with George Barnard and A. W. F. Edwards) emphasized the importance of the likelihood in data analysis, promoting this "likelihood approach" as an alternative to frequentist and Bayesian statistics. In response-surface optimization, Nelder and Roger Mead proposed the Nelder-Mead simplex heuristic, widely used in engineering and statistics.   == Biography == Born in Brushford, near Dulverton, Somerset, Nelder was educated at Blundell's School and Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, where he read mathematics. Nelder's appointments included Head of the Statistics Section at the National Vegetable Research Station, Wellesbourne from 1951 to 1968 and Head of the Statistics Department at Rothamsted Experimental Station from 1968 to 1984. During his time at Wellesbourne he spent a year (1965–1966) at the Waite Institute in Adelaide, South Australia, where he worked with Graham Wilkinson on Genstat. He held an appointment as Visiting Professor at Imperial College London from 1972 onwards. He was responsible, with Max Nicholson and James Ferguson-Lees, for debunking the Hastings Rarities – sightings of a series of rare birds, preserved by a taxidermist and provided with bogus histories. Nelder died on 7 August 2010 in Luton and Dunstable Hospital, taken there after a fall at home, which was incidental to the cause of death.   == Awards and distinctions == Nelder was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1976 and received the Royal Statistical Society's Guy Medal in Gold in 2005. He was also the recipient of the inaugural Karl Pearson Prize of the International Statistical Institute, with Peter McCullagh, "for their monograph Generalized Linear Models (1983)". As tribute on his eightieth birthday, a festschrift Methods and Models in Statistics: In Honour of Professor John Nelder, FRS was edited by Niall Adams, Martin Crowder, David J Hand & Dave Stephens, Imperial College Press (2004). The first annual John Nelder memorial lecture was help at Imperial College London, on 8 March 2012, as part of the Mathematics department Colloquium series. The lecture was given by John's long term co-author, Prof Peter McCullagh. An interview with Peter McCullagh, about statistical modelling, includes some reminiscences about John.   == Selected publications == JN and R. W. M. Wedderburn, "Generalized Linear Models", J. R. Statist. Soc. A, 135 (1972) 370–384. McCullagh, P. and J.A. Nelder. 1989. Generalized Linear Models. 2nd ed. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, Florida. ISBN 0-412-31760-5 Lee, Y., J.A. Nelder, and Y. Pawitan. 2006. Generalized Linear Models with Random Effects: Unified Analysis via H-likelihood. Chapman & Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, Florida. ISBN 1-58488-631-5   == References ==   == External links == A Conversation with John Nelder Photographs

John Panaretos (Greek: Γιάννης Πανάρετος; born 1948 in Kythera) is a Greek educator and statistician. He is Professor of Probability and Statistics at the Athens University of Economics and Business. He was Deputy Minister of Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs (October 6, 2009 – June 17, 2011). He has also been appointed by the Prime Minister to be in charge of the Open Government project. Before joining the Athens University of Economics and Business, he taught at the universities of Patras and Crete in Greece, University of Iowa and University of Missouri in the United States, and at Trinity College, Dublin in Ireland. He has been Director of the Institute of Statistical Documentation Research and Analysis since 1996, a life member of the Scientific Council of the Greek Parliament since 1987, and a member of the governing board of the Institute of Strategic and Development Studies (ISTAME) - Andreas Papandreou (2005–2008). Since 2004, he is the education adviser of George Papandreou, leader of Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK, the main opposition party of Greece) and the Socialist International. He was a member of the National Council of Education, the Council of University Education, the Council of Technical Education and the Council of Primary and Secondary Education. He has acted as Chairman of the Department of Statistics (1993–1996 & 2000-2002) and as member of the research committee of the University (1993–1996). At the University of Patras, he served as Vice Rector for Academic Affairs, as Chairman of the Research Committee, as Associate Dean of the Engineering School and as Chairman of the Division of Mathematics of the School. Panaretos has served as Vice President of the European Network of the National Councils of Education (1997–2000), Chairman of the National Council of Education of Greece (1996–2000), the Council of Higher Education (1988–1989), and the Secretary General of the Ministry of Education and Religious Affairs in Greece (1988–1989 and 1995–1996), and member of the governing board of the Institute of Strategic and Development Studies (ISTAME) - Andreas Papandreou (2004–2008). He has published more than fifty papers in international scientific journals, was an invited speaker in many scientific meetings, and served as Associate Editor of Communications in Statistics (A), Theory and Methods.   == Initiatives as Deputy Minister of Education == The preparation of a new Law of Higher Education in Greece that introduced, for the first time in Greece, a new model of Governance (Board of Trustees) and a selection of the Rector and the deans by means of an open call of interest, at an international level. The formation of an international advisory committee for the reforms on higher education consisting of nine internationally known figures in HE from all over the world (Linda P.B. Katehi (Chair), Chancellor, University of California, Davis, USA – Patrick Aebischer, President, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland – Gavin Brown, Former Vice-Chancellor, University of Sydney, Australia – James J. Duderstadt, President Emeritus, University of Michigan, USA – Gudmund Hernes, Former Minister of Education, Norway – David Naylor, President, University of Toronto, Canada – Jozef Ritzen, Former President, Maastricht University, Former Minister of Education, Netherlands – John Sexton, President, New York University, USA – Lap-Chee Tsui, President and Vice-Chancellor, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong). Their report can be found here. The preparation of a new law for research that removed the existed bureaucratic procedures and restructured the research Institutes. The complete change of procedures for submitting and evaluating research proposals in Greece. All proposals are now submitted in English electronically in a tailored-made platform and are evaluated by international experts outside Greece. The initiative to set up community colleges in Greece and allowing movement of students between the various levels of higher education Institutions. Changes in the national entrance exams for tertiary education that eliminated injustices. Also, implemented the introduction of an electronic system of submitting applications for participating in the national entrance exams for universities that replaced the paper-based one. The introduction of transparency in all political activities. All decisions signed by the deputy minister were immediately uploaded in the Internet and all policy initiatives were made available on the Internet for comments before taking their final form. Wide public consultation on the recognition of professional qualifications for higher education graduates.   == Initiatives as Chairman of the Department of Statistics and Director of the Graduate Studies == New undergraduate program based on the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS). It was the first undergraduate program in Greek universities that was fully restructured in this direction. (1996).(http://www.stat-athens.aueb.gr/en/prop/ili.htm) Introduced the International Graduate Program in Statistics, where all courses are taught in English and the M.Sc theses are sent to external examiner abroad for evaluation. (1996). (http://www.stat-athens.aueb.gr/en/master/full/general.htm) Introduced the Professional Graduate Degree Program. The first such program in Statistics in Greece. (1999). (http://www.stat-athens.aueb.gr/en/master/part/general.htm) Established the Distinguished Visiting Professorship Program in which the following scientists taught: 1997: Leslie Kish, Michigan, USA ("Survey Sampling"), 1998: Sir David R. Cox, Oxford, UK ("Theories of Statistical Inference") and Jef Teugels, Lueven, Belgium ("Statistics of Extremes"), 1999: C. R. Rao, Penn State, USA ("An overview of Linear Models: Past, Present and the Future") and Samuel Kotz, Washington, USA ("Modern Topics in Industrial Statistics"), 2000: David J. Bartholomew, LSE, USA ("Latent Variable Models and Factor Analysis"), 2001: David Freedman, Berkeley, USA ("Association, Regression and Causation"). 2002: Donald Rubin, Harvard, USA (Basic Concepts of Statistical Inference for Causal Effects in Experiments and Observational Studies). Organised, and was responsible for, the first external review of the Department (2000). The reviewers were C.R.Rao, (Chairman). Eberly Professor of Statistics, Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, USA. P. Florides, Professor of Applied Mathematics, Department of Mathematics, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Ireland. J. Teugels, Professor of Probability and Statistics, University Center for Statistics, Catholic University of Lueven, Belgium. W. Urfer, Professor of Statistics, Department of Statistics, University of Dortmund, Germany. (The full review is available at http://www.aueb.gr/statistical-institute/external-evaluation_en.html) Established the practice of short courses (2001). These courses introduce students to the latest developments in statistics without adding material to the core curriculum.   == References ==   == External links == Personal webpage Ministerial webpage Ministry of Education Athens University of Economics & Business Institute of Statistical Documentation Research & Analysis

John Rickman (22 August 1771 – 11 August 1840) was an English government official and statistician of the early nineteenth century. He was born in Newburn, Northumberland, son of the Rev Thomas Rickman and educated at Guildford Grammar School, Magdalen Hall, Oxford and Lincoln College, Oxford. The poet Robert Southey was one of his friends. From 1799 to 1801 he edited the Commercial, Agricultural, and Manufactures' Magazine which published his article 'On ascertaining the population' in 1800. An earlier version of this paper entitled 'Thoughts on the Utility and Facility of a general enumeration of the People of the British Empire' was brought to the attention of Charles Abbot. Shortly after, in 1800, Abbot appointed Rickman his Private Secretary. Rickman is credited with drafting the first bill which became the 1800 Census Act, the full title of which was An Act for taking an Account of the Population of Great Britain, and of the Increase or Diminution thereof, which became law in December 1800. Rickman was instrumental in carrying out the first four censuses of Great Britain, including not only a population count, but also the collection and analysis of parish register returns. Following Abbot's election to the post of Speaker of the House of Commons in February 1802, Rickman took the post of Speaker's Secretary, which he held until July 1814 when he was appointed Second Clerk Assistant at the Table of the House of Commons. He became Clerk Assistant in 1820, a post which he held to his death. It is often stated, but never the case that Rickman was Clerk of the House of Commons. Rickman served as Secretary to two Parliamentary Commissions established in 1803. The first for the making of roads and bridges in Scotland; the second for the construction of the Caledonian Canal through Scotland's Great Glen. The civil engineer Thomas Telford was amongst the commissioners on both these Commissions: John Rickman was a close friend of Telford, and was his executor. Besides Rickman's work on the census, he also collected and mustered other statistics. Between 1816 and 1836 he abstracted the poor rate returns for the Poor Law Committee; later he produced returns on Education for Lord John Russell's Education Committee and in 1839 he compiled a return of Local Taxation. In April 1815 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. The subtitle to Orlo William's biography of Rickman: Lamb's Friend the Census Taker under-emphasises his extensive parliamentary work.   == References == ^ Diaries of George Turnbull (Chief Engineer, East Indian Railway Company) held at the Centre of South Asian Studies at Cambridge University, England ^ George Turnbull, C.E. page 18 of the 437-page memoirs published privately 1893, scanned copy held in the British Library, London on compact disk since 2007 ^ "Library and Archive Catalogue". The Royal Society. Retrieved 6 October 2010.    == Biography == W. C. Rickman, Biographical memoir of John Rickman, esq., F. R. S., &c. &c. (London, privately published, 1841). Orlo Williams, Life and Letters of John Rickman (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1912).

John Russell, 1st Earl Russell KG GCMG PC (18 August 1792 – 28 May 1878), known as Lord John Russell before 1861, was a leading Whig and Liberal politician who served as Prime Minister on two occasions during the mid-19th century. Scion of one of the most powerful aristocratic families, his great achievements, says A. J. P. Taylor, were based on his indefatigable battles in Parliament over the years on behalf of the expansion of liberty; after each loss he tried again and again, until finally his efforts were largely successful. Woodward, however, argued that he was too much the abstract theorist, so that "He was more concerned with the removal of obstacles to civil liberty than with the creation of a more reasonable and civilized society. Nevertheless Russell led his Whig Party into support for reform; he was the principal architect of the great Reform Act of 1832. As Prime Minister his luck ran out. He took much of the blame for the government's failures in dealing with the Irish famine. Taylor concludes that as prime minister, he was not a success. Indeed, his Government of 1846 to 1852 was the ruin of the Whig party: it never composed a Government again, and his Government of 1865 to 1866, which might be described as the first Liberal Government, was very nearly the ruin of the Liberal party also.   == Background and educationEdit == Russell was born small and premature into the highest echelons of the British aristocracy. The Russell family had been one of the principal Whig dynasties in England since the 17th century, and were among the richest handful of aristocratic landowning families in the country, but as a younger son of the 6th Duke of Bedford he was not expected to inherit the family estates. As a younger son of a Duke, he bore the courtesy title "Lord John Russell", but as he was not a peer in his own right he was entitled to sit in the House of Commons until he was made an earl and moved to the House of Lords in 1861. After being withdrawn from Westminster School due to ill health, Russell was educated by tutors. He attended the University of Edinburgh, 1809 and 1812; he did not take a degree. Although of small stature and often in poor health, he traveled widely in Britain and on the continent.   == Public lifeEdit == Russell entered the House of Commons as a Whig in 1813. In 1819, Russell embraced the cause of parliamentary reform, and led the more reformist wing of the Whigs throughout the 1820s. When the Whigs came to power in 1830 in Earl Grey's government, Russell entered the government as Paymaster of the Forces, and was soon elevated to the Cabinet. He was one of the principal leaders of the fight for the Reform Act 1832, earning the nickname Finality Jack from his complacency pronouncing the Act a final measure. In 1834, when the leader of the Commons, Lord Althorp, succeeded to the peerage as Earl Spencer, Russell became the leader of the Whigs in the Commons, a position he maintained for the rest of the decade, until the Whigs fell from power in 1841. In this position, Russell continued to lead the more reformist wing of the Whig party, calling, in particular, for religious freedom, and, as Home Secretary in the late 1830s, played a large role in democratizing the government of British cities (other than London). During his career in Parliament, Lord John Russell represented the City of London. Taylor emphasizes Russell's central role in the expansion of liberty and leading his Whig Party to a commitment to a reform agenda. In 1845, as leader of the Opposition, Russell came out in favour of repeal of the Corn Laws, forcing Conservative Prime Minister Sir Robert Peel to follow him. When the Conservatives split the next year over this issue, the Whigs returned to power and Russell became Prime Minister. Russell's premiership was frustrated, because due to party disunity and infighting, he was unable to secure the success of many of the measures he was interested in passing. Russell's first government coincided with the Great Irish Famine of the late 1840s. Russell was unable to find a solution. He fought with his headstrong Foreign Secretary, Lord Palmerston, whose belligerence and support for continental revolution he found embarrassing. Palmerston was forced to resign when he recognized Napoleon III's coup of 2 December 1851, without royal approval. Palmerston turned the vote on a militia bill into a vote of confidence on the government. The majority vote in favour of an amendment proposed by Palmerston caused the downfall of Russell's ministry on 21 February 1852. This was Palmerston's famous "tit for tat with Johnny Russell", a revenge for his dismissal by Russell as Foreign Minister.   == In Opposition February 1852 – December 1852Edit == The July 1852 general election saw the election of 330 Conservatives and 324 Whigs to the Parliament. Neither had an overall majority for 38 members who were technically Conservatives, were actually Peelites (followers of the late Robert Peel). The Peelites had deserted the Conservatives to vote for the repeal of the Corn Laws in June 1846. The Corn Laws had imposed a tariff on all cheap imported wheat and, thus, kept the price of wheat and the bread made from wheat high. This served the interests of landed aristocracy which was the main body of support for the Conservative Party. However, the high price of wheat and bread added greatly to the desperation of poor and hungry in England and Ireland. The new Parliament included 113 "Free Traders" who were more radical than the Peelites. They felt that the tariffs on all imported consumer goods should be removed, not just the tariff on wheat or "corn." There were also 63 members of the "Irish Brigade," made up of Irish members interested in the Tenant Rights legislation for the protection of the tenant farmers in Ireland. None of these minor groups were interested in forming a government with the Conservatives because of the bitterness left over from the repeal of the Corn Laws. However, John Russell of the Whigs could not attract enough of the minor party members to form a government either. Other issues handled during the recent Russell government had alienated these three minor groups from the Whigs also. Thus, Queen Victoria asked the Earl of Derby to form a minority government. It only lasted until December 1852.   == Foreign Minister in the Aberdeen GovernmentEdit == Russell, as the leader of the Whig Party, then brought it into a new coalition government with the Peelite Conservatives, headed by the Peelite Lord Aberdeen. Palmerston could not possibly be appointed as Foreign Minister but he had to be a part of the new Aberdeen government and became Home Secretary. Russell continued to serve as Leader of the Whig Party in the House of Commons. As the leader of the largest party in the Aberdeen coalition government, Russell was needed in the new government. Accordingly, on 28 December 1852, Russell was appointed Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. In the eyes of many, including the Queen and Aberdeen, his jockeying for position against Palmerston was one of the causes of the inability of the administration to take a firm direction. It was a contest that Palmerston won; having entered the administration as the expected Whig heir, Russell left it having been overtaken by Palmerston.   == The Crimean WarEdit ==  Together with Palmerston, Russell was instrumental in getting Britain to join France in thwarting the threat of Russia against the Ottoman Empire. They did so as a member of the Aberdeen government and against the wishes of the cautious, Russophile Earl of Aberdeen. The Ottoman Empire was in a state of decline and several nations in Europe sought acquire portions of its territory. Russia sought to assert its territorial claims to the Balkans. However, just as soon as Louis Bonaparte had completed his coup against the Second Republic of France and assumed the title Napoleon III, he sent an ambassador to the Ottoman Empire with instructions to obtain from the Ottomans, a guarantee that France was to be the exclusive "protector of Christian sites" in Jerusalem and the Holy Land. Louis Bonaparte was the nephew of Napoleon I, Emperor of France, and many British public officials - like Aberdeen - felt that Louis Bonaparte was merely seeking foreign adventure and aggrandizement and would sooner or later involve Britain in another series of wars like those wars against France and Napoleon from 1793 to 1815. France had long been seen as an opponent of British interests, and that perception had not changed since 1815. Accordingly, much of the British public sided with Russia in what was now being called the "Eastern Question." However, as time passed, the horrific losses of British soldiers, reported in detail in the press, caused British public opinion to turn hostile. The British government was worried about the outcome of the rising tensions over Eastern Question. Accordingly, Aberdeen sent, Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, a diplomat of considerable experience, to the Ottoman Empire, to oversee British interests. When the Ottomans gave way to Louis Bonaparte's demands, Russia strongly objected and on 7 May 1853 one of Russia's leading statesmen, Prince Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov, arrived in Turkey to demands an agreement favourable to Russia. During the Russo-Turkish War of 1768-1774, Russia had occupied the Turkish/Ottoman-controlled provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia (modern Romania). Under the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca signed in 1774, Russia had given these Danubian provinces back to the Ottoman Empire in exchange for Turkish recognition of Russia's exclusive right to "protect the Christian sites in Jerusalem and the Holy Land." Menshikov, using threats, obtained his agreement with The Porte. The British elite saw a growing Russian threat not just to the Ottomans but also to Europe and even India. The balance of power was being upset. London cooperated with Paris. France sent the French ship-of-the-line to the Black Sea, in the spring of 1852, as a show of force against the Russians. The Ottomans reversed themselves and signed a treaty acknowledging the French and the Vatican as the official protectors of the Christian sites in the Holy Land. The Russians responded by sending its 4th and 5th Army Corps into Wallachia and Moldavia. It expected Austria and Prussia would support this move, but they were opposed and Russia had no allies. The Aberdeen government resisted active pursuit of the war. Lord Russell, frustrated by the Prime Minister's delays, resigned from the government on 21 February 1853. Aberdeen replaced Russell with Lord Clarendon. The Ottoman Empire declared war on Russia on 23 October 1853. The Russian fleet defeated the Turkish fleet at the Battle of Sinope on 30 November 1853. After Russia had ignored the Anglo-French ultimatum, both France and Britain declared war on Russia on 28 March 1854. The war was fought chiefly in the Black Sea, with the great Russian base of Sebastopol in Crimea as the main target. In September 1854, British, French and Turkish troops landed on the Crimean Peninsula and set siege to Sevastopol. After a campaign marked by gross mismanagement and very high rates of death from disease, Sevastopol finally fell. Public opinion had turned hostile. A motion in Parliament to investigate the mismanagement became a vote of confidence in the Aberdeen government and in the Secretary for War. Accordingly, when the Robuck motion passed, Aberdeen treated the vote as a vote of "no confidence" on his government and resigned. Upon the resignation of the Earl of Aberdeen, Lord Palmerston was asked formed a new government. John Russell was sent to Vienna to negotiate (accepting the Colonial Office) but sacrificed himself to protect negotiation confidentiality, and temporarily retired from politics in 1855, focusing on writing.   == Foreign Minister in the Palmerston Government 1859–1865Edit == In 1859, following another short-lived Conservative government, Palmerston and Russell made up their differences, and Russell consented to serve as Foreign Secretary in a new Palmerston cabinet - usually considered the first true Liberal Cabinet. This period was a particularly eventful one in the world outside Britain, seeing the Unification of Italy, the American Civil War, and the 1864 war over Schleswig-Holstein between Denmark and the German states. Russell arranged the London Conference of 1864, but failed to establish peace in the war. His tenure of the Foreign Office was noteworthy for the famous dispatch in which he defended Italian independence: "Her Majesty's Government will turn their eyes rather to the gratifying prospect of a people building up the edifice of their liberties, and consolidating the work of their independence, amid the sympathies and good wishes of Europe" (27 October 1860).   == The House of Lords 1860Edit == Russell was elevated to the peerage as Earl Russell, of Kingston Russell in the County of Dorset, and Viscount Amberley, of Amberley in the County of Gloucester and of Ardsalla in the County of Meath, and in 1861. As a peer in his own right, he sat in the House of Lords for the remainder of his career.   == Prime Minister again 1865–1866Edit == When Palmerston suddenly died in late 1865, Russell again became Prime Minister. His second premiership was short and frustrating, and Russell failed in his great ambition of expanding the franchise - a task that would be left to his Conservative successors, Derby and Benjamin Disraeli. In 1866, party disunity again brought down his government. Russell never again held any office. His last contribution to the House of Lords was on 3 August 1875.   == Marriages and childrenEdit ==  On 11 April 1835, Russell married Adelaide, Lady Ribblesdale, the eldest daughter of Thomas Lister Esq. and the widow of Thomas Lister, 2nd Baron Ribblesdale, who had died in 1832. Her death in 1838 cut the marriage short after three years. They had two daughters, Lady Georgiana Adelaide Russell (1836–1922), who married Archibald Peel and had a daughter, Grace (1878–1973); and Lady Victoria Russell (1838–1880), who married the Rev. Henry Montagu Villiers, and left many descendants. On 20 July 1841 Russell married secondly Lady Frances Anna-Maria Elliot-Murray-Kynynmound, daughter of Gilbert Elliot, 2nd Earl of Minto. Their children were John Russell, Viscount Amberley (1842–1876), George Gilbert William Russell (1848–1933); Francis Albert Rollo Russell (1849–1914) and Mary Augusta Russell (1853–1933). They lived at Pembroke Lodge, Richmond Park After his 1876 death, Russell and his second wife brought up the children of his eldest son Lord Amberley, including philosopher Bertrand Russell, who recalled his grandfather in his later life as "a kindly old man in a wheelchair". The 1st Earl Russell is buried at the 'Bedford Chapel' at St. Michael’s Church, Chenies.   == LegacyEdit == He was succeeded as Liberal leader by former Peelite William Gladstone, and was thus the last true Whig to serve as Prime Minister. Generally taken as the model for Anthony Trollope's Mr Mildmay, aspects of his character may also have suggested those of Plantagenet Palliser. An ideal statesman, said Trollope, should have "unblemished, unextinguishable, inexhaustible love of country...But he should also be scrupulous, and, as being scrupulous, weak." The 1832 Reform Act and extension of the franchise to British cities are partly attributed to his efforts. He also worked for emancipation, leading the attack on the Test and Corporation acts, which were repealed in 1828, as well as towards legislation limiting working hours in factories in the 1847 Factory Act, and the Public Health Act of 1848. His government's approach to dealing with the Great Irish Famine is now widely condemned as counterproductive, ill-informed and disastrous. Russell himself was sympathetic to the plight of the Irish poor, and many of his relief proposals were blocked by his cabinet or by the British Parliament. Queen Victoria's attitude to Russell had been coloured by his role in the Aberdeen administration. On visiting Windsor Castle to resign, Aberdeen had told the Queen: "Nothing could have been better", he said, "than the feeling of the members towards each other. Had it not been for the incessant attempts of Ld John Russell to keep up party differences, it must be acknowledged that the experiment of a coalition had succeeded admirably", which attitude she shared. The Queen continued to criticise Russell for his behaviour for the rest of his life, and on his death in 1878 her journal records that he was: "A man of much talent, who leaves a name behind him, kind, & good, with a great knowledge of the constitution, who behaved very well, on many trying occasions; but he was impulsive, very selfish (as shown on many occasions, especially during Ld Aberdeen's administration) vain, & often reckless & imprudent".   == Russell's governmentsEdit == First Russell ministry (July 1846–February 1852) Second Russell ministry (October 1865–June 1866)   == LiteratureEdit == In 1819 Lord John Russell published his book Life of Lord Russell about his famous ancestor; and a year later his Essays and Sketches of Life and Character, "By a Gentleman who has left his lodgings" (1820), a series of social and cultural commentaries ostensibly found in a missing lodger's rooms. In 1822 Russell published a historical drama Don Carlos : or, Persecution. A tragedy, in five acts. Between 1853 and 1856, he edited the Memoirs, Journal and Correspondence of Thomas Moore, which was published by Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans over 8 volumes. A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens was dedicated to Lord John Russell "In remembrance of many public services and private kindnesses."   == AncestryEdit ==   == See alsoEdit == Internationalization of the Danube River Confederate States of America: International diplomacy   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Wood, James, ed. (1907). "article name needed". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. London and New York: Frederick Warne.    == BibliographyEdit == Chamberlain, Muriel E. (1983). Lord Aberdeen: A Political Biography. London.  Halevy, Elie (1950). "The Triumph of Reform 1830-1841". History of the English People in the Nineteeth Century 3.  detailed political narrative Halevy, Elie (1951). "Victorian Years". History of the English People in the Nineteeth Century 4.  detailed political narrative Krein, David F. (1976). "War And Reform: Russell, Palmerston and the Struggle for Power in the Aberdeen Cabinet, 1853-54". Maryland Historian 7#2.  Partridge, M. S. (1987). "The Russell Cabinet and National Defence, 1846-1852". History. 72# 235.  Prest, John (2009). "Russell, John, first Earl Russell (1792–1878)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Retrieved 31 Aug 2014.  short scholarly biography Prest, John M. (1972). Lord John Russell. Macmillan.  a scholarly biography Prest, J. M. (1966). "Gladstone and Russell". Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 16.  Reid, Stuart Johnson (1895). Lord John Russell.  Saunders, Robert (2005). "Lord John Russell and Parliamentary Reform, 1848-67". English Historical Review. 120#489.  Scherer, Paul (1999). Lord John Russell: A Biography.  a scholarly biography Scherer, Paul H. (1987). "Partner or Puppet? Lord John Russell at the Foreign Office, 1859-1862". Albion: A Quarterly Journal Concerned with British Studies.  Taylor, A. J. P. (1976). Essays in English History.  Wyatt, Tilby A. (1931). Lord John Russell: A study in civil and religious liberty. London.  Woodward, Llewellyn (1962) [1938]. "The Age of Reform, 1815-1870" (2nd ed.). Oxford History of England.  political narrative and analysis   === HistoriographyEdit === Beales, Derek (1974). "Peel, Russell and Reform". Historical Journal 17#4.  Loades, David Michael (2003). Reader's guide to British history.    == External linksEdit == Lord John Russell 1st Earl Russell, short biography from the 10 Downing Street website Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Lord John Russell Lord John Russell 1792-1878 biography from the Liberal Democrat History Group Lord John Russell by Stuart J. Reid Works by or about John Russell, 1st Earl Russell at Internet Archive Works by John Russell, 1st Earl Russell at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  More about Earl Russell on the Downing Street website Pembroke Lodge (principal residence and museum) Portraits of John Russell, 1st Earl Russell at the National Portrait Gallery, London

John Wilder Tukey ForMemRS (/ˈtuːki/; June 16, 1915 – July 26, 2000) was an American mathematician best known for development of the FFT algorithm and box plot. The Tukey range test, the Tukey lambda distribution, the Tukey test of additivity, and the Teichmüller–Tukey lemma all bear his name.   == BiographyEdit == Tukey was born in New Bedford, Massachusetts in 1915, and obtained a B.A. in 1936 and M.Sc. in 1937, in chemistry, from Brown University, before moving to Princeton University where he received a Ph.D. in mathematics. During World War II, Tukey worked at the Fire Control Research Office and collaborated with Samuel Wilks and William Cochran. After the war, he returned to Princeton, dividing his time between the university and AT&T Bell Laboratories. He became a full professor at 35 and founding chairman of the Princeton statistics department in 1965. Among many contributions to civil society, Tukey served on a committee of the American Statistical Association that produced a report challenging the conclusions of the Kinsey Report, Statistical Problems of the Kinsey Report on Sexual Behavior in the Human Male. He was awarded the National Medal of Science by President Nixon in 1973. He was awarded the IEEE Medal of Honor in 1982 "For his contributions to the spectral analysis of random processes and the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm." Tukey retired in 1985. He died in New Brunswick, New Jersey on July 26, 2000.   == Scientific contributionsEdit == Early in his career Tukey worked on developing statistical methods for computers at Bell Labs where he invented the term "bit". His statistical interests were many and varied. He is particularly remembered for his development with James Cooley of the Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm. In 1970, he contributed significantly to what is today known as the jackknife estimation—also termed Quenouille-Tukey jackknife. He introduced the box plot in his 1977 book, "Exploratory Data Analysis". Tukey's range test, the Tukey lambda distribution, Tukey's test of additivity and Tukey's lemma all bear his name. He is also the creator of several little-known methods such as the trimean and Median-Median line, an easier alternative to linear regression. In 1974, he developed, with Jerome H. Friedman, the concept of the projection pursuit.   === Statistical practiceEdit === He also contributed to statistical practice and articulated the important distinction between exploratory data analysis and confirmatory data analysis, believing that much statistical methodology placed too great an emphasis on the latter. Though he believed in the utility of separating the two types of analysis, he pointed out that sometimes, especially in natural science, this was problematic and termed such situations uncomfortable science. A D Gordon offered the following summary of Tukey's principles for statistical practice: ... the usefulness and limitation of mathematical statistics; the importance of having methods of statistical analysis that are robust to violations of the assumptions underlying their use; the need to amass experience of the behaviour of specific methods of analysis in order to provide guidance on their use; the importance of allowing the possibility of data's influencing the choice of method by which they are analysed; the need for statisticians to reject the role of 'guardian of proven truth', and to resist attempts to provide once-for-all solutions and tidy over-unifications of the subject; the iterative nature of data analysis; implications of the increasing power, availability and cheapness of computing facilities; the training of statisticians.   == Statistical termsEdit == Tukey coined many statistical terms that have become part of common usage, but the two most famous coinages attributed to him were related to computer science. While working with John von Neumann on early computer designs, Tukey introduced the word "bit" as a contraction of "binary digit". The term "bit" was first used in an article by Claude Shannon in 1948. In 2000, Fred Shapiro, a librarian at the Yale Law School, published a letter revealing that Tukey's 1958 paper "The Teaching of Concrete Mathematics" contained the earliest known usage of the term "software" found in a search of JSTOR's electronic archives, predating the OED's citation by two years. This led many to credit Tukey with coining the term, particularly in obituaries published that same year, although Tukey never claimed credit for any such coinage. In 1995, Paul Niquette claimed he had originally coined the term in October 1953, although he could not find any documents supporting his claim. The earliest known publication of the term "software" in an engineering context was in August 1953 by Richard R. Carhart, in a Rand Corporation Research Memorandum.   == QuotesEdit == Doing statistics is like doing crosswords except that one cannot know for sure whether one has found the solution. The greatest value of a picture is when it forces us to notice what we never expected to see.   == PublicationsEdit == Andrews, David F; Peter J Bickel; Frank R Hampel; Peter J Huber; W H Rogers & John W Tukey (1972). Robust estimates of location: survey and advances. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-08113-1. OCLC 369963.  Basford, Kaye E & John W Tukey (1998). Graphical analysis of multiresponse data. Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 0-8493-0384-2. OCLC 154674707.  Blackman, R B & John W Tukey (1959). The measurement of power spectra from the point of view of communications engineering. Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-60507-8.  Cochran, William G; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (1954). Statistical problems of the Kinsey report on sexual behavior in the human male. Journal of the American Statistical Association.  Hoaglin, David C; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (eds) (1983). Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-09777-2. OCLC 8495063.  Hoaglin, David C; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (eds) (1985). Exploring Data Tables, Trends and Shapes. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-09776-4. OCLC 11550398.  Hoaglin, David C; Frederick Mosteller & John W Tukey (eds) (1991). Fundamentals of exploratory analysis of variance. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-52735-1. OCLC 23180322.  Morgenthaler, Stephan & John W Tukey (eds) (1991). Configural polysampling: a route to practical robustness. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-52372-0. OCLC 22381036.  Mosteller, Frederick & John W Tukey (1977). Data analysis and regression : a second course in statistics. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-04854-X. OCLC 3235470.  Tukey, John W (1940). Convergence and Uniformity in Topology. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-09568-X. OCLC 227948615.  Tukey, John W (1977). Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley. ISBN 0-201-07616-0. OCLC 3058187.  Tukey, John W; Ian C Ross; Verna Bertrand (1973). Index to statistics and probability. R & D Press. ISBN 0-88274-001-6. OCLC 745715.  The collected works of John W Tukey, edited by William S Cleveland Brillinger, David R (ed) (1984). Volume I: Time series, 1949–1964. Wadsworth. ISBN 0-534-03303-2. OCLC 10998116.  Brillinger, David R (ed) (1985). Volume II: Time series, 1965–1984. Wadsworth. ISBN 0-534-03304-0. OCLC 159731367.  Jones, Lyle V (ed) (1985). Volume III: Philosophy and principles of data analysis, 1949–1964. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-03305-9. OCLC 159731367.  Jones, Lyle V (ed) (1986). Volume IV: Philosophy and principles of data analysis, 1965–1986. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05101-4. OCLC 165832503.  Cleveland, William S (ed) (1988). Volume V: Graphics, 1965–1985. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05102-2. OCLC 230023465.  Mallows, Colin L (ed) (1990). Volume VI: More mathematical, 1938–1984. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05103-0. OCLC 232966724.  Cox, David R (ed) (1992). Volume VII: Factorial and ANOVA, 1949–1962. Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-534-05104-9. OCLC 165366083.  Braun, Henry I (ed) (1994). Volume VIII: Multiple comparisons, 1949–1983. Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 0-412-05121-4. OCLC 165099761.  About John Tukey O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John Tukey", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Interview of John Tukey about his experience at Princeton   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Royal Society obit. by Peter McCullagh John W. Tukey: His Life and Professional Contributions published in The Annals of Statistics John Wilder Tukey (1915–2000) in Notices of the American Mathematical Society Memories of John Tukey Short biography by Mary Bittrich Obituary from The New York Times "Remembering John W. Tukey", special issue of Statistical Science John Wilder Tukey at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Joseph Camp Griffith Kennedy (April 1, 1813 – July 13, 1887) of Pennsylvania, was a 19th-century Whig politician, lawyer and journalist who supervised the United States Census for 1850 and 1860. Initially a prosperous farmer and journalist from a prominent Pennsylvania family, Kennedy was appointed to supervise the Census because of his political activism in the 1848 Pennsylvania election.   == Biography == Kennedy graduated from Allegheny College, in Meadville, Pennsylvania. He received an M.A. in 1856, followed by an LL.D. in 1864. Upon the appointment to supervise the Census, Kennedy and his family, his wife Catherine and children Joey, John, Sallie and Annie lived in Washington, D.C. from 1849 until at least 1868. On July 13, 1887, Kennedy was stabbed and killed in Washington D.C. by John Dailey who believed that Kennedy had cheated him in a business affair. A small group of Kennedy's papers are held in the Walter Willcox Collection, Library of Congress.   == Census == Under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior and with contentious Congressional oversight, Kennedy was responsible for the redesign of census methodology and forms, for negotiations with Congressional leaders and committees and for the gathering of census data throughout the United States. He was also responsible for supervising the ultimate compilation of census data, tabulation of statistics, and publication of census summaries. The Seventh Census of the United States (1850) was taken 1 June 1850. This was the first year in which the census bureau attempted to count every member of every household, including women, children and slaves. Accordingly, the first slave schedules were produced in 1850. Prior to 1850, census records had only recorded the name of the head of the household and broad statistical accounting of other household members, (three children under age five, one woman between the age of 35 and 40, etc.).. The Eighth Census of the United States (1860) estimated the population of the United States at 31,400,000. This was the first census where American Indians were officially counted, but only those who had 'renounced tribal rules'. That figure for the nation was 40,000. Results of this census were tabulated by 184 clerks in the Bureau of the Census. However, by the time the 1860 census returns were ready for tabulation, the United States was moving toward the American Civil War. As a result, Superintendent Kennedy and his staff produced only an abbreviated set of reports, which included no graphic or cartographic representations. As the war began, however, Kennedy and the Census staff used the new statistics to produce maps of Southern states for Union field commanders. These maps displayed militarily vital topics, including white population, slave population, predominant agricultural products (by county), and rail and post-road transportation routes.   == Publications == Agriculture of the United States in 1860; Compiled from the Original Returns of the Eighth Census, Under the Direction of the Secretary of the Interior. Washington D. C., Government Printing Office, 1864. Population of the United States in 1860; compiled from the original returns of the eighth census, under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior. Washington D.C., Government printing office, 1864. complete text online, [1]   == See also == Annie Kennedy Bidwell   == References ==   == Further reading == Anderson, Margo J. The American Census: A Social History. Yale University Press, 1988. ISBN 0-300-04709-6 Fitzpatrick, Paul J. Leading American Statisticians in the Nineteenth Century II", JASA 53 (September 1958) pp. 692–694. McDonald, Lois H. "Annie Kennedy Bidwell: An Intimate History." Stansbury Publishing. 2004. ISBN 0-9708922-7-6   == External links == Kennedy's 1879 letter to the NY Times regarding Laws governing the 1880 census.

Joseph Michael Hilbe (born December 30, 1944) is an American statistician and philosopher, founding President of the International Astrostatistics Association(IAA) and one of the most prolific authors of books on statistical modeling in the early twenty-first century. Hilbe is an elected Fellow of the American Statistical Association as well as an elected member of the International Statistical Institute (ISI), for which he founded the ISI astrostatistics committee in 2009. Hilbe is also a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society and Full Member of the American Astronomical Society. Hilbe has made a number of contributions to the fields of count response models and logistic regression. Among his most influential books are two editions of Negative Binomial Regression (Cambridge University Press, 2007, 2011), Modeling Count Data (Cambridge University Press, 2014), and Logistic Regression Models (Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2009). Modeling Count Data won the 2015 PROSE honorable mention award for books in mathematics as the second best mathematics book published in 2014.  Hilbe is also editor-in-chief of the Springer Series in Astrostatistics, which began in 2011, is one of two co-editors for the Astrostatistics and AstroInformatics Portal, a co-ordinated website for the major astrostatistical organizations worldwide, hosted by the Pennsylvania State University Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, and is coordinating editor of the Cambridge University Press Series on Predictive Analytics in Action, commencing in 2012. A listing of his books, book chapters and encyclopedia articles are listed below (Publications). Hilbe was also a two-time national champion track & field athlete,  a US team and NCAA Division 1 head coach, and Olympic Games official.  He was also chair of the ISI sports statistics committee from 2007 to 2011 and chair of the 2014 Section on Statistics and Sports of the American Statistical Association.    == Life and Works == Born in Los Angeles, California, son of Rader John Hilbe (1910–1980) and Nadyne Anderson Hilbe (1910–1988), Hilbe was raised in Arcadia, CA, attended three years of high school at Woodside Priory School in Portola Valley, CA, before graduating from Paradise, CA high school in 1962. Hilbe attended California State University, Chico, from where he graduated in 1968 with a degree in philosophy. Hilbe studied for his doctorate in philosophy at U.C.L.A. where he was a graduate reader for visiting professor and Nobel Laureate Fredrick von Hayek and personal assistant to Rudolf Carnap, one of the founders of the Vienna Circle of Logical Positivism. Hilbe secured a position at the University of Hawaii, where he retired as an emeritus professor of philosophy in 1990. During this time he authored several texts in philosophy and logic. In 1988 he earned a doctorate in statistics (applied mathematics, U.C.L.A.) and in 1990 was hired by HCFA to develop statistical and data management tools for the study of Medicare data. Hilbe served as the founding editor of the Stata Technical Bulletin (predecessor to The Stata Journal) from 1991 to 1993, for which he developed a variety of statistical software commands, including the first generalized linear models (GLM) program having a negative binomial regression family (1993). The negative binomial family is now incorporated into the GLM routines of all major commercial statistical software. Hilbe is regarded as having popularized negative binomial regression, particularly in the disciplines of biostatistics and health outcomes analysis. It is now a standard method used for modeling overdispersed count data. Hilbe's 2007 text, Negative Binomial Regression, was the first text specifically devoted to the model and its many variations. His 2014 Modeling Count Data is regarded as the first text on applied count models. In 1992 Hilbe was appointed as an Adjunct Professor of Statistics in the Department of Sociology at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ. In 2007 the Sociology department merged with several other departments to become the School of Social and Family Dynamics. Hilbe served in several corporate positions during the 1990s, including the positions of lead statistician for Genentech's noted National Registry for Myocardial Infarctions (NRMI-2;1996–97) and lead statistician for Hoffman-La Roche's Canadian National Registry for Cardiovascular Disease (FASTRAK;1997–99). During this period Hilbe played an important role in the formation of the Health Policy Statistics Section of the American Statistical Association, serving as a member of its initial executive committee  and as a member of the founding scientific organizing committee (1995) for the International Conferences on Health Policy Statistics (ICHPS), which has been continuously held on a biannual basis. Hilbe was also one of the longest serving editors for a publication of the American Statistical Association, holding the position of Software Reviews Editor for The American Statistician for twelve years from 1997 to 2009. Hilbe's long-term interest in astronomy and meteorites led to his selection in 2006 as a Solar System Ambassador with NASA / Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, CA commencing January 2007. In 2008 Hilbe initiated the International Statistical Institute's (ISI) Astrostatistics Interest Group. In December 2009, the ISI Council approved the creation of an astrostatistics committee and network with Hilbe as inaugural chair. It was the first such interest-working group or committee authorized under the auspices of an astronomical of statistical organization. In August 2012 the International Astrostatistics Association (IAA) was formed with Hilbe elected as its founding President. The IAA is the first worldwide professional association for astrostatisticians. Its goal is to enhance collaboration between astrophysists, statisticians, and computer-information scientists, with an aim of enabling researchers to better understand and interpret astronomical data. In 2012, the Network and IAA stimulated the creation of the first working groups in astrostatistics and astroinformations within both the American Astronomical Society (AAS) and International Astronomical Union (IAU), with Hilbe as an initial member in both. Hilbe was also on the scientific organizing committee of the first IAU symposium on astrostatistics, Statistical Challenges in 21st Century Cosmology, held in May 2013 in Lisbon, Portugal. In 2009 Hilbe received the Distinguished Alumnus award from California State University, Chico.  Two years before he was inducted into the Chico State Athletic Hall of Fame. He is the only graduate of the university to receive both awards.  In 2010 Hilbe was inducted into the Paradise High School Athletic Hall of Fame, and in 2011 was inducted into the Woodside Priory High School Athletic Hall of Fame. Hilbe was married to Cheryl Swisher (1984) in Honolulu, Hawaii, and has four children.    == Athletics == Known as Joe Hilbe when involved with athletics, Hilbe won the National AAU Pentathlon Championships in 1968 and 1978. He was also listed in the Track & Field News World List rankings in the 100 yards (9.4, 1967) and 400 meters (45.9, 1965). Hilbe set Hawaii state records in the 100 meters (10.40, 1973) and the Javelin (78.51/257'7", 1976), which is still the recognized state mark. Hilbe served as National Chair for AAU Girl's Junior Olympic Track & Field from 1979 to 1982, and was Head Women's Track & Field coach at the University of Hawaii from 1979 to 1985.  His foremost athletes were Gwen Loud, 1984 NCAA Division 1 Long Jump Champion (6.72/22'5¾") and a member of the U.S. team to the first International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) World Championships in Helsinki, 1983, and Gwen Gardner, second at the 1980 U.S. Olympic Trials 400 meters, earning a berth on the Olympic team that boycotted the Moscow Olympic Games. As assistant men's coach at the University of Hawaii (1973–1977), Hilbe coached Terry Albritton, who broke the Shot Put world record (21.85/71'8½") in 1976, and won numerous AAU and NCAA titles. Hilbe was elected to serve as a U.S. team coach and manager during the 1980s for several major competitions in the U.S., Australia/New Zealand, the Caribbean, and in Europe. Hilbe was a member of the founding committee that formed the National Track & Field Officials Association in 1977. He was a lead competition official and IAAF technical official at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympic Games and was hired by Turner Broadcasting System to serve as Athletics Broadcast Coordinator for the 1990 Goodwill Games held in Seattle, WA.   == Publications: Books == Hilbe, Joseph M., Practical Guide to Logistic Regression, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2015) ISBN 978-1-4987-0957-6 Miner, L.A., P.S. Bolding, J.M. Hilbe, et al., Practical Predictive Analytics and Decisioning Systems in Medicine, Elsevier (2014), ISBN 978-0-1241-1643-6 Hilbe, Joseph M., Modeling Count Data, Cambridge University Press (2014) ISBN 978-1-1076-1125-2 Shults, J. and J.M. Hilbe,Quasi-Least Squares Regression, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2014) ISBN 978-1-4200-9993-5 Zuur, A.F, J.M. Hilbe, E.N Ieno, A Beginners Guide to GLM and GLMM with R, Highlands (2013) ISBN 978-0-9571-7413-9 Hilbe, J.M. and A.P. Robinson, Methods of Statistical Model Estimation, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2013) ISBN 978-1-4398-5802-8 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Estimating Equations, Second Edition, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2012) ISBN 978-1-4398-8113-2 Hilbe, Joseph M., Astrostatistical Challenges for the New Astronomy, Springer (2012) ISBN 978-1-4614-3507-5 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, Third Edition, Stata Press (2012) ISBN 978-1-5971-8105-1 Hilbe, Joseph M., Negative Binomial Regression, Second Edition, Cambridge University Press (2011) ISBN 978-0-521-19815-8 Muenchen, R.A. and J.M. Hilbe, R for Stata Users, Springer (2010) ISBN 978-1-4419-1317-3 Hilbe, Joseph M., Logistic Regression Models, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2009) ISBN 978-1-4200-7575-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., Solutions Manual for Logistic Regression Models, Chapman & Hall/CRC (2009) ISBN 978-1-4398-2066-7 Hilbe, Joseph M., Negative Binomial Regression, Cambridge University Press (2007) ISBN 978-0-521-85772-7 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, Second Edition, Stata Press (2007) ISBN 978-1-59718-014-6 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Estimating Equations, Chapman & Hall/CRC Press (2003) ISBN 978-1-58488-307-4 Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe, Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, Stata Press (2001) ISBN 1-881228-60-6 Hilbe, Joseph, Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints, Volume 2, (editor) Stata Press (1993) ISBN 1-881228-07-X Hilbe, Joseph, Stata Technical Bulletin Reprints, Volume 1, (editor) Stata Press (1992) ISBN 1-881228-05-3 Hilbe, Joseph, Sentential Logic, Educational Services Pub. Co. (1983) ASIN: 1881228606 Hilbe, Joseph M., Fundamentals of Conceptual Analysis, Kendall/Hunt (1977) ISBN 0-8403-1759-X Hilbe, Joseph, Philosophical Foundations of Law, Educational Services Pub. Co. (1973) ASIN: B005ONKCO2 HIlbe, J.M, Philosophy: Past and Present (2 vol), Educational Services Pub Co (1972) ASIN: B0052GQ4JI Hilbe, J.M., Experiencing Philosophy, Educational Services Pub. Co. (1970) ASIN: B0082YUQLE   == Publications: Major Book Chapters and Encyclopedia Articles == Hilbe, Joseph M., (2012), Astrostatistics: A Brief History and View into the Future in Hilbe, J.M (ed) Astrostatistical Challenges for the New Astronomy, New York: Springer ISBN 978-1-4614-3507-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., (2012), Astrostatistics in the International Arena in Feigelson, E.D. and G.J. Babu, (ed) Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy V, New York: Springer ISBN 978-1-4614-2596-0 Hilbe, J.M. and W.H. Greene, (2011), Chapter 4: Count Response Regression Models, in C. R. Rao, J.P. Miller, and D.C.Rao (Eds), Essential Statistical Methods for Medical Statistics, Oxford, UK: New Holland ISBN 978-0-4445-3737-9 Hilbe, Joseph M., Logistic Regression, StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies (2010). Hilbe, Joseph M., Modeling Count Data, StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies (2010). Hilbe, Joseph M., Generalized Linear Models, StatProb: The Encyclopedia Sponsored by Statistics and Probability Societies (2010),. Hilbe, Joseph M., Logistic Regression in M. Lovric (editor), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science, New York: Springer (2010). ISBN 978-3-642-04897-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., Modeling Count Data in M. Lovric (editor), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science, New York: Springer (2010). ISBN 978-3-642-04897-5 Hilbe, Joseph M., Generalized Linear Models in M. Lovric (editor), International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science, New York: Springer (2010). ISBN 978-3-642-04897-5 Hilbe, Joseph M, Statistical Software for the Social Sciences, in Kolenikov, S., L A. Thombs, and D. Steinley, (Eds), Statistics in the Social Sciences: Current Methodological Developments, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. pp. 175–189.(2010) Hilbe, J.M., G. Miner, and R. Nisbet, Astro-Statistics: Data Mining of SkyLab Project: Hubble Telescope Star and Galaxy Data, Tutorial SS, in Nisbet, R, J. Elder, and G. Miner (Eds), Handbook of Statistical Analysis & Data Mining Applications, New York:Elsevier (2009),ISBN 978-0-12-374765-5 Hilbe, J.M. and J.W. Hardin, Generalized Estimating Equations for Longitudinal Panel Analysis in S. Menard (Editor), Handbook of Longitudinal Research: Design, Measurement, and Analysis across the Social Sciences, London, UK: Academic Press/Elsevier (2007). Hilbe, Joseph and William Greene, Count Response Regression Models, in C.R. Rao, J.P. Miller, and D.C.Rao (Editors), Handbook of Statistics, Vol 27: Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, London, UK: North Holland/Elsevier (2007). Holmes, J.D., J. Rohn, and J. Hilbe, Informatics and Software Applications for Data Analyses in Van Beneden, C. and N. Mikanatha, (editors), Infectious Disease Surveillance, London: Blackwell (2007). Hardin, J.W. and J.M. Hilbe (2007). "Generalized Estimating Equations" in Encyclopedia of Clinical Trials, New York: Wiley & Son Pub. Hilbe, Joseph M., The Coevolution of Statistics and Hz. In S. Sawilowsky (ed.),Real Data Analysis, American Educational Research Association, SIG/Educational Statisticians: Information Age Publishing (2006). Hamilton, L. and J. Hilbe Statistical Analysis Using Stata, in R. Stine & J. Fox (Editors), Statistical Computing Environments for Social Research, Sage Publishing Co. (1997). Hilbe, J. and B. Turlach, Generalized Linear Models, in W. Haerdle, S. Klinke, B Turlach (Editors), XploRe: An interactive Statistical Computing Environment, Springer-Verlag (1995).   == See also == Stata Statistics International Astrostatistics Association The American Statistician American Statistical Association Royal Statistical Society International Statistical Institute American Astronomical Society   == References ==

Joseph Bernard Kruskal, Jr. (/ˈkrʌskəl/; January 29, 1928 – September 19, 2010) was an American mathematician, statistician, computer scientist and psychometrician. He was a student at the University of Chicago earing a bachelor of science in mathematics in the year of 1948 ,and a master of science in mathematics in the following year 1949. After his time at the University of Chicago Kruskal attended Princeton University, where he completed his Ph.D. in 1954, nominally under Albert W. Tucker and Roger Lyndon, but de facto under Paul Erdős with whom he had two very short conversations. Kruskal has worked on well-quasi-orderings and multidimensional scaling. He was a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, former president of the Psychometric Society, and former president of the Classification Society of North America. He also initiated and was first president of the Fair Housing Council of South Orange and Maplewood in 1963, and actively supported civil rights in several other organizations such as CORE. In statistics, Kruskal's most influential work is his seminal contribution to the formulation of multidimensional scaling. In computer science, his best known work is Kruskal's algorithm for computing the minimal spanning tree (MST) of a weighted graph. The algorithm first orders the edges by weight and then proceeds through the ordered list adding an edge to the partial MST provided that adding the new edge does not create a cycle. Minimal spanning trees have applications to the construction and pricing of communication networks. In combinatorics, he is known for Kruskal's tree theorem (1960), which is also interesting from a mathematical logic perspective since it can only be proved nonconstructively. Kruskal also applied his work in linguistics, in an experimental lexicostatistical study of Indo-European languages, together with the linguists Isidore Dyen and Paul Black. Their database is still widely used (available at the link below). Kruskal was born to a Jewish family in New York City to a successful fur wholesaler, Joseph B. Kruskal, Sr. His mother, Lillian Rose Vorhaus Kruskal Oppenheimer, became a noted promoter of Origami during the early era of television. He worked at Bell Labs from 1959 to 1993. Joseph Kruskal should not be confused with his two brothers Martin David Kruskal (1925–2006; co-inventor of solitons and of surreal numbers) and William Kruskal (1919–2005; developed the Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance), or his nephew Clyde Kruskal.   == Concepts named after Joseph Kruskal == Kruskal's algorithm (1956) Kruskal's tree theorem (1960) Kruskal–Katona theorem (1963) Kruskal rank or k-rank (1997)   == References ==   == External links == Joseph Kruskal at the Mathematics Genealogy Project The Dyen, Kruskal and Black lexicostatistical database : the 200-meaning Swadesh lists for 95 Indo-European languages. http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/departments/sia/kruskal/ : his Bell Labs page

Joseph L. Fleiss (November 13, 1937 – June 12, 2003) was a professor of biostatistics at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, where he also served as head of the Division of Biostatistics from 1975 to 1992. He is known for his work in mental health statistics, particularly assessing the reliability of diagnostic classifications, and the measures, models, and control of errors in categorization.   == Early life and education == Fleiss was born in Brooklyn, New York. He attended Columbia College of Columbia University and was awarded a bachelor's degree in 1959. He earned an M.S. in biostatistics in 1961 from the Columbia University School of Public Health (now called the Mailman School of Public Health), and a Ph.D. in statistics in 1967 from the Department of Mathematical Statistics in the Columbia Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.   == Career == Fleiss began his career as a biostatistician at the Biometrics Research Unit of the New York State Psychiatric Institute. While working at the Psychiatric Institute, he became a professor at the Columbia University School of Public Health. Fleiss served as head of the Division of Biostatistics at the School of Public Health from 1975 to 1992. Under his leadership, the Division increased in size and stature. Fleiss transformed the Division from a small program consisting chiefly of New Yorkers into a department with international prestige by recruiting top faculty from major institutions around the world.   == Field of expertise == One of Fleiss's chief concerns was mental health statistics, particularly assessing the reliability of diagnostic classifications, and the measures, models, and control of errors in categorization. He was among the first to notice the equivalence of weighted kappa and the intraclass correlation coefficient as measures of reliability in categorical data (see Fleiss' kappa). In an influential 1974 paper co-authored with Dr. Robert Spitzer, Fleiss demonstrated that the second edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-II) was an unreliable diagnostic tool. They found that different practitioners using the DSM-II were rarely in agreement when diagnosing patients with similar problems. In reviewing previous studies of 18 major diagnostic categories, Fleiss and Spitzer concluded that "there are no diagnostic categories for which reliability is uniformly high. Reliability appears to be only satisfactory for three categories: mental deficiency, organic brain syndrome (but not its subtypes), and alcoholism. The level of reliability is no better than fair for psychosis and schizophrenia and is poor for the remaining categories."   == Publications == Fleiss wrote two textbooks that are considered classics in biostatistics. According to the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions (1973) continues to be particularly influential in the fields of psychiatry and epidemiology. Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments (1986) was influential among medical researchers and biostatisticians, with its challenges concerning the planning and interpretation of studies involving human subjects. Fleiss also contributed chapters to more than two dozen books and authored or co-authored more than 200 statistical and scientific papers concerning the application of statistics in fields ranging from psychiatry and cardiology to dentistry.   == Awards == Among his many honors, Fleiss was given the Mortimer Spiegelman Award by the Statistics Section of the American Public Health Association in 1973. In 1997, the Harvard Institute of Psychiatric Epidemiology and Genetics recognized Fleiss with a Lifetime Contribution Award for his contributions to psychiatric epidemiology and biostatistics. Named a Fellow of the American Statistical Association in 1973.   == See also == Fleiss' kappa Cohen's kappa   == Notes and references ==   == Bibliography ==   === Books === Fleiss, J. L. (1973). Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions. New York: John Wiley & Sons.  Fleiss, J. L. (1986). Design and Analysis of Clinical Experiments. New York: John Wiley & Sons.  Fleiss, J. L.; Levin, B.; Paik, M.C. (2003). Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions (3rd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.    === Selected papers === Spitzer, R., Cohen, J., Fleiss, J. L., and Endicott, J. (1967). "Quantification of agreement in psychiatric diagnosis". Archives of General Psychiatry 17: 83–87. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1967.01730250085012.  Fleiss, J. L. (1971). "Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters". Psychological Bulletin 76 (5): 378–382. doi:10.1037/h0031619.  Spitzer, R., and Fleiss, J. L. (1974). "A re-analysis of the reliability of psychiatric diagnosis". British Journal of Psychiatry 125 (0): 341–347. doi:10.1192/bjp.125.4.341. PMID 4425771.  Shrout, P. E., and Fleiss, J. L. (1979). "Intraclass correlations: Uses in assessing rater reliability". Psychological Bulletin 86 (2): 420–428. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.86.2.420. PMID 18839484.

Joseph Moses Juran (December 24, 1904 – February 28, 2008) was a Romanian-born American engineer and management consultant. He was an evangelist for quality and quality management, having written several books on those subjects. He was the brother of Academy Award winner Nathan H. Juran.   == Early life == Juran was born in Brăila, Romania, one of the six children born to a Jewish couple, Jakob and Gitel Juran; they later lived in Gura Humorului. He had three sisters: Rebecca (nicknamed Betty), Minerva, who earned a doctoral degree and had a career in education, and Charlotte. He had two brothers: Nathan H. Juran and Rudolph, known as Rudy. Rudy founded a municipal bond company In 1912, he emigrated to America with his family, settling in Minneapolis, Minnesota. Juran excelled in school, especially in mathematics. He was a chess champion at an early age, and dominated chess at Western Electric. Juran graduated from Minneapolis South High School in 1920. In 1924, with a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Juran joined Western Electric's Hawthorne Works. His first job was troubleshooting in the Complaint Department. In 1925, Bell Labs proposed that Hawthorne Works personnel be trained in its newly developed statistical sampling and control chart techniques. Juran was chosen to join the Inspection Statistical Department, a small group of engineers charged with applying and disseminating Bell Labs' statistical quality control innovations. This highly visible position fueled Juran's rapid ascent in the organization and the course of his later career.   == Personal life == In 1926, he married Sadie Shapiro. Joseph and Sadie met in 1924 when his sister Betty moved to Chicago and he and Sadie met her [on the] train; in his autobiography he wrote of meeting Sadie "There and then I was smitten and have remained so ever since". They were engaged in 1925 on Joseph's 21st birthday. 15 months later they were married. They had been married for nearly 82 years when he died in 2008. Joseph and Sadie raised four children (3 sons and 1 daughter.) Robert, Sylvia, Charles, and Donald. Robert was an award-winning newspaper editor, and Sylvia earned a doctorate in Russian literature.   == Department chief == Juran was promoted to department chief in 1928, and the following year became a division chief. He published his first quality-related article in Mechanical Engineering in 1935. In 1937, he moved to Western Electric/AT&T's headquarters in New York City, where he held the position of Chief Industrial Engineer. As a hedge against the uncertainties of the Great Depression, he enrolled in Loyola University Chicago School of Law in 1931. He graduated in 1935 and was admitted to the Illinois bar in 1936, though he never practiced law. During the Second World War, through an arrangement with his employer, Juran served in the Lend-Lease Administration and Foreign Economic Administration. Just before war's end, he resigned from Western Electric, and his government post, intending to become a freelance consultant. He soon joined the faculty of New York University as an adjunct professor in the Department of Industrial Engineering, where he taught courses in quality control and ran round table seminars for executives. He also worked through a small management consulting firm on projects for Gilette, Hamilton Watch Company and Borg-Warner. After the firm's owner's sudden death, Juran began his own independent practice, from which he made a comfortable living until his retirement in the late 1990s. His early clients included the now defunct Bigelow-Sanford Carpet Company, the Koppers Company, the International Latex Company, Bausch & Lomb and General Foods.   == Japan == The end of World War II compelled Japan to change its focus from becoming a military power to becoming an economic one. Despite Japan's ability to compete on price, its consumer goods manufacturers suffered from a long-established reputation of poor quality. The first edition of Juran's Quality Control Handbook in 1951 attracted the attention of the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers (JUSE), which invited him to Japan in 1952. When he finally arrived in Japan in 1954, Juran met with ten manufacturing companies, notably Showa Denko, Nippon Kōgaku, Noritake, and Takeda Pharmaceutical Company. He also lectured at Hakone, Waseda University, Ōsaka, and Kōyasan. During his life, he made ten visits to Japan, the last in 1990. Working independently of W. Edwards Deming (who focused on the use of statistical process control), Juran—who focused on managing for quality—went to Japan and started courses (1954) in quality management. The training started with top and middle management. The idea that top and middle management needed training had found resistance in the United States. For Japan, it would take some 20 years for the training to pay off. In the 1970s, Japanese products began to be seen as the leaders in quality. This sparked a crisis in the United States due to quality issues in the 1980s.   == Contributions ==   === Pareto principle === In 1941, Juran stumbled across the work of Vilfredo Pareto and began to apply the Pareto principle to quality issues (for example, 80% of a problem is caused by 20% of the causes). This is also known as "the vital few and the trivial many". In later years, Juran preferred "the vital few and the useful many" to signal the remaining 80% of the causes should not be totally ignored.   === Management theory === When he began his career in the 1920s, the principal focus in quality management was on the quality of the end, or finished, product. The tools used were from the Bell system of acceptance sampling, inspection plans, and control charts. The ideas of Frederick Winslow Taylor dominated. Juran is widely credited for adding the human dimension to quality management. He pushed for the education and training of managers. For Juran, human relations problems were the ones to isolate and resistance to change was the root cause of quality issues. Juran credits Margaret Mead's book Cultural Patterns and Technical Change for illuminating the core problem in reforming business quality. He wrote Managerial Breakthrough, which was published in 1964, outlining the issue. Juran's concept of quality management extended outside the walls of the factory to encompass nonmanufacturing processes, especially those that might be thought of as service related. For example, in an interview published in 1997 he observed:  The key issues facing managers in sales are no different than those faced by managers in other disciplines. Sales managers say they face problems such as "It takes us too long...we need to reduce the error rate." They want to know, "How do customers perceive us?" These issues are no different than those facing managers trying to improve in other fields. The systematic approaches to improvement are identical. ... There should be no reason our familiar principles of quality and process engineering would not work in the sales process.   === The Juran trilogy === Juran was one of the first to write about the cost of poor quality. This was illustrated by his "Juran trilogy", an approach to cross-functional management, which is composed of three managerial processes: quality planning, quality control, and quality improvement. Without change, there will be a constant waste, during change there will be increased costs, but after the improvement, margins will be higher and the increased costs get recouped.   === Transferring quality knowledge between East and West === During his 1966 visit to Japan, Juran learned about the Japanese concept of quality circles, which he enthusiastically evangelized in the West. Juran also acted as a matchmaker between U.S. and Japanese companies looking for introductions to each other.   == Juran Institute == Juran founded the Juran Institute in 1979. The Institute is an international training, certification, and consulting company which provides training and consulting services in quality management, Lean manufacturing management and business process management, as well as Six Sigma certification. The institute is based in Southbury, Connecticut.   == Retirement == Juran was active well into his 80s, and only gave up international travel at age 86. He retired at the age of 90 but still gave interviews. His activities during the second half of his life include: Consulting for U.S. companies such as Armour and Company, Dennison Manufacturing Company, Merck, Sharp & Dohme, Otis Elevator Company, Xerox, and the United States Navy Fleet Ballistic Missile System. Consulting for Western European and Japanese companies, such as Rolls-Royce Motors, Philips, Volkswagen, Royal Dutch Shell and Toyota Motor Company Pro bono consulting for Soviet-bloc countries (Hungary, Romania, Czechoslovakia, Russia, Poland, and Yugoslavia) Founding the Juran Institute and the Juran Foundation.   == Later life and death == He started to write his memoirs at 92, which were published two months before he celebrated his 99th birthday. He gave two interviews at 94 and 97. In 2004, he turned 100 years old and was awarded an honorary doctorate from Luleå University of Technology in Sweden. A special event was held in May to mark his 100th birthday. He and Sadie celebrated their 81st wedding anniversary in June 2007. They were both at the age of 102 at the time of the event. Juran died of a stroke on 28 February 2008, at the age of 103 in Rye, New York. He was active on his 103rd birthday and was caring for himself and Sadie who was in poor health when he died. Sadie died on 2 December 2008, at the age of 103 years. They were survived by their four children, nine grandchildren and ten great-grandchildren. Juran left a book that was 37% complete, which he began at age 98.   == See also == Quality by Design   == Bibliography == Juran cites the following as his most influential works:   === Books ===  Quality Control Handbook, New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1951, OCLC 1220529  Eventually published in six editions: 2nd edition, 1962, 3rd edition, 1974, 4th edition, 1988, 5th edition, 1999, 6th edition, 2010 Managerial Breakthrough, New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964  Management of Quality Control, New York, New York: Joseph M. Juran, 1967, OCLC 66818686  Quality Planning and Analysis, New York, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970  Upper Management and Quality, New York, New York: Joseph M. Juran, 1980, OCLC 8103276  Juran on Planning for Quality, New York, New York: The Free Press, 1988, OCLC 16468905    === Published papers ===  "Directions for ASQC", Industrial Quality Control (Buffalo, New York: Society of Quality Control Engineers), November 1951  "Universals in Management Planning and Control", Management Review (New York, New York: American Management Association), November 1954: 748–761  "Improving the Relationship between Staff and Line", Personnel (New York, New York: American Management Association), May 1956  "Industrial Diagnostics", Management Review (New York, New York: American Management Association), June 1957  "Operator Errors—Time for a New Look", ASQC Journal (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), February 1968  "The QC Circle Phenomenon", Industrial Quality Control (Buffalo, New York: Society of Quality Control Engineers), January 1967  "Mobilizing for the 1970s", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), August 1969  "Consumerism and Product Quality", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), July 1970  "And One Makes Fifty", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), March 1975  "The Non-Pareto Principle: Mea Culpa", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), May 1975  "Khrushchev's Venture into Quality Improvement", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), January 1976  "Japanese and Western Quality—a Contrast", Quality Progress (New York, New York: American Society for Quality Control), December 1978    === In Japanese ===  Planning and Practices in Quality Control, Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers, 1956  a collection of Juran's 1954 lectures Lectures in Quality Control, 1956 Lectures in General Management, 1960   == References ==   == External links == The Juran Institute's official web site List of people with the longest marriages

Joshua Milne (1776–1851), was an English actuary.   == Life == He was appointed actuary to the Sun Life Assurance Society on 15 June 1810, and reconstructed the life tables then in use. He gave evidence before the select committee on the laws respecting friendly societies (1825 and 1827). By 1839 Milne had lost interest in the values of life contingencies, and turned to natural history; he is said to have possessed one of the best botanical libraries in London. He resigned his position in the Sun Life Office on 19 December 1843, and died at Upper Clapton on 4 January 1851.   == Actuarial works == When Milne entered the field, life tables were based on the data taken by Richard Price from the burial registers (1735–80) of All Saints' Church, Northampton. Milne took as the basis of his calculations the bills of mortality from Carlisle, which had been prepared by John Heysham. After a long correspondence (12 September 1812 – 14 June 1814) with Heysham, he published his major work A Treatise on the Valuation of Annuities and Assurances (1815). Milne's new "Carlisle table" marked an epoch in actuarial science. Considering the narrow base of data from which he had to work, it was quite accurate, and was widely adopted by insurance societies. The Carlisle Table was largely superseded by that published by the Institute of Actuaries in 1870. But it was still considered useful in the early 20th century. Subsequent writers built on Milne's work. He was the first to compute accurately, at the cost of heavy algebra, the value of fines (i.e. payments to be made at the successive deaths of persons). His notation for the expression of life contingencies suggested that of Augustus De Morgan in his Essay on Probabilities. Milne also contributed to the Encyclopædia Britannica, fourth edition, articles on "Annuities", "Bills of Mortality", and "Law of Mortality".   == References ==  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Lee, Sidney, ed. (1894). "Milne, Joshua". Dictionary of National Biography 38. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Josiah Charles Stamp, 1st Baron Stamp GCB GBE FBA (21 June 1880 – 16 April 1941), was an English industrialist, economist, civil servant, statistician, writer, and banker. He was a director of the Bank of England and chairman of the London, Midland and Scottish Railway.   == Life and career == Stamp was born in Hampstead, London, the third of seven children; his youngest brother L. Dudley Stamp became an internationally renowned geographer. At the time of his birth his father owned and managed a provision and general shop in London. Educated at a private Baptist school, Bethany House at Goudhurst, Kent, Josiah left school at 16 and joined the Civil Service as a boy clerk in the Inland Revenue Department. With a brief interval in the Board of Trade, he rose to assistant inspector of taxes at Hereford in 1903, an inspector of taxes in London in 1909, and assistant secretary in 1916. Meanwhile, he was studying economics as an external student. He was awarded a first class degree (1911) by the University of London and a doctorate (1916) by the London School of Economics. The thesis, published as British Incomes and Property, became a standard work on the subject and established his academic reputation. Stamp met his future wife, Olive Jessie Marsh, a soprano and student teacher, when he was seventeen. Pursuing their work and studies separately for several years until their marriage in 1903, they engaged in a correspondence that gives us a rich sense of Stamp's formative years (Jones 1964). Between 1904 and 1917 they had four sons, Wilfred, Trevor, Maxwell and Colin. It was as a result of this marriage that Stamp, son of a Baptist father and Church of England mother, converted to the Wesleyan Methodist Church. A few of his writings (see below), such as Christianity and Economics (1939), discuss the relevance of Christian values to contemporary economics systems. In 1919 Stamp changed career, leaving the civil service for business, to join as secretary and director of Nobel Industries Ltd, from which Imperial Chemical Industries developed. In 1926 he became Chairman of the LMS and was instrumental in getting William Stanier appointed in 1932 as Chief Mechanical Engineer to resolve the locomotive problems of the Company. In 1928 he was appointed a director of the Bank of England. Stamp was often called to serve on public commissions, committees and boards: he was a member of the Royal Commission on Income Tax, 1919, the Northern Ireland Finance Arbitration Committee, 1923–24, the Committee on Taxation and National Debt, 1924, the Dawes Reparation Commission's Committee on German Currency and Finance, 1924, the Young Committee in 1929 and the Economic Advisory Council, 1930–39. From 1927 until his death he was Colonel commanding the Royal Engineers Railway and Transport Corps, and became Honorary Colonel of Transportation Units in the Royal Engineers Supplementary Reserve in 1938. Stamp was widely regarded as the leading British expert on taxation, and took an active part in the work of the Royal Statistical Society, serving as president from 1930 to 1932. Stamp was appointed Commander in the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1918, Knight in the Order (KBE) in 1920, and Knight Grand Cross (GBE) in 1924 and Knight Grand Cross of the Bath (GCB) in 1936. He was a Knight of Grace of the Order of St John of Jerusalem. He also held the Grand Cross of the Austrian Order of Merit (awarded 1936) and the Afghan Order of Astaur. He was raised to the peerage on 28 June 1938 as Baron Stamp of Shortlands, in the County of Kent. He was first Mayor of the Borough of Beckenham, Kent, within which he had settled at Shortlands, in 1935. He was made an honorary Freeman of the same borough in 1936 and of Blackpool in 1937. Stamp refused to be moved out of his house, 'Tantallon', in Park Hill Road, Shortlands, because of German bombing during The Blitz. He, aged sixty, and his wife, aged sixty-three, were killed by a bomb's direct hit on the air-raid shelter at their home on 16 April 1941. They were buried at Beckenham Cemetery. Ironically in 1935, he had been a founder member of the Anglo-German Fellowship and had made low key visits to Nuremberg in 1936 (when he met Adolf Hitler – whom Stamp noted was a "statesman and demagogue combined" – and Franz von Papen), and 1937, to view the Nazi Party Congress with the unspoken support of the then Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax. Stamp's son Wilfred was killed at the same time and in the same place, but English law has legal fiction that in the event of the order of deaths being indeterminable, the elder is deemed to have died first. Legally therefore, Wilfred momentarily inherited the peerage: and as a consequence the family had to pay death duty twice. The peerage passed to the second of Stamp's four sons, Trevor.   == Quotes == A well known quote from Stamp (often referred to as Stamp's Law) is: "The government are very keen on amassing statistics. They collect them, add them, raise them to the nth power, take the cube root and prepare wonderful diagrams. But you must never forget that every one of these figures comes in the first instance from the chowky dar (village watchman in India), who just puts down what he damn pleases." (Stamp recounting a story from Harold Cox who quotes an anonymous English judge). Another quote often attributed to Stamp is: "Banking was conceived in iniquity and was born in sin. The bankers own the earth. Take it away from them, but leave them the power to create money, and with the flick of the pen they will create enough deposits to buy it back again. However, take away from them the power to create money and all the great fortunes like mine will disappear and they ought to disappear, for this would be a happier and better world to live in. But, if you wish to remain the slaves of bankers and pay the cost of your own slavery, let them continue to create money." (Said to be from an informal talk at the University of Texas in the 1920s, but as yet unverified.)   == Sources == Beveridge, 'Stamp, Josiah Charles, first Baron Stamp (1880–1941)', rev. Jose Harris, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004. A. L. Bowley Lord Stamp Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 104, No. 2 (1941), pp. 193–196. J. Harry Jones, M.A., LL.D., Josiah Stamp, Public Servant: The Life of the First Baron Stamp of Shortlands, London: Sir Isaac Pitman and Sons, 1964, 365 pp. With an Epilogue by his youngest son, Colin, from a talk broadcast over Springbok Radio from Johannesburg, South Africa, 5 October 1960.   == Books by Josiah Stamp == Sourced from Who Was Who. British Incomes and Property 1916 Wealth and Income of the Chief Powers 1919 The Fundamental Principles of Taxation 1921 The National Income 1924 with A. L. Bowley 1927 The Christian Ethic as an Economic Factor 1926 On Stimulus 1927 Some Economic Matters in Modern Life 1929 Criticism and other addresses 1931 Internationalism 1931 The Financial Aftermath of War 1932 Taxation During the [Great] War 1932 Ideals of a Student 1933 Motive and Method in a Christian Order 1936 The National Capital and Other Statistical Studies 1937 The Science of Social Adjustment 1937 We live and learn 1937 Christianity and Economics 1939   == References ==   == External links == Stamp, Josiah Charles at economia.unipv.it – Brief notes on Stamp's life Steam Index: Sir Josiah Charles Stamp – A biography emphasising Stamp's management of the LMS railway Josiah Charles Stamp, 1st Baron Stamp on the National Portrait Gallery website STAMP, Josiah Charles STAMP, Rt Hon Lord, GCB, GBE, KBE, CBE at the Wayback Machine (archived 28 August 2004) – Record at the British Academy to which Stamp was elected in 1926

Julius Bartels (August 17, 1899, Magdeburg – March 6, 1964) was a German geophysicist and statistician who made notable contributions to the physics of the Sun and Moon; to geomagnetism and meteorology; and to the physics of the ionosphere. He also made fundamental contributions to statistical methods for geophysics. Bartels was the first President of the International Association of Geomagnetism and Aeronomy. With Sydney Chapman, he wrote the influential book Geomagnetism.   == Life and career == Bartels was awarded his Ph.D. from Göttingen in 1923, then worked at the Potsdam magnetic observatory as a post-doctorate. In 1928 he was named professor at Eberswalde, teaching meteorology. He became full professor at Berlin University in 1936, and director of the Potsdam Geophysical Institute. From 1931 until the second year of World War II he was also a research associate at the Carnegie Institution of Washington. He collaborated with Sydney Chapman to publish the two-volume work Geomagnetism, a definitive reference on geophysics. Following the war in 1946 he became professor in Göttingen. He was also a director at the Max Planck Institute for Physics of the Stratosphere (today Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research) between 1955 and 1964. When 1958 ICSU created the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR). Bartels became chairman of the (West-)German branch. From 1954 until 1957 he served as first President of the IAGA. Between 1960 and 1963 he was vice-president of the IUGG.   == Research == Among his contributions was the development of the Kp-index, and he suggested the existence of "M-regions" on the Sun that resulted in geomagnetic activity. These coronal holes were later confirmed by the Skylab mission. Finally he also helped initiate the International Geophysical Year, which took place in 1957/8. The Bartels' Rotation Number of the Sun based on a regular 27 day cycle is named after him. It is similar to the Carrington rotation which is based on 27.2753 days.   == Awards and honors == Posthumously awarded the William Bowie Medal of the American Geophysical Union. The Julius Bartels Medal, of the European Geosciences Union Division on Solar-Terrestrial Sciences, was named in his honor. The crater Bartels on the Moon is named after him. The Chree Medal and Prize in 1953   == See also == List of geophysicists   == References ==

Kantilal Vardichand ("Kanti") Mardia, MSc, PhD, DSc, (born 1935) is a statistician specializing in directional statistics, multivariate analysis, geostatistics, statistical bioinformatics and statistical shape analysis. He was born in Sirohi, Rajasthan, India in a Jain family and now resides and works in Leeds. He is known for his series of tests of multivariate normality based measures of multivariate skewness and kurtosis as well as work on the statistical measures of shape.   == Life and career == Mardia was educated at the Ismail Yusuf College at the University of Bombay (BSc 1955, MSc in Statistics 1957), the University of Poona (MSc in Pure Mathematics 1961), the University of Rajasthan (PhD 1965) and the University of Newcastle Upon Tyne (PhD 1967, DSc 1973). He held academic positions at the Institute of Science, Mumbai and the University of Hull. Mardia was appointed Professor of Applied Statistics and Head of the Department of Statistics in the School of Mathematics at the University of Leeds in 1973. He retired in 2000 with the title Emeritus Professor and is currently Senior Research Professor of Applied Statistics at Leeds. He is also a long term Visiting Professor at the University of Oxford from March 2013. He was instrumental in founding the Centre of Medical Imaging Research (CoMIR) in the University of Leeds where he held the position of joint director. He was the driving force behind the exchange programs between Leeds and other scholarly centres such as the University of Granada, Spain, and the Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. He has written several scholarly books and edited conference proceedings and other special volumes. In 1973, Mardia founded the University of Leeds Annual Statistics Research Workshops (LASR) which have run for most years and he has edited all the proceedings. These workshops attract an international audience and focus on applied statistical topics especially those involving shape and images, and more recently, bioinformatics. Due to his initiative and efforts, the Centre of Statistical Bioinformatics (CoSB), Leeds, has been recently established. Mardia is the centre's Adjunct Director. In 2003 he was awarded the Guy Medal in Silver by the Royal Statistical Society. In 2013 he was awarded the Wilks Memorial Award by the American Statistical Association.  He is a practicing Jain and is strict vegetarian. His book The Scientific Foundations of Jainism[1] is already a classic introducing Four Nobles Truths of Jains. He is the Founding and Current Chairman of the Yorkshire Jain Foundation .   == Books == Multivariate Analysis (coauthored with John T. Kent and John Bibby) Statistics of Directional Data (second edition coauthored with Peter Jupp) Statistical Shape Analysis (coauthored with Ian Dryden) Bayesian methods in structural bioinformatics, (co-edited with Thomas Hamelryck and Jesper Ferkinghoff-Borg)   == References ==   == External links == Home page at Leeds University Review of the LASR on the occasion of Mardias 65th Birthday by Fred Bookstein. Yorkshire Jain Foundation In Conversation with Prof. Kanti V. Mardia . . . in Research Newsletter of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad. February 2009.

Kaoru Ishikawa (石川 馨, Ishikawa Kaoru, July 13, 1915 - April 16, 1989) was a Japanese organizational theorist, Professor at the Faculty of Engineering at The University of Tokyo, noted for his quality management innovations. He is considered a key figure in the development of quality initiatives in Japan, particularly the quality circle. He is best known outside Japan for the Ishikawa or cause and effect diagram (also known as fishbone diagram) often used in the analysis of industrial processes.   == Biography == Born in Tokyo, the oldest of the eight sons of Ichiro Ishikawa. In 1939 he graduated University of Tokyo with an engineering degree in applied chemistry. After graduating from the University of Tokyo he worked as a naval technical officer from 1939-1941. Between 1941-1947 Ishikawa worked at the Nissan Liquid Fuel Company. In 1947 Ishikawa started his academic career as an associate professor at the University of Tokyo. He undertook the presidency of the Musashi Institute of Technology in 1978. In 1949, Ishikawa joined the Japanese Union of Scientists and Engineers (JUSE) quality control research group. After World War II Japan looked to transform its industrial sector, which in North America was then still perceived as a producer of cheap wind-up toys and poor quality cameras. It was his skill at mobilizing large groups of people towards a specific common goal that was largely responsible for Japan's quality-improvement initiatives. He translated, integrated and expanded the management concepts of W. Edwards Deming and Joseph M. Juran into the Japanese system. After becoming a full professor in the Faculty of Engineering at The University of Tokyo (1960) Ishikawa introduced the concept of quality circles (1962) in conjunction with JUSE. This concept began as an experiment to see what effect the "leading hand" (Gemba-cho) could have on quality. It was a natural extension of these forms of training to all levels of an organization (the top and middle managers having already been trained). Although many companies were invited to participate, only one company at the time, Nippon Telephone & Telegraph, accepted. Quality circles would soon become very popular and form an important link in a company's Total Quality Management system. Ishikawa would write two books on quality circles (QC Circle Koryo and How to Operate QC Circle Activities). Among his efforts to promote quality were the Annual Quality Control Conference for Top Management (1963) and several books on quality control (the Guide to Quality Control was translated into English). He was the chairman of the editorial board of the monthly Statistical Quality Control. Ishikawa was involved in international standardization activities. 1982 saw the development of the Ishikawa diagram which is used to determine root causes. At Ishikawa's 1989 death, Juran delivered this eulogy:   == Contributions to quality of improvement == User Friendly Quality Control Fishbone Cause and Effect Diagram - Ishikawa diagram Implementation of Quality Circles Emphasised the Internal customer Shared Vision   == Awards and recognition == 1972 American Society for Quality's Eugene L. Grant Award 1977 Blue Ribbon Medal by the Japanese Government for achievements in industrial standardization 1982 Walter A. Shewhart Medal 1988 Awarded the Order of the Sacred Treasures, Second Class, by the Japanese government.   == Publications == Ishikawa, Kaoru (1980) [original Japanese ed. 1970]. QC Circle Koryo : General Principles of the QC Circle. Tokyo: QC Circle Headquarters, Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers.  Ishikawa, Kaoru (1985). How to Operate QC Circle Activities. Tokyo: QC Circle Headquarters, Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers.  Ishikawa, Kaoru (1985) [First published in Japanese 1981]. What is Total Quality Control? The Japanese Way [Originally titled: TQC towa Nanika—Nipponteki Hinshitsu Kanri]. D. J. Lu (trans.). New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-952433-9.  Ishikawa, Kaoru (1990). Introduction to Quality Control. J. H. Loftus (trans.). Tokyo: 3A Corporation. ISBN 4-906224-61-X. OCLC 61341428.  About Kaoru Ishikawa Kondo, Yoshio (July 1994). "Kaoru Ishikawa: What He thought and Achieved, A Basis for Further Research". Quality Management Journal 1 (4): 86–91. ISSN 1068-6967.  Watson, Greg (April 2004). "The Legacy Of Ishikawa". Quality Progress 37 (4): 54–57. ISSN 0033-524X.  Dewar, Donald L. (May 1988). "A Serious Anomaly: TQC without Quality Circles". Annual Quality Congress, Dallas, TX 42 (0): 34–38.  title=The Japanese Approach to Product Quality |Professor Sasaki and David Hutchins 1980 Pub Pergamon Press | 0-08-028 159-1 |HBK 0-0273-028B 160-5 title=Quality Circles Handbook | last= Hutchins | first=David (1983)| |Pub PITMAN BOOKS 0-273 02644-5| PBK AND 0-273-02024-2 HBK A special tribute to Professor Kaoru Ishikawa 1990 | title= The man and his work | David Hutchins invited author of one chapter| Published by JUSE JAPAN + Special Committee| E 03(5379)1240 title= Hoshin Kanri - the Strategic Approach to Continuous Improvement | last= Hutchins | first=David | | 2008 | pub – GOWER PRESS 13:9780566087 400   == References ==   == External links == Biography by the American Society for Quality Biography by De La Salle University

Dame Karen Hope Dunnell, DCB, FAcSS (born 16 June 1946) was National Statistician and Chief Executive of the Office for National Statistics of the United Kingdom and head of the Government Statistical Service from 1 September 2005 until retiring on 28 August 2009. Since its inception in 2008, she was also the Chief Executive of the UK Statistics Authority. She now has a range of non-executive roles including membership of Pricewaterhouse Coopers Public Interest Body, Trustee of National Heart Forum, member of the Court of Governors, University of Westminster.   == Background == Born Karen Williamson in Los Angeles, USA, she moved to Britain when she was a young child and was educated at Maidstone Grammar School for Girls and Bedford College, London. Her father was a US serviceman during World War II and her mother, who was English, was a teacher. Karen Dunnell has been married twice: to Keith Dunnell (1969–76) and Professor Michael Adler (1979–94). She has two adult daughters by her second marriage and two grandchildren. She lives in London and has a home in the Var in SE France.   == Career == Karen Dunnell studied sciences at school because she wanted to go into medicine. However, a growing interest in politics and society led her to study sociology at Bedford College, London, from where she graduated in 1967. She began her career as a health care researcher with the Institute of Community Studies, where much of her work involved healthcare surveys, and, in 1972, she wrote a book, Medicine Takers, Prescribers and Hoarders with Ann Cartwright,. This established a measure of morbidity and the relationship between medicines acquired through the NHS and over-the-counter. Dunnell then joined the Department of Epidemiology & Public Health at St Thomas' Hospital Medical School, working on multi-disciplinary projects alongside doctors, social scientists, statisticians and economists, including a major project that measured the cost of caring for people with severe disabilities in the community compared with the cost of caring for them in institutions. She joined the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) in 1974, as a social survey officer in the Survey Division, where she stayed for 15 years, working on, among other things, two major surveys. One of these was the UK's contribution to the World Fertility Survey, published as a book, Family Formation, in 1976. This measured cohabitation for the first time and first asked the question, now a standard, "At what age did you first have sexual intercourse?". The other studied the work of community nurses, using an intensive survey combined with diary-keeping. She was promoted to Assistant Director, overseeing all health surveys in the OPCS. These included surveys on drinking and smoking and a major survey on disability that established what proportion of people in different age groups had different disabilities. She was responsible, in this post, for liaising with the Department of Health. In 1990, she moved from working with health surveys in the OPCS to medical statistics. When OPCS merged with the Central Statistical Office to form the ONS in 1996, she became Director of Demography and Health Statistics, working on general practice statistics and inequalities in health, and established the Health Statistics Quarterly journal. In 1999, she moved to a central post responsible for launching National Statistics and dealing with the arrival of Len Cook, the first National Statistician, in 2000. She was promoted to Group Director in Social Statistics in 2000, managing health, demography, population, labour market and social reporting and was temporarily promoted to the Board of the ONS in 2001 in the run-up to the 2001 census. A major reorganisation, which divided the activities of ONS into 'sources' and 'analysis', followed and Dunnell was given the job of setting up the new "Sources" Directorate, bringing together household and business surveys, the infrastructure that supported them, the statistical modernisation programme and planning for the 2011 Census. She took up this post on the ONS Executive in 2002.   === National Statistician === Karen Dunnell was appointed National Statistician and Director of the Office for National Statistics from 1 September 2005 at a time when the government was being criticised for the quality, credibility and uses to which it put the statistics generated both by ONS and by governments departments. Soon afterwards, Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, announced that, following the success of the idea of independence for the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England as a means of gaining trust in the its interest-rate decisions, a form of independence should be applied to ONS so that its data could also gain public trust. ONS is now accountable to Parliament via a Statistics Board, known as the UK Statistics Authority (UKSA), rather than, as previously, via a Treasury minister. Following the implementation of the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007, the role of Registrar-General for England and Wales, an ancient additional title, held by the National Statistician since the inception of ONS, was transferred, with the General Register Office for England and Wales, which she also headed, to the Identification and Passport Service in the Home Office   === Controversy === A government policy inherited by Karen Dunnell as National Statistician aroused controversy. Following the efficiency reviews initiated by the Chancellor and Prime Minister (viz. Review of Public Sector Relocation by Sir Michael Lyons, 2003-4, and Releasing Resources to the Front Line, Sir Peter Gershon, 2004), the government adopted a policy, criticised by unions, of dispersal of certain public service posts and functions out of London. The policy was initially applied to ONS during Len Cook's tenure as National Statistician but after Karen Dunnell succeeded to the post, ONS accelerated the policy of relocating the Office for National Statistics away from London and concentrating staff in its offices in Titchfield, near Southampton, and in Newport, South Wales, to which the ONS headquarters has moved. The announcement, in January 2007, of the almost complete closure of the ONS's London offices by 2010 reversed a decision to retain a sizeable office in the capital. This relocation policy, together with substantial expenditure cutbacks in recent government spending settlements, resulted in disquiet among London-based staff whose representatives reported morale problems and a high staff turnover rate among staff still in London. To set against the risks to data quality of any loss of expertise, especially among London-based staff who were unwilling to move, including analysts in National Accounts and in health statistics, Ms. Dunnell defended ONS implementation of government policy on civil service relocation. In the face of some Bank of England disquiet, reported in 2007 to the Treasury Select Committee, about risks to economic data quality, combined with opposition from London staff (including a lack of confidence in management expressed in a staff survey highlighted by staff unions), she asserted that the ONS Board had agreed a process of managed and gradual change to take account of these risks, building up expertise in Newport before shifting functions there. She also cited the benefits to the local economy, the skills of existing ONS staff in Newport and access to universities and other resources in the region as well as the benefits of operating key functions from a single location.   === Other roles === Outside the OPCS, Karen Dunnell has been a member of the British Sociology Association and was on the committee of its BSA Medical Sociology Group. She later chaired the Society for Social Medicine. She is a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, is a visiting professor at the London School of Hygiene. She has been elected to a second term as a Visiting Fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford. Karen Dunnell was awarded an Honorary Doctorate degree by Middlesex University in July 2008, was appointed an Honorary Fellow of Cardiff University in July 2009  and was appointed Dame Commander of the Order of the Bath (DCB) in the Queen's Birthday Honours List in June 2009.   == References ==   == External links == Dame Karen Dunnell, DCB at Debrett's People of Today

Karl Gustav Jöreskog (born 25 April 1935) is a Swedish statistician. Jöreskog is a Professor Emeritus at Uppsala University, and a co-author (with Dag Sörbom) of the LISREL statistical program. He is also a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Jöreskog received his bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees in Uppsala University. He is also a former student of Herman Wold. He was a statistician at Educational Testing Service (ETS) and a visiting professor at Princeton University.   == Research == Jöreskog proposed a reliable numerical method for computing maximum-likelihood estimates in factor analysis; similarly reliable methods were also proposed by Gerhard Derflinger, Robert Jennrich, and Stephen M. Robinson at roughly the same time. Jöreskog's Fortran codes helped to popularize factor analysis around the world. While working at the Educational Testing Service and giving lectures at Princeton University, Jöreskog proposed a linear model for the analysis of covariance structures, a fundamental contribution to structural equation modeling (SEM). His other research interests include multivariate analysis, item response theory, statistical computing, and factor-analysis in geology.   == Awards == In 2007 Jöreskog received the Award for distinguished scientific applications of psychology from the American Psychological Association (APA).   == Selected bibliography == Jöreskog, K. G. (1969). A general approach to confirmatory maximum likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrika, 34, 183–202. Jöreskog, K. G. (1970). "A general method for analysis of covariance structures". Biometrika 57: 239–251. doi:10.1093/biomet/57.2.239.  Reprinted as Jöreskog, K. G. (2001). "A general method for analysis of covariance structures". In D. M. Titterington and D. R. Cox. Biometrika: One Hundred Years. Oxford University Press. pp. 345–357. ISBN 0-19-850993-6.   Jöreskog, K. G., and Goldberger, A. S. (1975). "Estimation of a model with multiple indicators and multiple causes of a single latent variable". Journal of the American Statistical Association 70 (351): 631–639. doi:10.2307/2285946. JSTOR 2285946.  Jöreskog, K. G., & Sörbom, D. (1979). Advances in factor analysis and structural equation models. New York: University Press of America. Jöreskog, K. G., & Moustaki, I. (2001). Factor analysis of ordinal variables: A comparison of three approaches. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 36, 347–387.   === Festschrift === Cudeck, R., Jöreskog, K. G., Du Toit, S. H. C., & Sörbom, D. (2001). Structural Equation Modeling: Present and Future : a Festschrift in Honor of Karl Jöreskog. Scientific Software International.   == Notes ==   == See also ==   == External links == Jöreskog's presentation of the econometric research that was recognized with the 2000 Nobel Prize in economics Profile of Karl Jöreskog on the website of SSI company Karl Gustav Jöreskog at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Kenneth Massey is an American sports statistician known for his development of a methodology for ranking and rating sports teams in a variety of sports. His ratings have been a part of the Bowl Championship Series since the 1999 season. He is an assistant professor of mathematics at Carson–Newman University in Tennessee.   == MethodsEdit == Massey, unlike the developers of other sports rating systems, gives quite a lot of information on how his system works, but omits enough details to prevent someone from copying the calculations in their entirety. The Massey Ratings are designed to measure past performance, not necessarily to predict future outcomes. The first challenge for any computer rating system is to account for the variability in performance. A team will not always play up to its full potential. Other random factors (officiating, bounce of the ball) may also affect the outcome of a game. The model must somehow eliminate the "noise" which obscures the true strength of a team. The second goal is to account for the differences in schedule. When there is a large disparity in schedule strength, win-loss records lose their significance. The model must evaluate games involving mismatched opponents, as well as contests between well matched teams. It is necessary to achieve a reasonable balance between rewarding teams for wins, convincing wins, and playing a tough schedule. This issue is difficult to resolve, and rating systems exist that are based on each of the extremes.The overall team rating is a merit based quantity, and is the result of applying a Bayesian win-loss correction to the power rating. Only the score, venue, and date of each game are used to calculate the Massey ratings. Stats such as rushing yards, rebounds, or field-goal percentage are not included. Nor are game conditions such as weather, crowd noise, day/night, or grass/artificial turf. Overtime games are not treated any differently. Finally, neither injuries nor psychological factors like motivation are considered.   == JustificationEdit == Massey's ratings are particularly relevant in the world of American college football, where, with over 100 teams in NCAA Division I competition, there is no way a team can play against more than a small fraction of its competitors. Therefore, in determining the participants in championship games and tournaments, it is necessary to distinguish between teams that have compiled impressive win-loss records against strong competition and teams that have defeated weaker opponents. Massey's analysis is a valuable tool for leagues that need to fairly seed playoff brackets, or schedule games that will encourage competitive play and good sportsmanship. Sports rating systems are generally used by gamblers to forecast results, but Massey is not affiliated with this industry. Massey's ratings came under some scrutiny ine late 2008 due to his controversial rankings at the end of the season. Although Massey's rating system came under fire near the end of the 2008 season for rating undefeated Utah ahead of then-consensus human poll #1 Alabama, his ratings seemed to be justified following Utah's 31-17 one-sided victory in the 2009 Sugar Bowl.   == BackgroundEdit == Massey first got the idea to do sports ratings as an undergraduate at Bluefield College. He developed various rating models at that time, and presented his work in the form of an honors project. While doing graduate work in mathematics at Virginia Tech, Massey was invited by Roy Kramer, then commissioner of the Southeastern Conference and president of the Bowl Championship Series, to submit his ratings for inclusion in the BCS ranking formula. Massey's college football rankings were part of the BCS formula from 1999-2013. Massey also consults for various amateur and professional athletic leagues.   == Personal LifeEdit == Massey resides in Jefferson City, TN with his wife, a native of Sibiu, Romania. They are expecting their first child to be born in 2015.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Official website Massey, Ken. "Massey Ratings". High School Sports.  Massey, Ken (Spring 1997). "Honors Project in Mathematics, Bluefield College".   available at Statistical Models Applied to the Rating of Sports Teams at the Internet ArchivePDF

Kingsley Davis (August 20, 1908 – February 27, 1997) was an internationally recognized American sociologist and demographer. He was identified by the American Philosophical Society as one of the most outstanding social scientists of the twentieth century, and was a Hoover Institution senior research fellow.   == Education and careerEdit == Davis received his Ph.D. from Harvard University and taught at Smith College, Clark University, Pennsylvania State University, Princeton University, Columbia University, the University of California at Berkeley and the University of Southern California. Among his other accomplishments, Davis served as president of the Population Association of America and the American Sociological Association represented the United States on the United Nations Population Commission member of the Advisory Council of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Advisory Committee on Population for the U.S. Bureau of the Census was the first sociologist in the United States to be elected to the National Academy of Sciences (1966). Davis won the Irene B. Taeuber Award for outstanding research in demography (1978), the Common Wealth Award for distinguished work in sociology (1979), and the Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award from the American Sociological Association (1982).   == ResearchEdit == Davis led and conducted major studies of societies in Europe, South America, Africa and Asia, coined the term "population explosion,", and played a major role in the naming and development of the demographic transition model. He was also one of the original scholars in the development of the theory of overurbanization. He is also credited with coining the term "zero population growth"  although George Stolnitz claimed to have that distinction. Davis had several children while espousing limitations on childbearing world-wide. Davis also published an influential article with Wilbert E. Moore entitled "Some Principles of Stratification," which was a very influential functionalist account of the reasons for social inequality. Davis and Moore synthesize Durkheim and Parsons to argue for the "functional necessity" of some positions over others: those that are highest paid go to the most deserving individuals; at the same time, the differential rewards motivates individuals to work to fill positions they might otherwise not. Thus, from this perspective, illness is a deviant state because it means that the individual may not be able to fill their role. Sociologists see this article as a paradigmatic case of functionalist logic, and indeed, Davis came to be a leading figure in this school of sociology. As a demographer, Davis was internationally recognized for his expertise in world population growth and resources, the history and theory of international migration, world urbanization, demographic transition and population policy.   == Published WorksEdit == Kingsley Davis was a prolific scholar who published numerous research articles, book chapters and books.   === Other writingEdit === In the popular press, Davis' work appeared in "Scientific American," "Science," the "New York Times Magazine," "Commentary," "Foreign Affairs" and numerous newspapers. In 1957, Davis predicted that population of the world would reach six billion by the year 2000. He was remarkably close; that population figure was reached in October 1999.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == David Heer and Kingsley Davis. "Kingsley Davis: A Biography and Selections from His Works" (Transaction Publishers, 2005) —— (July 1951). Population and Progress in Puerto Rico. Foreign Affairs (Council on Foreign Relations).  CS1 maint: Date and year (link)   == External linksEdit == Kingsley Davis at Encyclopædia Britannica Obituary at Stanford News Biography at the American Sociological Association Biography from Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society

Ladislaus Josephovich Bortkiewicz (August 7, 1868 – July 15, 1931) was Russian economist and statistician of Polish ancestry, who lived most of his professional life in Germany, where he taught at Strassburg University (Privatdozent, 1895–1897) and Berlin University (1901–1931).   == Life and work == Bortkiewicz was born in Saint Petersburg, Imperial Russia, where he graduated from the Law Faculty in 1890. In 1898 he published a book about the Poisson distribution, titled The Law of Small Numbers. In this book he first noted that events with low frequency in a large population follow a Poisson distribution even when the probabilities of the events varied. It was that book that made the Prussian horse-kick data famous. The data give the number of soldiers killed by being kicked by a horse each year in each of 14 cavalry corps over a 20-year period. Bortkiewicz showed that those numbers follow a Poisson distribution. The book also examined data on child-suicides. Some have suggested that the Poisson distribution should have been named the "Bortkiewicz distribution." In political economy, Bortkiewicz is important for his analysis of Karl Marx's reproduction schema in the last two volumes of Capital. Bortkiewicz identified a transformation problem in Marx's work. Making use of Dmitriev's analysis of Ricardo, Bortkiewicz proved that the data used by Marx was sufficient to calculate the general profit rate and relative prices. Though Marx's transformation procedure was not correct—because it did not calculate prices and profit rate simultaneously, but sequentially—Bortkiewicz has shown that it is possible to get the correct results using the Marxian framework, i.e. using the marxian variables constant capital and variable capital it is possible to obtain the profit rate and the relative prices in a three-sector model. This "correction of the Marxian system" has been the great contribution of Bortkiewicz to classical and Marxian economics but it was completely unnoticed until Paul Sweezy's 1942 book "Theory of Capitalist Development". Piero Sraffa (1960) has provided the complete generalization of the simultaneous method for classical and Marxian analysis. Bortkiewicz died in Berlin, Germany. His papers, including a voluminous correspondence file (some 1,000 letters 1876–1931), were deposited at Uppsala University in Sweden, except for his correspondence with Léon Walras which went into the collection of the Walras scholar William Jaffe in the USA.   == Major publications == Die mittlere Lebensdauer. Die Methoden ihrer Bestimmung und ihr Verhältnis zur Sterblichkeitsmessung. Gustav Fischer, Jena 1893 (Göttinger Digitalisierungszentrum) "Review of Léon Walras, Éléments d'économie politique pure, 2e édit.", 1890, Revue d'économie politique Das Gesetz der kleinen Zahlen, 1898 "Wertrechnung und Preisrechnung im Marxschen System", 1907, Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik. "On the Correction of Marx's Fundamental Theoretical Construction in the Third Volume of Capital." Die Iterationen, spanish version 1917 Value and Price in the Marxian System, 1952, IEP. "Die Rodbertus'sche Grundrententheorie und die Marx'sche Lehre von der absoluten Grundrente", from: "Archiv für die Geschichte des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung", 1910–11   == See also == Mihajlo D. Mesarovic   == Notes ==   == References == Joseph Schumpeter: Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, Economic Journal, Vol. 42 (1932), pp. 338–340, reprinted in: Ten great economists from Marx to Keynes (New York, 1960), pp. 302–305 Emil Julius Gumbel: Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences 2 (New York, 1968), pp. 128–131. Freely available online at StatProb Paul A. Samuelson. Resolving a Historical Confusion in Population Analysis. Human Biology, 48, 1976: S. 559–580.   == External links == Biographical sketch on the web site of the University of St. Andrews (in Scotland) Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz from encyclopedia.com New School: Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz

Lancelot Thomas Hogben FRS (9 December 1895 – 22 August 1975) was a British experimental zoologist and medical statistician. He developed the African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis) as a model organism for biological research in his early career, attacked the eugenics movement in the middle of his career, and popularised books on science, mathematics and language in his later career.   == Early life == Hogben was born in Portsmouth and brought up in Southsea, Hampshire. His parents were Plymouth Brethren; he broke young from the family religion. He attended Tottenham County School in London, his family having moved to his mother's home town of Stoke Newington in 1907, and then as a medical student studied physiology at Trinity College, Cambridge. He took his degree in 1915. He had acquired socialist convictions, changing the name of the university's Fabian Society to Socialist Society and went to become an active member of the Independent Labour Party. Later in life he preferred to describe himself as 'a scientific humanist'.   == First World War == In the First World War he was a pacifist and was imprisoned as a conscientious objector in 1916 at Wormwood Scrubs; this was after six months working with the Red Cross in France, and his deliberate return to Cambridge. His health collapsed and he was released in 1917. Hogben married in 1918 the mathematician, statistician, and feminist Enid Charles, with whom he had two sons and two daughters.   == Academic == After a year's convalescence he took lecturing positions in London universities, moving in 1922 to the University of Edinburgh and its Animal Breeding Research Department. He then went to McGill University, and in 1927 to a zoology chair at the University of Cape Town. He worked on endocrinology and used the Xenopus frog. While using Xenopus to investigate the endocrine system, he serendipitously discovered that female Xenopus frogs, when injected with urine from a pregnant woman, ovulated within hours. Thus, the Hogben Pregnancy Test was created and remained the major, international pregnancy test for decades. He found the job in South Africa attractive, but his antipathy to the country's racial policies drove him to leave. In 1930 Hogben moved to the London School of Economics, in a chair for social biology. He became a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1936. The citation read  Distinguished for his work in Experimental Zoology, especially in respect of the mechanism of colour change in Amphibia and Reptilia. He has published a series of important papers on the effect of hormones on the pigmentary effector system and on the reproductive cycle of vertebrates, and has worked on many branches of comparative physiology. More recently he has made substantial contributions to genetics, especially with regard to man.  The social biology position at the London School of Economics was funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, and when it withdrew funding Hogben moved to Aberdeen, becoming Regius Professor of Natural history at the University of Aberdeen in 1937. Hogben was granted both the Neill Prize, as well as a gold medal, for his work in mathematical genetics.   == Political views == While Chair for Social Biology at the LSE, Hogben unleashed a relentless attack on the British eugenics movement, which was at its apex in the 1920s and 1930s. In contrast to eugenicists, who commonly drew a strict line between heredity (or nature) and environment (or nurture), Hogben highlighted the 'interdependence of nature and nurture'. Hogben's appeal to this interdependence of nature and nurture marked the first time gene-environment interaction (or 'gene-environment interplay') was used to undermine statistical attempts to partition the contributions of nature and nurture, as well as the eugenic implications drawn from those statistics. Hogben's foil throughout this period was R.A. Fisher, the leading scientist-eugenicist of the day (Tabery 2008). In an interview for the book Twentieth Century Authors, Hogben stated:  "I like Scandinavians, skiing, swimming and socialists who realize it is our business to promote social progress by peaceful methods. I dislike football, economists, eugenicists, Fascists, Stalinists, and Scottish conservatives. I think that sex is necessary and bankers are not".   == Society for Experimental Biology == In 1923, Hogben was a founder of the Society for Experimental Biology and its organ the British Journal of Experimental Biology (renamed Journal of Experimental Biology in 1930), along with Julian Huxley and geneticist Francis Albert Eley Crew (1886–1973). According to Gary Werskey, Hogben was the only one of the founders not holding any eugenic ideas.   == Writer == Hogben produced two best-selling works of popular science, Mathematics for the Million (1936) and Science for the Citizen (1938). While at Aberdeen, Hogben developed an interest in language. Besides editing The Loom of Language by his friend Frederick Bodmer, he created an international language, Interglossa, as 'a draft of an auxiliary for a democratic world order'. George Orwell in his essay Politics and the English Language used a sentence of Hogben's as an example of how not to write, particularly in relation to the use of metaphors.  Above all, we cannot play ducks and drakes with a native battery of idioms which prescribes egregious collocations of vocables (...)  Professor Hogben plays ducks and drakes with a battery which is able to write prescriptions (...)   == Later life == During World War II Hogben had responsibility for the British Army's medical statistics. He was Mason Professor of Zoology at the University of Birmingham 1941–1947 and professor of medical statistics there 1947–1961, when he retired. In 1963, he became the first Vice-Chancellor of the University of Guyana, a post he abandoned in April 1964, resigning in 1965. In the 1950s Hogben settled at Glyn Ceiriog in north Wales, where he bought a cottage. That decade his marriage to Enid broke down, the couple separated in 1953 and divorced in 1957, with Hogben remarrying later that year to local widowed retired school headmistress, (Mary) Jane Roberts (nee Evans), who was seven years younger. Widowed by the death of Jane in 1974, he died at the War Memorial Hospital, Wrexham. in 1975 aged 79 and was cremated at nearby Pentre Bychan.   == Hogben's legacy == Hogben's research has left a lasting impression on the history of biology. The African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis), which Hogben first developed as a model organism, is now one of the most widely used model organisms in biological research. Likewise, his emphasis on the interdependence of nature and nurture has had and continues to have an impact on scientific practice and scientific debate. In terms of scientific practice, modern research on phenotypic plasticity, gene-environment interaction, and developmental systems theory all owes much to the legacy of Hogben's initial emphasis on understanding nature and nurture interdependently rather than in dichotomy. In terms of scientific debate, the dispute between Hogben and R.A. Fisher over gene-environment interaction was the first of many subsequent disputes over the extent to which the primacy of the gene can be understood independently of its developmental relationship with the environment (Tabery 2007). The debate on nature and nurture, the race and intelligence controversy, the heritability wars, concerns over the geneticisation of complex human traits, and arguments over the promises and perils of the human genome project all incorporate some element of disagreement over the primacy of the gene. Hogben's attack on that primacy by appeal to the interdependence of nature and nurture has been echoed in each successive dispute.   == The Hogben Archive == The Lancelot Thomas Hogben papers are held in Special Collections, University of Birmingham. Archive highlights include a draft of his autobiography (later edited and published by his son Adrian Hogben and his wife), correspondence, hand drawn diagrams for his books, and reflections on his life and works. (For a review of the Hogben Archive, see Tabery 2006).   == Works == A short life of Alfred Russel Wallace (1823-1913), p. 64 (London, Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1918) Exiles of the Snow, and Other Poems (1918) An Introduction to Recent Advances in Comparative Physiology (1924) with Frank R. Winton The Pigmentary Effector System. A review of the physiology of colour response (1924) Comparative Physiology (1926) Comparative Physiology of Internal Secretion (1927) The Nature of Living Matter (1930) Genetic Principles in Medical and Social Science (1931) Mathematics for the Million (1936), illustrated by Frank Horrabin The Retreat from Reason (1936) Conway Memorial Lecture 20 May 1936, chaired by Julian Huxley. Science for the Citizen: A Self-Educator Based on the Social Background of Scientific Discovery (1938), illustrated by Frank Horrabin Political Arithmetic: A Symposium of Population Studies (1938) editor Dangerous Thoughts (1939) Author in Transit (1940) Principles of Animal Biology (1940) Interglossa: A Draft of an Auxiliary for a Democratic world order, Being an Attempt to Apply Semantic Principles to Language Design (1943) The Loom of Language by Frederick Bodmer (1944) editor An Introduction to Mathematical Genetics (1946) History of the Homeland The Story of the British Background by Henry Hamilton (1947), No. 4 of Primers for the Age of Plenty, edited by Hogben The New Authoritarianism (1949) Conway Memorial Lecture 1949 From Cave Painting To Comic Strip: A Kaleidoscope of Human Communication (1949) Chance and Choice by Cardpack and Chessboard (1950) Man Must Measure: The Wonderful World of Mathematics (1955) Statistical theory. The relationship of probability, credibility and error. An examination of the contemporary crisis in statistical theory from a behaviorist viewpoint (1957) The Wonderful World Of Energy (1957) The Signs of Civilisation (1959) The Wonderful World of Communication (1959) Mathematics in the Making (1960) Essential World English (1963) with Jane Hogben and Maureen Cartwright Science in Authority: Essays (1963) The Mother Tongue (1965) Wales for the Welsh — A Tale of War and Peace with Notes for those who Teach or Preach (1967) Beginnings and Blunders or Before Science Began (1970) The Vocabulary Of Science (1970) with Maureen Cartwright Astronomer Priest and Ancient Mariner (1972) Maps, Mirrors and Mechanics (1973) Columbus, the Cannon Ball and the Common Pump (1974) How The World Was Explored, editor, with Marie Neurath and Joseph Albert Lauwerys Hogben, Anne; Hogben, Lancelot Thomas; Hogben, Adrian. Lancelot Hogben: scientific humanist: an unauthorised autobiography (1998)   == Further reading == Erlingsson, Steindór J., "The Early History of the SEB and the BJEB." Society For Experimental Biology Bulletin, March, pp. 10–11, 2006. The article can be accessed here Tabery, James, "Looking Back on Lancelot's Laughter", The Mendel Newsletter 15: 10–17, 2006. Werskey, Gary (1978). The Visible College. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 0-7139-0826-2.    == References ==   == External links == Lancelot Hogben biography at the Galton Institute Scientific Humanism in Time Magazine (11 March 1940) Max Perutz on Lancelot Hogben and his autobiography in Times Higher Education (31 July 1998) Details of research on Xenopus Royal Society certificate of election Royal Society photograph First part of Interglossa (there is a photograph of the author on p. 2.) Brief excerpts from Interglossa Full text and diagrams from Interglossa For a tribute to Mathematics for the Million from Fields Medallist David Mumford Interview with David Mumford Some of the correspondence between Hogben and R. A. Fisher is available online Correspondence of Sir R.A. Fisher: Calendar of Correspondence with Lancelot Hogben

Leland Wilkinson (born c. 1945) is a statistician and computer scientist at Tableau Software and Adjunct Professor of Computer Science at University of Illinois at Chicago. Dr. Wilkinson developed the SYSTAT statistical package in the early 1980s, sold it to SPSS in 1995, and worked at SPSS for 10 years recruiting and managing the visualization team. He left SPSS in 2008 and became Executive VP of SYSTAT Software Inc. in Chicago. He then served as the VP of Data Visualization at Skytree, Inc, and joined Tableau in October 2014. His research focuses on scientific visualization and statistical graphics.   == Family life == He is the son of Mr. and Mrs Kirk C. Wilkinson. He is brother of Alec Wilkinson, a writer for New Yorker. He was married to Reverend Ruth VanDemark, who died in 2012, and is the father of Amie Wilkinson, a professor of mathematics at University of Chicago, and Caroline Wilkinson, a writer. He married Marilyn Vogel, an attorney, in 2013.   == Education and academic work == Wilkinson received an A.B. from Harvard University in 1966, an S.T.B. from Harvard Divinity School in 1969, and a Ph.D. in Psychology from Yale University in 1975. In the 1970s and 1980s, he was a full-time faculty member at University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC). After serving 10 years as Adjunct Professor of Statistics at Northwestern University, he rejoined UIC as Adjunct Professor of Computer Science. Dr. Wilkinson is recognized as the primary author of the 1999 American Psychological Association's Guidelines for Statistical Methods in Psychology Journals.   == Professional career == Wilkinson wrote SYSTAT, a statistical software package, in the early 1980s. This program was noted for its comprehensive graphics, including the first software implementation of the heatmap display now widely used among biologists. After his company grew to 50 employees, he sold it to SPSS in 1995. At SPSS, he assembled a team of graphics programmers who developed the nViZn platform  that produces the visualizations in SPSS, Clementine, and other analytics products. The nViZn platform was modeled after Wilkinson's 1999 book on statistical graphics, The Grammar of Graphics. This book also served as the foundation for the R package ggplot2, the Python Bokeh package, the R package ggbio, and helped shape the Polaris project at Stanford. Wilkinson now serves as VP of Statistics at Tableau Software.   == Awards == Wilkinson is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and an elected member of the International Statistical Institute.   == External links == Leland Wilkinson's academic home page   == References ==

Leon Isserlis (1881–1966) was a Russian-born British statistician known for his work on the exact distribution of sample moments, including Isserlis’ theorem. He also brought to the attention of British statisticians the work of Russian mathematicians and statisticians, including Chebyshev and Chuprov. He was born in Boguslav near Kiev in June 1881 and was a direct descendant of the eminent rabbi Moses Isserles. He moved to Britain when he was ten years old with his widowed mother, an elder brother and two sisters. He attended the City of London School and won an open scholarship to study mathematics at Christ's College, Cambridge. Upon leaving Cambridge in 1904 he was appointed head of mathematics at the West Ham Municipal Technical Institute (one of the forerunners of the University of East London). He also registered as a research student at University College London, where he studied under Karl Pearson, and was awarded a D.Sc. in 1916. In March 1920 he moved to become statistician to the Chamber of Shipping and remained there until his retirement in 1942, when his position as statistician was taken by Maurice Kendall. In 1926 He wrote a review for the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society of R. A. Fisher's seminal book Statistical Methods for Research Workers. The review was rather critical, particularly of Fisher's lack of references to earlier work by others such as Chebyshev. He was a friend of Major Greenwood and worked with him on statistical issues for the Medical Research Council, although most of this work was anonymous and unpublished. He was also chairman of the Jewish Health Organization from 1931 to 1939. He served as secretary of the Royal Statistical Society in 1934–35 and again in 1944–45, and was awarded its Guy Medal in Silver in 1939.   == References == Irwin, J. O. (1966). "Leon Isserlis, M.A., D.Sc. (1881–1966)". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 129 (4): 612–616. JSTOR 2982284.  John Aldrich (August 2005 – October 2008). "Leon Isserlis and the JRSS review of the 1st edition of R. A. Fisher’s Statistical Methods for Research Workers". Retrieved 2010-06-22.  L. I. [Leon Isserlis]. "Review of Statistical Methods for Research Workers". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 89 (1): 45–146. JSTOR 2341488.

Leonard Henry Courtney, 1st Baron Courtney of Penwith PC (6 July 1832 – 11 May 1918) was a British politician, academic and man of letters. He was a member of William Ewart Gladstone's second administration from 1880 to 1883 and served as Chairman of Ways and Means (Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons) between 1886 and 1893.   == Background and education == Courtney was born at Penzance, Cornwall, the eldest son of John Sampson Courtney, a banker, and Sarah, daughter of John Mortimer. Two of his brothers, John Mortimer Courtney (1838–1920), and William Prideaux Courtney (1845–1913), also attained public distinction, the former in the government service in Canada (from 1869, retiring in 1906), rising to be deputy-minister of finance, and the latter in the British civil service (1865–1892), and as a prominent man of letters and bibliographer. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, where he was Second Wrangler and first Smith's prizeman, and elected a fellow of his college. He was called to the Bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1858. From 1872 to 1875 he was professor of political economy at University College, London.   == Political career ==  In December 1876, after a previous unsuccessful attempt, Courtney was elected to parliament for Liskeard as a Liberal. He continued to represent the borough, and Bodmin into which it was merged by the Reform Act of 1885, until 1900, when his attitude towards the South African War (he and his wife Catherine were one of the foremost of the so-called Pro-Boer Party) compelled his retirement. Until 1885, he was a devoted adherent of William Ewart Gladstone, particularly in finance and foreign affairs. In 1880 he was appointed Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department, in 1881 Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies and in 1882 Financial Secretary to the Treasury. He was known as a stubborn fighter for principle, and after finding that the government's Reform Bill in 1884 contained no recognition of the scheme for proportional representation, to which he was deeply committed, he resigned office. He refused to support Gladstone's Home Rule Bill in 1886 and was one of those who chiefly contributed to its rejection, whose reputation for unbending integrity and intellectual eminence gave solidity to the Liberal Unionist party. In 1886, Courtney was elected Chairman of Ways and Means (Deputy Speaker of the House of Commons) and was sworn of the Privy Council in 1889. His efficiency in this office seemed to mark him out for the speakership after the 1895 general election. A Liberal Unionist, however, could be elected only by Conservative votes, and he had made himself objectionable to a large section of the Conservative Party by his independent attitude on various questions, on which his liberalism outweighed his party loyalty. He, would in any case, have been incapacitated by an affection of the eyesight, which for a while threatened to withdraw him from public life altogether. After 1895, Courtney's divergences from the Unionist party on questions other than Irish politics became gradually more marked. He became known in the House of Commons principally for his candid criticism of the measures introduced by his nominal leaders, and he was rather to be ranked among the Opposition than as a Ministerialist. When the crisis with the Transvaal came in 1899, Courtney's views, which remained substantially what they were when he supported the settlement after Majuba in 1881, had plainly become incompatible with his position even as a nominal follower of Lord Salisbury and Joseph Chamberlain.  He led the work of the South African Conciliation Committee which brought the sufferings of the Boers to the attention of British people. He gradually reverted to formal membership of the Liberal party and, in January 1906, unsuccessfully contested Edinburgh West as a supporter of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman at the general election. Among the birthday honours of 1906 he was elevated to the peerage as Baron Courtney of Penwith, in the County of Cornwall. Courtney was a prominent supporter of the women's movement through the influence of his wife and sister-in-law. In his earlier years, he was a regular contributor to The Times, and he wrote numerous essays in the principal reviews on political and economic subjects. In 1901 he published a book on The Working Constitution of the United Kingdom. He was President of the Royal Statistical Society, 1897-9. He was a great friend of the artist Norman Garstin.   == Personal life ==  Courtney married Catherine Potter, daughter of Richard Potter and an elder sister of Beatrice Webb, in 1883. They had no children. In May 1918, aged 85, he was living at 15 Cheyne Walk at the time of his death. He left effects totalling £56,672 2s 6d. The peerage became extinct.   == References ==  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Courtney, Leonard Henry Courtney". Encyclopædia Britannica 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Leonard Courtney Archival material relating to Leonard Courtney, 1st Baron Courtney of Penwith listed at the UK National Archives Catalogue of the Courtney papers at the Archives Division of the London School of Economics. Portrait Leigh Rayment's Peerage Pages  Leigh Rayment's Historical List of MPs

Leslie Kish (born Laszlo Kiss, July 27, 1910 – October 7, 2000) was a Hungarian-American statistician and survey methodologist.   == Life and career == Kish emigrated with his family to the USA in 1925. His father soon died, and Kish helped support the family by working while continuing his studies in the evenings. In 1937 he volunteered for the International Brigade to fight against Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War. He saw action in a Hungarian battalion, was wounded, and returned to the United States in 1939. when 1939, he finished his baccalaureate in mathematics at the City College of New York. He worked at the U.S. Bureau of the Census from 1940 until 1941, when he moved to the Division of Program Surveys of the Department of Agriculture. For the remainder of World War II he served as a meteorologist in the U.S. Army Air Corps. After the war he returned to the Department of Agriculture, but in 1947 he joined the University of Michigan faculty. He moved to the University of Michigan "as a member of the newly created Survey Research Center, which later became the Institute for Social Research (ISR). While working full time, Kish received an M.A. in mathematical statistics in 1948 and a Ph.D. in sociology in 1952. He became a lecturer at the University of Michigan in 1951, an Associate Professor in 1956, a professor in 1960 and professor emeritus in 1981".   == Awards and honors == In 1997, the American Statistical Association gave Kish their Wilks Memorial Award. The award citation read: "For being a truly outstanding statistician, who has had a profound influence on sample survey practice throughout the world. His originality and ability to provide practical solutions to real-world statistical problems illuminate his extensive writings; a notable example is his classic text Survey Sampling, which is widely consulted and referenced by practitioners of statistics everywhere. His wisdom and guidance have benefited countless colleagues and students from America and abroad. For his remarkable work as an applied statistician in consistently using his knowledge and insight for the benefit of society. At the Survey Research center of the Institute of Social Research at the University of Michigan, he has been a leader in many areas — administration, intellectual creativity, research, training, and mentorship. His influential role in the World Fertility Survey further illustrates his impact as an international ambassador of statistics and a tireless advocate for scientific statistical methods. For being a humanitarian and true citizen of the world. His unmatched concern for those living in less fortunate circumstances and his use of the statistical profession to help is an inspiration for all statisticians".   == Selected publications == Kish, Leslie. Statistical Design for Research. New York: Wiley. 1987. ISBN 978-0471083597. Kish, Leslie (1965), Survey Sampling, New York: Wiley . ISBN 978-0471109495. Kish, L. (1949), "A Procedure for Objective Respondent Selection within the Household", Journal of the American Statistical Association 44: 380–387, doi:10.2307/2280236, JSTOR 2280236 . On the basis of this paper, Kish's name is associated with the Kish grid.   == See also == Kish grid   == References ==   == External links == A conversation with Leslie Kish "Leslie Kish Papers: 1952-2001," in Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan: "The papers date from 1952 to 2001 and are divided into six series: Biographical Information, University of Michigan Administrative and Course Materials, Papers and Presentations, Institute of Social Research, Organizations and Activities, and Personal and Professional Correspondence".

Lester Greenspan Telser (born January 3, 1931 in Chicago) is an American economist and Professor Emeritus in Economics at the University of Chicago.   == Education and career == He is a native of the Hyde Park neighborhood on the South Side of Chicago and a graduate of the Chicago Public Schools (Charles Kozminski elementary school and Hyde Park High School (now Hyde Park Academy High School)) and Roosevelt University, where he studied under Abba Lerner. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1956. He taught briefly at Iowa State University and was conscripted into the United States Army in which he served from 1956-1958. He has been a member of the University of Chicago faculty since 1958 (now emeritus). He was a visitor at the Cowles Foundation (which had formerly been at the University of Chicago) at Yale University in 1964-1965 and at the Center for Operations Research in Econometrics (CORE) at the Catholic University of Louvain (Université catholique de Louvain) in Louvain (Leuven, Belgium) in 1969-1970.   == Contributions == His works include research on the theory of the core, Federal Reserve policy, and integer programming. Unusually for the Chicago school of economics, he also wrote about game theory as early as 1972. A brief, personal history by Lester Telser of the University of Chicago Economics Department including the importance of the Cowles Foundation is available as part of a symposium on "Living the Legacy: Chicago Economics through the Years."   == Awards and honors == He has been a Fellow of the Econometric Society and of the American Statistical Association since 1968.   == Books == Functional Analysis in Mathematical Economics: Optimization Over Infinite Horizons (with Robert L. Graves, 1972). Competition, Collusion, and Game Theory (1972). Economic Theory and the Core (1978). A Theory of Efficient Cooperation and Competition (1987). Theories of Competition (1988). Joint Ventures of Labor and Capital (1997). Classic Futures: Lessons from the Past for the Electronic Age. The Core Theory in Economics: Problems and Solutions (2007).   == References ==

Lloyd Stowell Shapley (born June 2, 1923) is a distinguished American mathematician and Nobel Prize–winning economist. He is a Professor Emeritus at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), affiliated with departments of Mathematics and Economics. He has contributed to the fields of mathematical economics and especially game theory. Since the work of von Neumann and Morgenstern in 1940s, Shapley has been regarded by many experts as the very personification of game theory. With Alvin E. Roth, Shapley won the 2012 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences "for the theory of stable allocations and the practice of market design."   == Life and career == Lloyd Shapley was born on June 2, 1923, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, one of the sons of Martha (Betz) and the distinguished astronomer Harlow Shapley, both from Missouri. He attended Phillips Exeter Academy and was a student at Harvard when he was drafted in 1943. He served in the Army Air Corps in Chengdu, China and received the Bronze Star decoration for breaking the Soviet weather code. After the war, he returned to Harvard and graduated with an A.B. in mathematics in 1948. After working for one year at the RAND Corporation, he went to Princeton University where he received a Ph.D. in 1953. His thesis and post-doctoral work introduced the Shapley value and the core solution in game theory. After graduating, he remained at Princeton for a short time before going back to the RAND corporation from 1954 to 1981. Since 1981 he has been a professor at UCLA.   == Contribution == Along with the Shapley value, stochastic games, the Bondareva–Shapley theorem (which implies that convex games have non-empty cores), the Shapley–Shubik power index (for weighted or block voting power), the Gale–Shapley algorithm (for the stable marriage problem), the concept of a potential game (with Dov Monderer), the Aumann–Shapley pricing, the Harsanyi–Shapley solution, the Snow–Shapley theorem for matrix games, and the Shapley–Folkman lemma & theorem bear his name. Besides, his early work with R.N.Snow and Samuel Karlin on matrix games was so complete that little has been added since. He has been instrumental in the development of utility theory, and it was he who laid much of the groundwork for the solution of the problem of the existence of Von Neumann–Morgenstern stable sets. His work with M.Maschler and B.Peleg on the kernel and the nucleolus, and his work with Robert Aumann on non-atomic games and on long-term competition have all appeared in economic theory. In his 80s, Shapley continued publishing in the areas of specialization he created or advanced, such as multi-person utility (with Manel Baucells) and authority distribution (a generalization to the Shapley–Shubik power index and useful in ranking, planning and group decision-making).   == Awards and honors == Bronze Star, U.S. Army Air Corps, 1944 Procter Fellow, Princeton University, 1951–52 Fellow, Econometric Society, 1967 Fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 1974 Member, National Academy of Sciences, 1979 John von Neumann Theory Prize, 1981 Honorary Ph.D., Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 1986 Fellow, INFORMS (Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences), 2002 Distinguished Fellow, American Economic Association, 2007 Fellow, American Mathematical Society, 2012 Sveriges Riksbank Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, 2012 Golden Goose Award, 2013   == Selected publications == A Value for n-person Games [1953], In Contributions to the Theory of Games volume II, H.W. Kuhn and A.W. Tucker (eds.). Stochastic Games [1953], Proceedings of National Academy of Science Vol. 39, pp. 1095–1100. A Method for Evaluating the Distribution of Power in a Committee System [1954] (with Martin Shubik), American Political Science Review Vol. 48, pp. 787–792. College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage [1962] (with David Gale), The American Mathematical Monthly Vol. 69, pp. 9–15. Simple Games : An Outline of the Descriptive Theory [1962], Behavioral Science Vol. 7, pp. 59–66. On Balanced Sets and Cores [1967], Naval Research Logistics Quarterly Vol. 14, pp. 453–460. On Market Games [1969] (with Martin Shubik), Journal of Economic Theory Vol. 1, pp. 9–25. Utility Comparison and the Theory of Games [1969], La Decision, pp. 251–263. Cores of Convex Games [1971] International Journal of Game Theory Vol. 1, pp. 11–26. The Assignment Game I: The Core [1971] (with Martin Shubik), International Journal of Game Theory Vol. 1, pp. 111–130. Values of Non-Atomic Games [1974] (with Robert Aumann), Princeton University Press. Mathematical Properties of the Banzhaf Power Index [1979] (with Pradeep Dubey), Mathematics of Operations Research Vol. 4, pp. 99–132. Long-Term Competition – A Game-Theoretic Analysis [1994] (with Robert Aumann), In Essays in Game Theory: In Honor of Michael Maschler Nimrod Megiddo (ed.), Springer-Verlag. Potential Games [1996] (with Dov Monderer), Games and Economic Behavior Vol. 14, pp. 124–143. On Authority Distributions in Organizations [2003] (with X. Hu), Games and Economic Behavior Vol. 45, pp. 132–152, 153–170. Multiperson Utility [2008] (with Manel Baucells). Games and Economic Behavior Vol. 62, pp. 329–347.   == Trivia == In 1950, Shapley invented the board game So Long Sucker, along with Mel Hausner, John Forbes Nash, and Martin Shubik.   == References ==   == External links == Home Page Lloyd Shapley at the Mathematics Genealogy Project The Shapley Value Citation of von Neumann Theory Prize on L.S.Shapley's work: "Lloyd Shapley has dominated game theory for the thirty-seven years since von Neumann and Morgenstern published their path-breaking book, The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior." Albert Tucker's comment on L.S.Shapley's work. In 1995, Albert W. Tucker mentioned in his passing that Shapley was second only to Von Neumann as the most important researcher in theory of games so far. Robert Aumann's Nobel lecture, also see here.

Louis Chen Hsiao Yun is Emeritus Professor at the National University of Singapore. Chen earned his BSc (Honours) from University of Singapore in 1964 and completed his MSc as well as PhD at Stanford University in 1969 and 1971 respectively. In 1972, he joined the Mathematics Department of the then University of Singapore as a Lecturer. He was promoted to Senior Lecturer in 1977, Associate Professor in 1981 and Professor in 1989.   == Academic career == Chen held several administrative appointments at the National University of Singapore (NUS). At NUS's Faculty of Science, he was Head of the Department of Mathematics from July 1996 to June 2000 and Head of the Department of Statistics and Applied Probability from July 2002 to June 2004. He was also Director of NUS's Institute for Mathematical Sciences from July 2000 to December 2012. For his achievements in his field of study, he was appointed Tan Chin Tuan Centennial Professor from July 2006 to December 2012 and Distinguished Professor from January 2013 to June 2015.   == Research, honours and awards == Chen's research interests include the Stein-Chen method of Poisson approximation which deals with the probability of rare events. This method and technique is widely applied in many areas ranging from molecular biology to computer science. He was the first Asian to be elected President of the Bernoulli Society for Mathematical Statistics and Probability from August 1997 to July 1999, and was the first East Asian to be elected President of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics from August 2004 to July 2005. He was also elected Vice-President of the International Statistical Institute from August 2009 to July 2011. Among his numerous local and international awards and honours are his election as Fellow of TWAS, The World Academy of Sciences in 2000 and Fellow of the Singapore National Academy of Science in 2011; a Public Administration Medal (Silver) in 2002; and the conferment by the French Government of the title of Chevalier dans l'Ordre des Palmes Académiques in 2005 for his service to education.   == References == Leong, Y. K.; Lee, S. L.; Sun, Y. (2005). "Louis Hsiao-Yun Chen: Epitome of Rare Events". COSMOS 01: 1. doi:10.1142/S0219607705000127.  "Distinguished Science Alumni Awards 2004: CHEN Hsiao Yun Louis". National University of Singapore. Retrieved 28 March 2013.    == External links == Louis H. Y. CHEN, Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore  Louis Chen Hsiao Yun at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Louis (Eliyahu) Guttman (February 10, 1916 – October 25, 1987; Hebrew: לואיס (אליהו) גוטמן‎) was an Israeli mathematician and Professor of Social and Psychological Assessment at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He founded and was the scientific director of the Israel Institute of Applied Social Research, later renamed the Guttman Institute before finally becoming the Guttman Center (part of the Israel Democracy Institute).   == Biography == Guttman was born in New York City on February 10, 1916 and grew up in the Jewish community of Minneapolis, Minnesota. Guttman received both his BA in 1936 and MA in 1939 at the University of Minnesota, and his PhD in Social and Psychological Measurement in 1942. From 1941 to 1947 Guttman was professor of sociology at Cornell University, while as part of the World War II effort, he also served as an Expert Consultant to the US Army’s Research Branch. In 1947 Guttman and his wife Ruth emigrated to Palestine. He was member of the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, and foreign Honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and President of the Psychometric Society. In 1956 he was elected Stanford University: Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. In 1962 he received the Rothschild Prize and in 1971 Science included Guttman in a list of the 62 most important contributors to scientific research in the social sciences since the beginning of the 20th century. Other awards were: 1974 Regents of the University of Minnesota - Outstanding Achievement Award 1978 Israel Prize in the social sciences 1984 Educational Testing Service Measurement Award from Princeton University. Guttman died on October 25, 1987, while on sabbatical in Minneapolis, Minnesota, in the United States.   == Work == Guttman research interests were in the fields of scale analysis, facet theory. His work left a legacy of major developments in the theory and practice of scale and factor analysis, multidimensional scaling and facet theory. His mathematical and philosophical treatments of Factor analysis are among the important parts of his scientific legacy. His earlier work in scaling analysis produced what has become to be known as the Guttman scale. Notably, Guttman first proved several fundamental theorems in matrix algebra, as discussed in papers by Hubert, Meulman and Heiser (2000) and Takane and Yanai (2005). Several of Guttman’s contributions have been incorporated into computer packages, among them Smallest Space Analysis (SSA) and Partial Order Scalogram Analysis (POSAC). Guttman was described as a brilliant innovator who "saw theory in method and method in theory", was "informed by high sophistication in mathematics, statistics, sociology and psychology", and one who "made a major contribution to democratic policy-making in the new state" and “was concerned with the 'well-being' of individuals, groups and society"    == Publications == Guttman published in numerous journals and books, including over 300 pages in Psychometrika. Many of his papers are still quoted in the scientific literature as being relevant and important to current statistical and mathematical advances. His innovative methodological work on attitudes was published in the 4th volume of Studies in Social Psychology in World War II (more popularly called The American Soldier series, after the title of the first two volumes).   == References ==   == External links == Guttman Center

Louis Israel Dublin (November 1, 1882 – March 7, 1969) was a Jewish American statistician. As vice president and statistician of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, he promoted progressive and socially useful insurance underwriting policies. As a scholar, Dublin was an important figure in the establishment of demography as a social-scientific discipline in the United States during the 1920s and 1930s. Dublin was interested in eugenics but as a Jew of recent immigrant extraction criticized eugenicists for equating biological superiority with Nordic origins. Dublin was born in Kovno (Kaunas is the Lithuanian name for Kovno), Lithuania. He came to the U.S. in 1886 with his parents Max and Sarah (Rosensweig). Dublin obtained his bachelor's in 1901 at City College of New York. He earned his Ph.D. at Columbia University in 1904. He married Augusta Salik on April 5, 1908. Dublin taught at Yale as a lecturer in vital statistics, and in 1924 served as president of the American Statistical Association. He died in Winter Park, Orange County, Florida at the age of 86   == Body Mass Index == While serving as a vice president at Met Life Insurance and as a statistician Dublin developed a height for weight table based on longevity of life insurance holders in the early 1940s. These tables would later develop into the Body Mass Index developed by University of Minnesota's pioneering cholesterol and heart disease physiology researcher Ancel Keys in 1972. Keys intended the BMI to be used only for the study of groups and not to be applied to individuals. The index is statistically very limited in usefulness as covered a very limited demographic of people who were able to afford life insurance and who were mostly white.   == Major works == Louis Israel Dublin, Alfred J. Lotka: The Money Value of a Man (Public Health in America Series). New York : Arno Press, 1977 (Repr. of the 1930 ed. by the Ronald Press Co., New York). ISBN 978-0-405-09814-7 with Lee K. Frankel and Miles M. Dawson, Workingmen's Insurance in Europe, 1910 with Lee K. Frankel, Principles of Life Insurance, 1911 Mortality Statistics of Insured Wage Earners and Their Families, 1919 Louis I. Dublin, To Be or Not to Be: a Study of Suicide, 1933. Harrison Smith and Robert Hass, New York. Louis I. Dublin, A Family of Thirty Million: The Story of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 1943. Louis I. Dublin,The Facts of Life: From Birth to Death, New York: The Macmillan Company, 1951. A 40 Year Campaign Against Tuberculosis, 1952 Louis I. Dublin, Suicide: a Sociological and Statistical Study,1963. Ronald Press Company, New York.   == Other works == Louis I. Dublin, After Eighty Years (autobiography) University of Florida Press, Gainesville 1966, pp. 243 Louis I. Dublin, "Home-Making and Careers," Atlantic Monthly, 138: 335-43, September 1926. Collected papers at the Archives, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland    == References ==   === Inline ===   === General === "Louis I. Dublin 1882-1969". Statistical bulletin (Metropolitan Life Insurance Company) (UNITED STATES) 50: 2. March 1969. ISSN 0026-1513. PMID 4897172.  Lilienfeld, David E (June 2009). "Louis I. Dublin and the development of the observational study: the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company natural history (cohort) studies of typhoid fever and scarlet fever". Ann Epidemiol (United States) 19 (6): 410–5. doi:10.1016/j.annepidem.2009.01.014. PMID 19460671.  Falk, I S (July 1969). "Louis I. Dublin. November 1, 1882-March 7, 1969". American journal of public health and the nation's health (UNITED STATES) 59 (7): 1083–5. doi:10.2105/ajph.59.7.1083. ISSN 0002-9572. PMC 1226577. PMID 4893562.  Marquis, Albert Nelson, ed. Who’s Who in America, a Biographical Dictionary of Notable Living Men and Women of the United States, 1926–1927, vol. 14, Chicago: The A.N. Marquis Company, 1926, 624.   == External links == American Statistical Association's biography (PDF file) Finding Aid to the Louis I. Dublin Papers Library of Congress listing of Louis I. Dublin publications

Luc Anselin (born December 1, 1953) is one of the principal developers of the field of spatial econometrics.   == Life and contributions == Luc Anselin is currently Regents' Professor, Walter Isard Chair and Director of the School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning (ASU) where he attracted some of the leading spatial econometrics scholars. He also founded and directs the GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis and Computation at ASU to develop, implement, apply, and disseminate spatial analysis methods. He held prior appointments at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, University of Texas at Dallas, West Virginia University, the University of California, Santa Barbara and the Ohio State University. His (joint) appointments included a range of disciplines, including Geography, Urban and Regional Planning, Economics, Agricultural and Consumer Economics, Political Economy and Political Science. In recent years, several national and international awards recognized Luc Anselin's lifetime achievements, including his development of new spatial methodologies (e.g., local indicators of statistical association) and his widely adopted spatial software tools. The Regional Science Association International elected him as Fellow in 2004, and awarded him their Walter Isard Prize in 2005 and their William Alonso Memorial Prize in 2006. In 2008, Luc Anselin was awarded one of the nation's highest academic honors by being elected to the National Academy of Sciences as well as to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2012, Luc Anselin was elected as a University Consortium for Geographic Information Science (UCGIS) Fellow. 2008 marked the 20th anniversary of the book "Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models" that Luc Anselin is best known for and that has been cited over 6,000 times. One of the principal academic achievements of Dr. Anselin has been his contributions to moving the discipline of spatial econometrics from the margins in 1988 to current acceptance in mainstream econometrics, thereby advancing the econometric foundations of Geographic Information Science. His publications include several hundred articles and seminal edited books (including New Directions in Spatial Econometrics in 1995 and Advances in Spatial Econometrics in 2004) in the fields of Quantitative Geography, Regional Science, GIScience, Econometrics, Economics and Computer Science. His development of spatial software further facilitated the establishment of spatial econometrics. Prominent software tools include SpaceStat (spatial econometrics), GeoDa (exploratory spatial data analysis and spatial regression modeling), and collaborative efforts such as PySAL, an open source library of spatial analytic functions based on the Python programming language. The increased popularity of spatial analysis methods is illustrated by GeoDa's worldwide adoption by over 56,000 users within six years of its creation. A native of Belgium, Luc Anselin graduated magna cum laude with a B.S. in economics in 1975 and summa cum laude with an M.S. in Statistics, Econometrics and Operations in 1976, both from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Around this time, the origins of spatial econometrics began to take shape in economics departments in the Netherlands and geography/regional science departments in the UK. In 1977, he moved from Belgium to the U.S. to enroll in Cornell University's interdisciplinary doctoral program in regional science. This provided the opportunity to work with Walter Isard, one of the founders of regional science in the US, and William Greene, author of the standard textbook in econometrics. He earned his doctorate in regional science in 1980.   == Selected works ==   === Books === L. Anselin, R. Florax and S. Rey (eds.), Advances in Spatial Econometrics. Methodology, Tools and Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2004. L. Anselin and S. Rey (eds.), New Tools for Spatial Data Analysis: Proceedings of a Workshop. Center for Spatially Integrated Social Science, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2002 (CDROM). S. Messner, L. Anselin, D. Hawkins, G. Deane, S. Tolnay, R. Baller, An Atlas of the Spatial Patterning of County-Level Homicide, 1960-1990. Pittsburgh: NCOVR, 2000. L. Anselin and R. Florax (eds.), New Directions in Spatial Econometrics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,1995. L. Anselin and M. Madden (eds.), New Directions in Regional Analysis: Integrated and Multiregional Approaches. London: Belhaven Press, 1990 (paperback edition, 1993). L. Anselin, Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.   === Articles and book chapters === L. Anselin, J. Le Gallo and H. Jayet. “Spatial Panel Econometrics,” In L. Matyas and P. Sevestre (Eds.), The Econometrics of Panel Data, Fundamentals and Recent Developments in Theory and Practice (3rd Edition). Dordrecht, Kluwer (2008). L. Anselin, S. Sridharan and S. Gholston. “Using Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis to Leverage Social Indicator Databases: The Discovery of Interesting Patterns,” Social Indicators Research (2007). L. Anselin and J. Le Gallo. “Interpolation of Air Quality Measures in Hedonic House Price Models: Spatial Aspects,” Spatial Economic Analysis 1(1), 2006: 31-52. L. Anselin. “Spatial Econometrics,” In T.C. Mills and K. Patterson (Eds.), Palgrave Handbook of Econometrics: Volume 1, Econometric Theory. Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006: 901-969. L Anselin, I. Syabri and Y. Kho. “GeoDa: An Introduction to Spatial Data Analysis,” Geographical Analysis 38 (1), 2006: 5-22. S. Rey and L. Anselin. “Recent Advances in Software for Spatial Analysis in the Social Sciences,” Geographical Analysis 38 (1), 2006: 1-4. L. Anselin. “How (not) to Lie with Spatial Statistics,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 30 (2), 2006: S3-S6. L. Mobley, E. Root, L. Anselin, N. Lozano, J. Koschinsky. “Spatial Analysis of Elderly Access to Primary Care Services,” International Journal of Health Geographics 5 (19), 2006. L. Anselin. “Spatial Dependence,” In B. Warff (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Human Geography. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 2006: 451-452. L. Anselin. “Spatial Heterogeneity,” In B. Warff (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Human Geography. Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage Publications, 2006: 452-453. S. Messner, G. Deane, L. Anselin and B. Pearson-Nelson. “Locating the Vanguard in Rising and Falling Homicide Rates among U.S. Cities,” Criminology 43 (3), 2005: 661-696. L. Anselin. “Spatial Statistical Modeling in a GIS Environment,” In D. Maguire, M. Goodchild and M. Batty (Eds.), GIS, Spatial Analysis and Modeling. Redlands, CA, ESRI Press, 2005: 93-111. A. Varga, L. Anselin and Z. Acs. “Regional Innovation in the U.S. over Space and Time,” In G. Maier and S. Sedlacek (Eds.), Spillovers and Innovation: Space, Environment and the Economy. Vienna, Springer-Verlag, 2005: 93-104.   == References ==   == External links == Luc Anselin Faculty Profile School of Geographical Sciences and Urban Planning Arizona State University News National Academy of Sciences Elects Luc Anselin Anselin Named First ASU Walter Isard Chair Luc Anselin Receives Three RSA Awards GeoDa Article Most Cited and Read in Geographical Analysis

Luigi Bodio (born 12 October 1840 in Milan–2 November 1920 in Rome) was an Italian economist and statistician, among the founders of Italian Statistics. He was the first General Secretary of the International Statistical Institute (ISI) and among the first Presidents of ISI.   == Biography == Bodio graduated in 1861 at University of Pisa as a doctor of law, and afterward traveled abroad with government scholarship to complete his postgraduate education in economics and statistics. In 1864 he became Professor in National Economics in Livorno, and in 1867 also in Milan. From 1868 to 1872 Bodio was Professor in Economics and Economic Geography at University of Venice. In 1872, after the death of Pietro Maestri, he was President of the Italian Royal Statistical Office (founded by Maestri) in Rome. Since 1876 Bodio was editor, together with Cesare Correnti and Paolo Boselli, of the "Archivio di statistica". In the same year he conducted the first official surveys on Italian migration. In 1882 Bodio became a member of the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. In 1885 was a founding member and General Secretary of the International Statistical Institute up to 1905. In 1909 he was elected President of the International Statistical Institute and remained in charge until his death in 1920. In 1900 Bodio was elected National Senator, and he was General Commissioner of Migration (1901–04), an Inter-ministerial Body created to address and protect the Italian migration abroad. In 1996, the International Cooperation Centre for Statistics (ICstat) was dedicated to Luigi Bodio in recognition of his dedication and promotion of the statistical cooperation.   == Writings == "Statistique internationale des caisses d'épargne", 1876 "Saggio sul commercio esterno terrestre e marittimo del regno d'Italia", 1865 "Dei documenti statistici del regno d'Italia", 1867 "Dei rapporti della statistica coll' economia politica e colle altre scienze affini", 1869 "Del patrimonio delle entrate e delle spese della pubblica beneficenza in Italia", 1889   == References ==   == External links == Works by or about Luigi Bodio at Internet Archive http://www.icstat.org - ICstat - International Cooperation Center for Statistics "Luigi Bodio" http://isi.cbs.nl/ - International Statistical Institute

Maurice Stevenson Bartlett FRS (18 June 1910 – 8 January 2002) was an English statistician who made particular contributions to the analysis of data with spatial and temporal patterns. He is also known for his work in the theory of statistical inference and in multivariate analysis.   == Biography == Born in London, Bartlett was raised in a poor family but won a scholarship to Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith, where he was inspired to the study of statistics by a chapter in Hall and Knight's Algebra. In 1929, he won a scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge where he read mathematics, graduating with the rank of wrangler. He attended lectures on statistics by John Wishart, on relativity by Arthur Eddington and on quantum mechanics by Paul Dirac. In one of his lectures Wishart described his geometric derivation of the Wishart distribution. Overnight Bartlett worked out a proof using characteristic functions. Bartlett was Wishart's first post-graduate student and they wrote two papers together. This was the beginning of Bartlett's involvement with multivariate analysis. During his Queens years, he rowed for the college. In 1933, Bartlett was recruited by Egon Pearson to the new statistics department at University College, London. Pearson was already working with Jerzy Neyman. Also in the college were Ronald A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane. Bartlett was stimulated by all of them, most of all by the work of Fisher, criticising some of it (for example, fiducial inference) while developing other parts (for example conditional inference). Relations between the two men fluctuated; sometimes Bartlett was in Fisher's good books, but often not. In 1934, Bartlett became statistician at the ICI agricultural research station at Jealott's Hill. Not only did he deal with practical problems but he worked on statistical theory, as well as on problems in genetics but he became interested in the characterisation of intelligence. He remembered Jealott's Hill as the best working environment of his career. Bartlett left ICI for the University of Cambridge in 1938 but at the outset of World War II was mobilised into the Ministry of Supply, conducting rocket research alongside Frank Anscombe, David Kendall and Pat Moran. After the war Bartlett's renewed Cambridge work focused on time-series analysis and stochastic process. With Jo Moyal he planned a large book on probability, but the collaboration did not work out and Bartlett went ahead and published his own book on stochastic processes. He made a number of visits to the USA. In 1947 he became professor of mathematical statistics at the University of Manchester where he not only developed his interests in epidemiology but also served as an able and active administrator. In 1960, he took up the chair of statistics at University College, London before serving the last eight years of his academic life as professor of biomathematics at the University of Oxford. He retired in 1975. After his retirement Bartlett remained active in statistics, visiting the Institute of Advanced Studies at the Australian National University several times. He had married Sheila, daughter of C. E. Chapman, in 1957, the couple parenting a daughter. Bartlett died in Exmouth, Devon. Bartlett is known for Bartlett's method for estimating power spectra and Bartlett's test for homoscedasticity.   == Honours == Rayleigh Prize, (1933); Guy Medals in Silver (1952) and Gold (1969) of the Royal Statistical Society; President of the Manchester Statistical Society, (1959–1960); Fellow of the Royal Society, (1961); President of the Royal Statistical Society (1966) Honorary Member of the International Statistical Institute, (1980); Foreign Associate of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, (1993); D.Sc.s from the University of Chicago (1966) and the University of Hull (1976).   == References ==   == Works ==   === Some papers === (1933) with John Wishart, The distribution of second order moment statistics in a normal system. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 28, 455–459. (1933) On the theory of statistical regression. Proc. Royal Soc. Edinburgh, 53, 260–283. (1933) Probability and chance in the theory of statistics. Proc. Royal Soc. London Ser. A 141 518–534. (1934) The vector representation of a sample. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc., 30, 327–340. (1936) Statistical information and properties of sufficiency. Proc. Royal Soc. London Ser., A 154, 124–137. (1937) Properties of sufficiency and statistical tests. Proc. Royal Soc. London Ser. A, 160, 268–282. (reprinted with an introduction by D. A. S. Fraser S. Kotz & N. L. Johnson (eds) Breakthroughs in Statistics, volume 1. Springer, New York. 1992.) (1938) Methods of estimating mental factors. Nature, 141, 609–610. (1939) A note on tests of significance in multivariate analysis, in Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (1941) The statistical significance of canonical correlation. Biometrika. (1947) The use of transformations. Biometrics. (1948) Internal and external factor analysis. British Journal of Psychiatry. (1949) Fitting a straight line when both variables are subjects to error. Biometrics. (1949) The statistical significance of "dispersed hits" in card-guessing experiments. Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, 48, 336–338. (1950) Tests of significance in multivariate analysis. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology. (1950) Tests of significance in factor analysis. British Journal of Psychology, 3, 77–85.   === Books === An Introduction to Stochastic Processes, (1955) ISBN 0-521-04116-3 Stochastic Population Models in Ecology and Epidemiology, (1960) ISBN 0-416-52330-7 Essays in Probability and Statistics, (1962) ISBN 0-416-64880-0 Probability, Statistics and Time, (1975) ISBN 0-412-14150-7 The Statistical Analysis of Spatial Pattern, (1976) ISBN 0-412-14290-2 Selected Papers of M. S. Bartlett 3 vols. edited by R.G. Stanton, E.D. Johnson, D.S. Meek. Winnipeg : Charles Babbage Research Centre (1989).   == Autobiography == Ingram Olkin (1989) A Conversation with Maurice Bartlett, Statistical Science, 4, 151–163. "Chance and Change" in J. Gani (ed) (1982) The Making of Statisticians, New York: Springer-Verlag. Several statisticians, including Bartlett, give their life stories.   == External links == ISI Newsletter Note by D. R. Cox IMS Bulletin Obituary by Besag & Clifford p. 14 at the Wayback Machine (archived May 17, 2005) Royal Society citation For Bartlett's correspondence with Fisher see Statistical Inference and Analysis, Selected Correspondence of R.A. Fisher Edited by J.H. Bennett Correspondence of Sir R.A. Fisher: Calendar of Correspondence with M.S. Bartlett There are photographs at Maurice Stevenson Bartlett on the Portraits of Statisticians page. Royal Society

Major Greenwood FRS (9 August 1880 – 5 October 1949) was an English epidemiologist and statistician. Major Greenwood junior was born in Shoreditch in London's East End, the only child of a doctor in general practice there. ("Major" was his forename, not a military rank.) He was educated on the classical side at Merchant Taylors' School and went on to study medicine at University College London and the London Hospital. On qualifying in 1904 he worked for a time as assistant to his father but after a few months he gave up clinical practice for good. He went to work as a demonstrator for the physiologist Leonard Hill (father of the future statistician Austin Bradford Hill) at the London Hospital Medical College. Leonard Hill recalled, "By recognising the ability of a student with nothing behind him to show his worth and by appointing him my assistant I may claim to have started Greenwood on his career." While Greenwood made a good start in physiological research he was already drawn to statistics; his first paper in Biometrika appeared in 1904. After a period of study with Karl Pearson he was appointed statistician to the Lister Institute in 1910. There he worked on a wide range of problems, including a study of the effectiveness of inoculation with the statistician Udny Yule. In the First World War Greenwood first served in the Royal Army Medical Corps but then was put in charge of a medical research unit at the Ministry of Munitions. There he investigated the health problems associated with factory work, one result of which was an influential study of accidents which he produced with Yule. In 1919 Greenwood joined the newly created Ministry of Health with responsibility for medical statistics. In 1928 he became the first professor of Epidemiology and Vital Statistics at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine where he stayed until he retired in 1945. He established a group of researchers, of whom the most important was Austin Bradford Hill. Greenwood played the same role in A. B. Hill’s career as Hill’s father had played in his. The Royal Society awarded the Buchanan Medal to Greenwood in 1927, and elected him a Fellow in 1928. The election certificate stated  Engaged in medical research. Has applied the statistical method to the elucidation of many problems of physiology, pathology, hygiene and epidemiology. Is the author, or joint author, of more than sixty papers dealing with these applications, including important contributions to the experimental study of epidemiology (Journ Hyg, 24, 1925, Greenwood and Topley; ibid, 25, 1926, Greenwood, Newbold, Topley and Wilson). Has done much to encourage and develop the use of modern statistical methods by medical laboratory investigators, and, as Chairman of the Medical Research Council's Statistical Committee, to secure the adequate planning and execution of field investigations.  He was elected President of the Royal Statistical Society in 1934 and awarded its Guy Medal in Gold in 1945. Greenwood produced a large body of research, was the first holder of important positions in modern medical statistics and wrote extensively on the history of his subject, but as Austin Bradford Hill wrote in his obituary, "in the future, it may well indeed seem that one of his greatest contributions, if not the greatest, lay merely in his outlook, in his statistical approach to medicine, then a new approach and one long regarded with suspicion. And he fought this fight continuously and honestly—for logic for accuracy, for ‘little sums.’" His name is attached to the Greenwood formula for the variance or standard error (SE) of the Kaplan–Meier estimator of survival. A statistical method invented by Major Greenwood in a statistical study of infectious diseases is still used in present day research. The Greenwood statistic was used to discover that there is some kind of order in the placement of genes on the chromosomes of living things and this inspired a new look at epigenetics, which is now considered to be as important as genetics in how living organisms develop and evolve. Greenwood lived at Loughton, where among his neighbours were Sir Frank Baines, Millais Culpin, and Leonard Erskine Hill.   == Publications == Greenwood, M. (1904). "A First Study of the Weight, Variability, and Correlation of the Human Viscera, with Special Reference to the Healthy and Diseased Heart". Biometrika 3: 63. doi:10.1093/biomet/3.1.63.  Greenwood, M; Yule, G. U. (1915). "The Statistics of Anti-typhoid and Anti-cholera Inoculations, and the Interpretation of such Statistics in general". Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine 8 (Sect Epidemiol State Med): 113–94. PMC 2004181. PMID 19978918.  Greenwood, Major and Udny Yule, G. (1920). "An Inquiry into the Nature of Frequency Distributions Representative of Multiple Happenings with Particular Reference to the Occurrence of Multiple Attacks of Disease or of Repeated Accidents". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 83: 255–279. JSTOR 2341080.  Edgar L. Collis and Major Greenwood The health of the industrial worker. 1921 Major Greenwood The natural duration of cancer. London, England: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, Reports on Public Health and Medical Subjects, No. 33. 1926 Major Greenwood Epidemics and crowd-diseases: an introduction to the study of epidemiology. 1935 Major Greenwood Medical statistics from Graunt to Farr: the Fitzpatrick lectures for the years 1941 and 1943. 1948   == References ==   == Further reading == Royal Society Certificate of Election and Candidature A. B. H.; William Butler (1949) "Obituary: Major Greenwood", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), 112, 487–489. McKinlay, P. L. (1951). "Major Greenwood, 1880-1949". Biometrika 38 (1–2): 1–3. doi:10.1093/biomet/38.1-2.1. PMID 14848107.  Anne Hardy; Eileen Magnello (2002) "Statistical methods in epidemiology: Karl Pearson, Ronald Ross, Major Greenwood and Austin Bradford Hill", 1900–1945 Soz Praventiv Med; 47(2): 80–89. Farewell, V.; Johnson, T.; Armitage, P. (2006). "'A memorandum on the Present Position and Prospects of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology' by Major Greenwood". Statistics in Medicine 25 (13): 2161–77. doi:10.1002/sim.2608. PMID 16755605.  J. Rosser Matthews (1995) Quantification and the Quest for Medical Certainty, Princeton, Princeton University Press. "Greenwood, Major". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/51797.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)

Mark Kac (/kɑːts/ KAHTS; Polish: Marek Kac; 3 August 1914 – 26 October 1984) was a Polish American mathematician. He was born to a Polish-Jewish family; their town, Kremenets (Polish: "Krzemieniec"), changed hands from the Russian Empire to Poland when Kac was a child. His main interest was probability theory. His question, "Can one hear the shape of a drum?" set off research into spectral theory, with the idea of understanding the extent to which the spectrum allows one to read back the geometry. (In the end, the answer was "no", in general.) Kac completed his Ph.D. in mathematics at the Polish University of Lwów in 1937 under the direction of Hugo Steinhaus. While there, he was a member of the Lwów School of Mathematics. After receiving his degree he began to look for a position abroad, and in 1938 was granted a scholarship from the Parnas Foundation which enabled him to go work in the United States. He arrived in New York City in November, 1938. With the onset of World War II, Kac was able to stay in America, while his parents and brother who remained in Western Ukraine were murdered by the Germans in the mass executions of the Jews of Krzemieniec (August 1942). From 1939 until 1961 he was at Cornell University, first as an instructor, then from 1943 as assistant professor and from 1947 as full professor. While there, he became a naturalized US citizen in 1943. In the academic year 1951–1952 Kac was on sabbatical at the Institute for Advanced Study. In 1952 Kac, with Theodore H. Berlin, introduced the spherical model of a ferromagnet (a variant of the Ising model) and, with J. C. Ward, found an exact solution of the Ising model using a combinatorial method. In 1961 he left Cornell and went to Rockefeller University in New York City. In the early 1960s he worked with George Uhlenbeck and P. C. Hemmer on the mathematics of a van der Waals gas. After twenty years at Rockefeller University, he moved to the University of Southern California where he spent the rest of his career.   == Work == In his 1966 article with the title "Can one hear the shape of the drum" Kac asked the question whether two resonators ("drums") of different geometrical shapes can have exactly the same set of frequencies ("sound tones"). The answer was positive, meaning that the eigenfrequency set does not uniquely characterize the shape of a resonator.   == Reminiscences == His definition of a profound truth. "A truth is a statement whose negation is false. A profound truth is a truth whose negation is also a profound truth." (Also attributed to Niels Bohr) He preferred to work on results that were robust, meaning that they were true under many different assumptions and not the accidental consequence of a set of axioms. Often Kac's "proofs" consisted of a series of worked examples that illustrated the important cases. When Kac and Richard Feynman were both on the Cornell faculty he went to a lecture of Feynman's and saw that the two of them were working on the same thing from different directions. The Feynman-Kac formula resulted, which proves rigorously the real case of Feynman's path integrals. The complex case, which occurs when a particle's spin is included, is still unproven. Kac had learned Wiener processes by reading Norbert Wiener's original papers, which were "the most difficult papers I have ever read." Brownian motion is a Wiener process. Feynman's path integrals are another example. Kac's distinction between an "ordinary genius" like Hans Bethe and a "magician" like Richard Feynman has been widely quoted. (Bethe was also at Cornell University.) Kac became interested in the occurrence of statistical independence without randomness. As an example of this, he gave a lecture on the average number of factors that a random integer has. This wasn't really random in the strictest sense of the word, because it refers to the average number of prime divisors of the integers up to N as N goes to infinity, which is predetermined. He could see that the answer was c log log N, if you assumed that the number of prime divisors of two numbers x and y were independent, but he was unable to provide a complete proof of independence. Paul Erdős was in the audience and soon finished the proof using Sieve theory, and the result became known as the Erdős–Kac theorem. They continued working together and more or less created the subject of Probabilistic number theory. Kac sent Erdős a list of his publications, and one of his papers contained the word Capacitor in the title. Erdős wrote back to him "I pray for your soul." Kac got a typed manuscript back from his secretary and it contained the following sentence "This result can be verified by connecting 300 volts across a negro gentleman." He looked at his handwritten draft to see what could possibly have produced this, and it said "This result can be verified by connecting 300 volts across a rigger," which was a Breadboard.   == Awards and honors == 1950 — Chauvenet Prize for 1947 expository article 1959 — member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 1965 — member of the National Academy of Sciences 1968 — Chauvenet Prize (and 1967 Lester R. Ford Award) for 1966 expository article 1971 — Solvay Lecturer at Brussels 1980 — Fermi Lecturer at the Scuola Normale, Pisa   == Books == Mark Kac and Stanislaw Ulam: Mathematics and Logic: Retrospect and Prospects, Praeger, New York (1968) Dover paperback reprint. Mark Kac, Statistical Independence in Probability, Analysis and Number Theory, Carus Mathematical Monographs, Mathematical Association of America, 1959. Mark Kac, Probability and related topics in the physical sciences. 1959 (with contributions by Uhlenbeck on the Boltzmann equation, Hibbs on quantum mechanics, and van der Pol on finite difference analogues of the wave and potential equations, Boulder Seminar 1957). Mark Kac, Enigmas of Chance: An Autobiography, Harper and Row, New York, 1985. Sloan Foundation Series. Published posthumously with a memoriam note by Gian-Carlo Rota.   == See also == Feynman–Kac formula Erdős–Kac theorem   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Mark Kac", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Mark Kac at the Mathematics Genealogy Project National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

Sir Maurice George Kendall, FBA (6 September 1907 – 29 March 1983) was a British statistician, widely known for his contribution to statistics. The Kendall tau rank correlation is named after him.   == Education and early life == Maurice Kendall was born in Kettering, Northamptonshire as the only child of John Roughton Kendall and Georgina Brewer. As a young child he survived a case of cerebral meningitis, which was frequently fatal at that time. After growing up in Derby, England, he studied mathematics at St John's College, Cambridge, where he played cricket and chess (with future champions Conel Hugh O'Donel Alexander and Jacob Bronowski). After graduation as a Mathematics Wrangler in 1929, he joined the British Civil Service in the Ministry of Agriculture. In this position he became increasingly interested in using statistics towards agricultural questions, and one of his first published papers to the Royal Statistical Society involved studying crop productivity using factor analysis. He was elected a Fellow of the Society in 1934.   == Work in statistics == In 1938 and 1939 he began work, along with Bernard Babington-Smith, on the question of random number generation, developing both one of the first early mechanical devices to produce random digits, and formulated a series of tests for statistical randomness in a given set of digits which, with some small modifications, became fairly widely used. He produced one of the second large collections of random digits (100,000 in total, over twice as many as those published by L. H. C. Tippett in 1927), which was a commonly used tract until the publication of RAND Corporation's A Million Random Digits with 100,000 Normal Deviates in 1955 (which was developed with a roulette wheel-like machine very similar to Kendall's and verified as "random" using his statistical tests). In 1937, he aided the ageing statistician G. Udny Yule in the revision of his standard statistical textbook, Introduction to the Theory of Statistics, commonly known for many years as "Yule and Kendall". The two had met by chance in 1935, and were on close terms until Yule's death in 1951 (Yule was godfather to Kendall's second son). During this period he also began work on the rank correlation coefficient which currently bears his name (Kendall's tau), which eventually led to a monograph on Rank Correlation in 1948. In the late 1930s, he was additionally part of a group of five other statisticians who endeavoured to produce a reference work summarising recent developments in statistical theory, but it was cancelled on account of onset of World War II.   == War-time efforts == Kendall became Assistant general manager to the British Chamber of Shipping by day and had air-raid warden duties by night. Despite these constraints on his time, he managed to produce volume one of The Advanced Theory of Statistics in 1943 and a second volume in 1946. During the war he also produced a series of papers extending to work of R.A. Fisher on the theory of k-statistics, and developed a number of extensions to this work through the 1950s. After the war, he worked on the theory and practice of time series analysis, and conclusively demonstrated (with the meager computing resources available at the time) that unsmoothed sample periodograms were unreliable estimators for the population spectrum.   == London School of Economics == In 1949 he accepted the second chair of statistics at the London School of Economics, University of London. Here he worked part-time as the director of the new Research Techniques Division. From 1952 to 1957 he edited a two-volume work on Statistical Sources in the United Kingdom, which was a standard reference until the mid-1970s. In the fifities he also worked on multivariate analysis, and developed the text Multivariate Analysis in 1957. In the same year he also developed, along with W. R. Buckland, a Dictionary of Statistical Terms, aimed at helping making the tools of statistics more available to potential users in industry and government. In 1953 he published " The Analytics of Economic Time Series, Part 1: Prices" in which he suggested that the movement of shares on the stock market was random i.e. they were as likely to go up on a certain day as they were to go down. These results were disturbing to some financial economists and further debate and research then followed. This ultimately led to the creation of the Random Walk Hypothesis, and the closely related efficient-market hypothesis which states that random price movements indicate a well-functioning or efficient market.   == CEIR and WFS == In 1961 he left the University of London and took a position as the managing director (later chairman) of a consulting company, CEIR (later known as Scientific Control Systems), and in the same year began a two-year term as president of the Royal Statistical Society. In the 1960s he published and co-edited a number of volumes and monographs in statistical theory. In 1972, he became director of the World Fertility Survey, a project sponsored by the International Statistical Institute and the United Nations which aimed to study fertility in developed and developing nations. He continued this work until 1980, when illness forced him to retire.   == Honours == He was knighted by the British government in 1974 for his services to the theory of statistics, and received a medal from the United Nations in 1980 in recognition for his work on the World Fertility Survey. He was also elected a fellow of the British Academy and received the highest honour of the Royal Statistical Society, the Guy Medal in Gold. He additionally had served as president of the Operational Research Society, the Institute of Statisticians, and was elected a fellow of the American Statistical Association, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the Econometric Society, and the British Computer Society. At the time of his death in 1983, he was honorary president of the International Statistical Institute.   == Notes ==   == Family == Kendall's first wife, Sheila (née Lester), predeceased him. He was survived by their daughter and two sons, and by his second wife, Ruth (née Whitfield) and their son.   == References == Ord, Keith (1984). "In Memoriam: Maurice George Kendall, 1907–1983". The American Statistician 38 (1): 36–37. doi:10.1080/00031305.1984.10482870. JSTOR 2683557.  Stuart, Alan (1984). "Sir Maurice Kendall, 1907–1983". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 147 (1): 120–122. JSTOR 2981762.  Bartholomew, D. J. (1983). "Obituary: Sir Maurice Kendall FBA". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series D 32 (4): 445–446. JSTOR 2987557.  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Maurice George Kendall", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Alan Stuart and Keith Ord, Kendall's Advanced Theory of Statistics Volume 1 – Distribution Theory (Sixth Ed.), 1994

Maurice Princet (1875 – October 23, 1973) was a French mathematician and actuary who played a role in the birth of cubism. He was an associate of Pablo Picasso, Guillaume Apollinaire, Max Jacob, Jean Metzinger, and Marcel Duchamp. He is known as "le mathématicien du cubisme" ("the mathematician of cubism").  Princet is credited with introducing the work of Henri Poincaré and the concept of the "fourth dimension" to the cubists at the Bateau-Lavoir. Princet brought to Picasso's attention a book by Esprit Jouffret, Traité élémentaire de géométrie à quatre dimensions (Elementary Treatise on the Geometry of Four Dimensions, 1903), a popularization of Poincaré's Science and Hypothesis in which Jouffret described hypercubes and other complex polyhedra in four dimensions and projected them onto the two-dimensional page. Picasso's sketchbooks for Les Demoiselles d'Avignon illustrate Jouffret's influence on the artist's work. In 1907, Princet's wife left him for André Derain, and he drifted away from the circle of artists at the Bateau-Lavoir. But Princet remained close to Metzinger and participated in meetings of the Section d'Or in Puteaux. He gave informal lectures to the group, many of whom were passionate about mathematical order. Princet's influence on the cubists was attested to by his contemporaries. Maurice de Vlaminck wrote, "I witnessed the birth of cubism, its growth, its decline. Picasso was the obstetrician, Guillaume Apollinaire the midwife, Princet the godfather." In 1910, Metzinger said of him, "[Picasso] lays out a free, mobile perspective, from which that ingenious mathematician Maurice Princet has deduced a whole geometry". Later, Metzinger wrote in his memoirs that:  Maurice Princet joined us often. Although quite young, thanks to his knowledge of mathematics he had an important job in an insurance company. But, beyond his profession, it was as an artist that he conceptualized mathematics, as an aesthetician that he invoked n-dimensional continuums. He loved to get the artists interested in the new views on space that had been opened up by Schlegel and some others. He succeeded at that.  Louis Vauxcelles sarcastically dubbed Princet "the father of cubism":  M. Princet has studied at length non-Euclidean geometry and the theorems of Riemann, of which Gleizes and Metzinger speak rather carelessly. Now then, M. Princet one day met M. Max Jacob and confided him one or two of his discoveries relating to the fourth dimension. M. Jacob informed the ingenious M. Picasso of it, and M. Picasso saw there a possibility of new ornamental schemes. M. Picasso explained his intentions to M. Apollinaire, who hastened to write them up in formularies and codify them. The thing spread and propagated. Cubism, the child of M. Princet, was born.  Duchamp told Pierre Cabanne, "We weren't mathematicians at all, but we really did believe in Princet".   == See also == Mathematics and art Actuary   == Notes ==   == Further reading ==

Michael S. Teitelbaum (born January 21, 1944) is a demographer and the former Vice President of the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation in New York City. He is Senior Research Associate at the Labor and Worklife Program, Harvard Law School. He publishes in both the popular and academic press on demographic trends, especially fertility and international migration and their causes and consequences. In the 1970s he was Staff Director of the Select Committee on Population in the U.S. House of Representatives, and in the 1980s he served as Commissioner to the U.S. Commission for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative Economic Development. From 1990-1997 he was Vice Chair and Acting Chair of the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform often known as the Jordan Commission after its late Chair Barbara Jordan. Teitelbaum was an undergraduate student at Reed College and later a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, where he earned his DPhil in demography in 1970. Between 1969 and 1973, he was an assistant professor and research associate in the Office of Population Research at Princeton University. From 1974 to 1978, he served as University Lecturer in Demography and Faculty Fellow at Nuffield College, Oxford University. Teitelbaum also worked as a program officer for the Ford Foundation in 1973-1974 and 1980-1981. He joined the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation as a program director and became Vice President of this institution in 2007. In 2013, ScienceCareers from the journal Science named him Person of the Year for his “dedicated, imaginative, and surpassingly effective work on behalf of early-career scientists.”   == Ideas and scholarship == Teitelbaum has produced an array of works on global and national demographic developments, focused on both fertility behavior and on international migration. His work also tackles the history of ideas about population, including insights into the political uses and repercussions of shifts in demography. In The Fear of Population Decline (1985), Teitelbaum and his co-author Jay M. Winter provide a cross-national discussion of political and cultural anxieties about low fertility, highlighted by France’s military defeats and the tendency of political leaders to regard sagging population growth as an obstacle to national renewal. Great Britain's Royal Commission on Population in 1949 asserted that “the failure of a society to reproduce itself indicates something wrong in its attitude to life, which is likely to involve other forms of decadence.” Teitelbaum and Winter have been critical of works such as Philip Longman’s The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten World Prosperity and What to Do About It (New York: Basic Books, 2004) that express alarms about the prospects for world civilization if procreation does not have an upsurge in the twenty-first century. In the New York Times (April 6, 2014), Teitelbaum and Winter warned against the “dark prophecies” about population decline, noting that such concerns have a long history of exaggeration that persist to this day. A century ago Theodore Roosevelt thundered against Anglo-Saxon “race suicide,” while Depression-era fertility declines led to books such as The Twilight of Parenthood: A Biological Study of the Decline of Population Growth (1934) by the socialist feminist Enid Charles. After the low fertility rates of the Great Depression were supplanted by the baby boom of the postwar period, environmentalists and left-leaning observers began to forecast mass starvation on the assumption that food production could not keep pace with high population growth rates in the developing world [works such as Paul Erlich’s The Population Bomb (1968)]. In making his case for pro-natalist policies in the prestigious journal Foreign Affairs (September/October 2004), Longman has criticized Teitelbaum for focusing a historical lens on the problem of population decline: “The matter cannot be settled by pointing to history, because no previous society has experienced aging on the scale and at the speed of that now occurring throughout the world…. Countries such as China are now aging as much in one generation as France did over the course of centuries.” As a foundation executive, Teitelbaum played a significant role in nurturing a network of scholars and policy experts on the economics of science and engineering. He observed that passionate debates about feared “shortages” of US scientists and engineers were being conducted without rigorous data and information. Thus, he helped support the formation of the Science and Engineering Workforce Project based at the National Bureau of Economic Research and led by Harvard labor economist Richard B. Freeman. Teitelbaum also realized that universities and scientific research institutes were vastly expanding the hiring of postdocs often for long periods but with little likelihood of a career path in research. He initiated a Sloan Foundation grants program to improve data collection and analysis about postdocs, and provided start-up support for the National Postdoctoral Association (NPA), founded in 2003 and now based in Washington, D.C. Teitelbaum has brought historical approaches to the understanding of labor market conditions for scientists and engineers in the United States. In Falling Behind? Boom, Bust & the Global Race for Scientific Talent (Princeton University Press, 2014), he identifies five periods since World War II in which alarms were sounded that the United States was in danger of a catastrophic shortage of scientific talent. He suggests that the panics that ensued frequently lead to boom and bust cycles that are not healthy for scientific research, nor for the economic well-being of scientists and their research institutions. Nonetheless, claims of “shortages” of scientists and engineers continue to be strongly promoted by industry lobbyists and others. Teitelbaum’s demonstration of the flimsy evidence underlying many such claims seems likely to be contested or ignored by well-financed advocates of shortage claims.   == Selected bibliography == Falling Behind? Boom, Bust & the Global Race for Scientific Talent (Princeton University Press, 2014) The Global Spread of Fertility Decline: Population, Fear, and Uncertainty (Yale University Press, 2013, co-authored with Jay Winter) Political Demography, Demographic Engineering (Berghahn Books, 2001, co-authored with Myron Weiner) A Question of Numbers: High Migration, Low Fertility, and the Politics of National Identity (Hill and Wang, 1998, co-authored with Jay Winter) Threatened Peoples, Threatened Borders (W.W. Norton, 1995, co-editor); Population and Resources in Western Intellectual Traditions (Cambridge University Press, 1989, co-editor); The Fear of Population Decline (Academic Books, 1985, co-authored with Jay M. Winter); Latin Migration North: The Problem for U.S. Foreign Policy (Council on Foreign Relations, 1985); The British Fertility Decline: Demographic Transition in the Crucible of the Industrial Revolution (Princeton University Press, 1984).   == Notes ==

Milton Friedman (July 31, 1912 – November 16, 2006) was an American economist who received the 1976 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for his research on consumption analysis, monetary history and theory and the complexity of stabilization policy. With George Stigler and others, Friedman was among the intellectual leaders of the second generation of Chicago price theory, a methodological movement at the University of Chicago's Department of Economics, Law School, and Graduate School of Business from the 1940s onward. Several students and young professors that were recruited or mentored by Friedman at Chicago went on to become leading economists; they include Gary Becker, Robert Fogel, Ronald Coase, and Robert Lucas, Jr.. Friedman's challenges to what he later called "naive Keynesian" theory began with his 1950s reinterpretation of the consumption function. In the 1960s, he became the main advocate opposing Keynesian government policies, and described his approach (along with mainstream economics) as using "Keynesian language and apparatus" yet rejecting its "initial" conclusions. He theorized that there existed a "natural" rate of unemployment, and argued that employment above this rate would cause inflation to accelerate. He argued that the Phillips curve was, in the long run, vertical at the "natural rate" and predicted what would come to be known as stagflation. Friedman promoted an alternative macroeconomic viewpoint known as "monetarism", and argued that a steady, small expansion of the money supply was the preferred policy. His ideas concerning monetary policy, taxation, privatization and deregulation influenced government policies, especially during the 1980s. His monetary theory influenced the Federal Reserve's response to the global financial crisis of 2007–08. Friedman was an advisor to Republican U.S. President Ronald Reagan and Conservative British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. His political philosophy extolled the virtues of a free market economic system with minimal intervention. He once stated that his role in eliminating U.S. conscription was his proudest accomplishment. In his 1962 book Capitalism and Freedom, Friedman advocated policies such as a volunteer military, freely floating exchange rates, abolition of medical licenses, a negative income tax, and school vouchers. His support for school choice led him to found the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice. Milton Friedman's works include many monographs, books, scholarly articles, papers, magazine columns, television programs, and lectures, and cover a broad range of economic topics and public policy issues. His books and essays have had an international influence, including in former Communist states. A survey of economists ranked Friedman as the second most popular economist of the twentieth century after John Maynard Keynes, and The Economist described him as "the most influential economist of the second half of the 20th century ... possibly of all of it."   == Early lifeEdit == Friedman was born in Brooklyn, New York on July 31, 1912, to recent Jewish immigrants Sára Ethel (née Landau) and Jenő Saul Friedman, from Beregszász in Carpathian Ruthenia, Kingdom of Hungary (now Berehove in Ukraine), both of whom worked as dry goods merchants. Shortly after Milton's birth, the family relocated to Rahway, New Jersey. In his early teens, Friedman was injured in a car accident, which scarred his upper lip. A talented student, Friedman graduated from Rahway High School in 1928, just before his 16th birthday. In 1932, Friedman graduated from Rutgers University, where he specialized in Mathematics and Economics and initially intended to become an actuary. During his time at Rutgers, Friedman became influenced by two economics professors, Arthur F. Burns and Homer Jones, who convinced him that modern economics could help end the Great Depression. After graduating from Rutgers, Friedman was offered two scholarships to do graduate work — one in mathematics at Brown University and the other in economics at the University of Chicago. Friedman chose the latter, thus earning a Master of Arts degree in 1933. He was strongly influenced by Jacob Viner, Frank Knight, and Henry Simons. It was at Chicago that Friedman met his future wife, economist Rose Director. During the 1933–1934 academic year he had a fellowship at Columbia University, where he studied statistics with renowned statistician and economist Harold Hotelling. He was back in Chicago for the 1934–1935 academic year, working as a research assistant for Henry Schultz, who was then working on Theory and Measurement of Demand. That year, Friedman formed what would prove to be lifelong friendships with George Stigler and W. Allen Wallis.   == Public serviceEdit == Friedman was initially unable to find academic employment, so in 1935 he followed his friend W. Allen Wallis to Washington, where Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal was "a lifesaver" for many young economists. At this stage, Friedman said that he and his wife "regarded the job-creation programs such as the WPA, CCC, and PWA appropriate responses to the critical situation," but not "the price- and wage-fixing measures of the National Recovery Administration and the Agricultural Adjustment Administration." Foreshadowing his later ideas, he believed price controls interfered with an essential signaling mechanism to help resources be used where they were most valued. Indeed, Friedman later concluded that all government intervention associated with the New Deal was "the wrong cure for the wrong disease," arguing that the money supply should simply have been expanded, instead of contracted. Later, Friedman and his colleague Anna Schwartz wrote A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960, which argued that the Great Depression was caused by a severe monetary contraction due to banking crises and poor policy on the part of the Federal Reserve. During 1935, he began work for the National Resources Committee, which was then working on a large consumer budget survey. Ideas from this project later became a part of his Theory of the Consumption Function. Friedman began employment with the National Bureau of Economic Research during autumn 1937 to assist Simon Kuznets in his work on professional income. This work resulted in their jointly authored publication Incomes from Independent Professional Practice, which introduced the concepts of permanent and transitory income, a major component of the Permanent Income Hypothesis that Friedman worked out in greater detail in the 1950s. The book hypothesizes that professional licensing artificially restricts the supply of services and raises prices. During 1940, Friedman was appointed an assistant professor teaching Economics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, but encountered antisemitism in the Economics department and decided to return to government service. From 1941 to 1943 Friedman worked on wartime tax policy for the Federal Government, as an advisor to senior officials of the United States Department of the Treasury. As a Treasury spokesman during 1942 he advocated a Keynesian policy of taxation. He helped to invent the payroll withholding tax system, since the federal government badly needed money in order to fight the war. He later said, "I have no apologies for it, but I really wish we hadn't found it necessary and I wish there were some way of abolishing withholding now."   == Academic careerEdit ==   === Early yearsEdit === In 1940, Friedman accepted a position at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, but left because of differences with faculty regarding United States involvement in World War II. Friedman believed the United States should enter the war. In 1943, Friedman joined the Division of War Research at Columbia University (headed by W. Allen Wallis and Harold Hotelling), where he spent the rest of World War II working as a mathematical statistician, focusing on problems of weapons design, military tactics, and metallurgical experiments. In 1945, Friedman submitted Incomes from Independent Professional Practice (co-authored with Kuznets and completed during 1940) to Columbia as his doctoral dissertation. The university awarded him a PhD in 1946. Friedman spent the 1945–1946 academic year teaching at the University of Minnesota (where his friend George Stigler was employed). On February 12, 1945, his son, David D. Friedman was born.   === University of ChicagoEdit ===  In 1946, Friedman accepted an offer to teach economic theory at the University of Chicago (a position opened by departure of his former professor Jacob Viner to Princeton University). Friedman would work for the University of Chicago for the next 30 years. There he contributed to the establishment of an intellectual community that produced a number of Nobel Prize winners, known collectively as the Chicago school of economics. At that time, Arthur F. Burns, who was then the head of the National Bureau of Economic Research, asked Friedman to rejoin the Bureau's staff. He accepted the invitation, and assumed responsibility for the Bureau's inquiry into the role of money in the business cycle. As a result, he initiated the "Workshop in Money and Banking" (the "Chicago Workshop"), which promoted a revival of monetary studies. During the latter half of the 1940s, Friedman began a collaboration with Anna Schwartz, an economic historian at the Bureau, that would ultimately result in the 1963 publication of a book co-authored by Friedman and Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960. Friedman spent the 1954–1955 academic year as a Fulbright Visiting Fellow at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. At the time, the Cambridge economics faculty was divided into a Keynesian majority (including Joan Robinson and Richard Kahn) and an anti-Keynesian minority (headed by Dennis Robertson). Friedman speculated that he was invited to the fellowship, because his views were unacceptable to both of the Cambridge factions. Later his weekly columns for Newsweek magazine (1966–84) were well read and increasingly influential among political and business people. From 1968 to 1978, he and Paul Samuelson participated in the Economics Cassette Series, a biweekly subscription series where the economist would discuss the days' issues for about a half-hour at a time. Friedman was an economic adviser to Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater during 1964.   === Nobel Prize in Economic SciencesEdit === Friedman won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, the sole recipient for 1976, "for his achievements in the fields of consumption analysis, monetary history and theory and for his demonstration of the complexity of stabilization policy."   == RetirementEdit == In 1977, at the age of 65, Friedman retired from the University of Chicago after teaching there for 30 years. He and his wife moved to San Francisco where he became a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. From 1977 on, he was affiliated with the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. During the same year, Friedman was approached by the Free To Choose Network and asked to create a television program presenting his economic and social philosophy. The Friedmans worked on this project for the next three years, and during 1980, the ten-part series, titled Free to Choose, was broadcast by the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). The companion book to the series (co-authored by Milton and his wife, Rose Friedman), also titled Free To Choose, was the bestselling nonfiction book of 1980 and has since been translated into 14 foreign languages. Friedman served as an unofficial adviser to Ronald Reagan during his 1980 presidential campaign, and then served on the President's Economic Policy Advisory Board for the rest of the Reagan Administration. Ebenstein says Friedman was "the 'guru' of the Reagan administration." In 1988 he received the National Medal of Science and Reagan honored him with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Milton Friedman is known now as one of the most influential economists of the 20th century. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Friedman continued to write editorials and appear on television. He made several visits to Eastern Europe and to China, where he also advised governments. He was also for many years a Trustee of the Philadelphia Society.   == Scholarly contributionsEdit ==   === EconomicsEdit === Friedman was best known for reviving interest in the money supply as a determinant of the nominal value of output, that is, the quantity theory of money. Monetarism is the set of views associated with modern quantity theory. Its origins can be traced back to the 16th-century School of Salamanca or even further; however, Friedman's contribution is largely responsible for its modern popularization. He co-authored, with Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960 (1963), which was an examination of the role of the money supply and economic activity in the U.S. history. A striking conclusion of their research regarded the way in which money supply fluctuations contribute to economic fluctuations. Several regression studies with David Meiselman during the 1960s suggested the primacy of the money supply over investment and government spending in determining consumption and output. These challenged a prevailing, but largely untested, view on their relative importance. Friedman's empirical research and some theory supported the conclusion that the short-run effect of a change of the money supply was primarily on output but that the longer-run effect was primarily on the price level. Friedman was the main proponent of the monetarist school of economics. He maintained that there is a close and stable association between inflation and the money supply, mainly that inflation could be avoided with proper regulation of the monetary base's growth rate. He famously used the analogy of "dropping money out of a helicopter.", in order to avoid dealing with money injection mechanisms and other factors that would overcomplicate his models. Friedman's arguments were designed to counter the popular concept of Cost-push inflation, that the increased General Price Level at the time was the result of increases in the price of oil, or increases in wages; as he wrote,  Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.  Friedman rejected the use of fiscal policy as a tool of demand management; and he held that the government's role in the guidance of the economy should be restricted severely. Friedman wrote extensively on the Great Depression, which he termed the Great Contraction, arguing that it had been caused by an ordinary financial shock whose duration and seriousness were greatly increased by the subsequent contraction of the money supply caused by the misguided policies of the directors of the Federal Reserve.  The Fed was largely responsible for converting what might have been a garden-variety recession, although perhaps a fairly severe one, into a major catastrophe. Instead of using its powers to offset the depression, it presided over a decline in the quantity of money by one-third from 1929 to 1933 ... Far from the depression being a failure of the free-enterprise system, it was a tragic failure of government.  Friedman also argued for the cessation of government intervention in currency markets, thereby spawning an enormous literature on the subject, as well as promoting the practice of freely floating exchange rates. His close friend George Stigler explained, "As is customary in science, he did not win a full victory, in part because research was directed along different lines by the theory of rational expectations, a newer approach developed by Robert Lucas, also at the University of Chicago." Friedman was also known for his work on the consumption function, the permanent income hypothesis (1957), which Friedman himself referred to as his best scientific work. This work contended that rational consumers would spend a proportional amount of what they perceived to be their permanent income. Windfall gains would mostly be saved. Tax reductions likewise, as rational consumers would predict that taxes would have to increase later to balance public finances. Other important contributions include his critique of the Phillips curve and the concept of the natural rate of unemployment (1968). This critique associated his name, together with that of Edmund Phelps, with the insight that a government that brings about greater inflation cannot permanently reduce unemployment by doing so. Unemployment may be temporarily lower, if the inflation is a surprise, but in the long run unemployment will be determined by the frictions and imperfections of the labor market. Friedman's essay "The Methodology of Positive Economics" (1953) provided the epistemological pattern for his own subsequent research and to a degree that of the Chicago School. There he argued that economics as science should be free of value judgments for it to be objective. Moreover, a useful economic theory should be judged not by its descriptive realism but by its simplicity and fruitfulness as an engine of prediction. That is, students should measure the accuracy of its predictions, rather than the 'soundness of its assumptions'. His argument was part of an ongoing debate among such statisticians as Jerzy Neyman, Leonard Savage, and Ronald Fisher.   === StatisticsEdit === One of his most famous contributions to statistics is sequential sampling. Friedman did statistical work at the Division of War Research at Columbia, where he and his colleagues came up with the technique. It later became, in the words of The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, "the standard analysis of quality control inspection". The dictionary adds, "Like many of Friedman’s contributions, in retrospect it seems remarkably simple and obvious to apply basic economic ideas to quality control; that however is a measure of his genius."   == Public policy positionsEdit ==   === Federal ReserveEdit === Due to its poor performance, Friedman believed that the Federal Reserve Board should be abolished. He further believed that if the money supply was to be centrally controlled (as by the Federal Reserve System) that the preferable way to do it would be with a mechanical system that would keep the quantity of money increasing at a steady rate.   === Exchange ratesEdit === Friedman was a strong advocate for floating exchange rates throughout the entire Bretton-Woods period. He argued that a flexible exchange rate would make external adjustment possible and allow countries to avoid Balance of Payments crisis. He saw fixed exchange rates as an undesirable form of government intervention. The case was articulated in an influential 1953 paper, "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates", at a time, when most commentators regarded the possibility of floating exchange rates as a fantasy.   === School choiceEdit === In his 1955 article "The Role of Government in Education" Friedman proposed supplementing publicly operated schools with privately run but publicly funded schools through a system of school vouchers. Reforms similar to those proposed in the article were implemented in, for example, Chile in 1981 and Sweden in 1992. In 1996, Friedman, together with his wife, founded The Foundation for Educational Choice to advocate school choice and vouchers.   === ConscriptionEdit === While Walter Oi is credited with establishing the economic basis for a volunteer military, Milton Friedman was a proponent, stating that the draft was "inconsistent with a free society." In Capitalism and Freedom, he argued that conscription is inequitable and arbitrary, preventing young men from shaping their lives as they see fit. During the Nixon administration he headed the committee to research a conversion to paid/volunteer armed force. He would later state that his role in eliminating the conscription in the United States was his proudest accomplishment. Friedman did, however, believe a nation could compel military training as a reserve in case of war time.   === Foreign policyEdit === Biographer Lanny Ebenstein noted a drift over time in Friedman's views from an interventionist to a more cautious foreign policy. He supported US involvement in the Second World War and initially supported a hard line against Communism, but moderated over time. He opposed the Gulf War and the Iraq War. In a spring 2006 interview, Friedman said that the USA's stature in the world had been eroded by the Iraq War, but that it might be improved if Iraq were to become a peaceful independent country.   === Libertarianism and the Republican PartyEdit === He served as a member of President Reagan's Economic Policy Advisory Board starting at 1981. In 1988, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the National Medal of Science. He said that he was a libertarian philosophically, but a member of the U.S. Republican Party for the sake of "expediency" ("I am a libertarian with a small 'l' and a Republican with a capital 'R.' And I am a Republican with a capital 'R' on grounds of expediency, not on principle.") But, he said, "I think the term classical liberal is also equally applicable. I don't really care very much what I'm called. I'm much more interested in having people thinking about the ideas, rather than the person."   === Public goods and monopolyEdit === Friedman was supportive of the state provision of some public goods that private businesses are not considered as being able to provide. However, he argued that many of the services performed by government could be performed better by the private sector. Above all, if some public goods are provided by the state, he believed that they should not be a legal monopoly where private competition is prohibited; for example, he wrote:  There is no way to justify our present public monopoly of the post office. It may be argued that the carrying of mail is a technical monopoly and that a government monopoly is the least of evils. Along these lines, one could perhaps justify a government post office, but not the present law, which makes it illegal for anybody else to carry the mail. If the delivery of mail is a technical monopoly, no one else will be able to succeed in competition with the government. If it is not, there is no reason why the government should be engaged in it. The only way to find out is to leave other people free to enter.   === Social security, welfare programs, and negative income taxEdit === After 1960 Friedman attacked Social Security from a free market view stating that it had created welfare dependency. Friedman proposed that if there had to be a welfare system of any kind, he would replace the existing U.S. welfare system with a negative income tax, a progressive tax system in which the poor receive a basic living income from the government. According to the New York Times, Friedman's views in this regard were grounded in a belief that while "market forces ... accomplish wonderful things", they "cannot ensure a distribution of income that enables all citizens to meet basic economic needs".   === Drug policyEdit === Friedman also supported libertarian policies such as legalization of drugs and prostitution. During 2005, Friedman and more than 500 other economists advocated discussions regarding the economic benefits of the legalization of marijuana.   === LGBT rightsEdit === Friedman was also a supporter of gay rights. He specifically supported same-sex marriage, saying on the issue, "I do not believe there should be any discrimination against gays."   === Economic freedomEdit === Michael Walker of the Fraser Institute and Friedman hosted a series of conferences from 1986 to 1994. The goal was to create a clear definition of economic freedom and a method for measuring it. Eventually this resulted in the first report on worldwide economic freedom, Economic Freedom in the World[3]. This annual report has since provided data for numerous peer-reviewed studies and has influenced policy in several nations. Along with sixteen other distinguished economists he opposed the Copyright Term Extension Act and filed an amicus brief in Eldred v. Ashcroft. He supported the inclusion of the word "no-brainer" in the brief. Friedman argued for stronger basic legal (constitutional) protection of economic rights and freedoms to further promote industrial-commercial growth and prosperity and buttress democracy and freedom and the rule of law generally in society.   == Honors, recognition, and influenceEdit == George H. Nash, a leading historian of American conservatism, says that by, "the end of the 1960s he was probably the most highly regarded and influential conservative scholar in the country, and one of the few with an international reputation." Friedman allowed the libertarian Cato Institute to use his name for its biannual Milton Friedman Prize for Advancing Liberty beginning in 2001. A Friedman Prize was given to the late British economist Peter Bauer in 2002, Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto in 2004, Mart Laar, former Estonian Prime Minister in 2006 and a young Venezuelan student Yon Goicoechea in 2008. His wife Rose, sister of Aaron Director, with whom he initiated the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice, served on the international selection committee. Friedman was also a recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economics. Upon Friedman's death, Harvard President Lawrence Summers called him "The Great Liberator" saying "... any honest Democrat will admit that we are now all Friedmanites." He said Friedman's great popular contribution was "in convincing people of the importance of allowing free markets to operate." In 2013 Stephen Moore, a member of the editorial forward of the Wall Street Journal said, "Quoting the most-revered champion of free-market economics since Adam Smith has become a little like quoting the Bible." He adds, "There are sometimes multiple and conflicting interpretations."   === Hong KongEdit === Friedman once said, "If you want to see capitalism in action, go to Hong Kong." He wrote in 1990 that the Hong Kong economy was perhaps the best example of a free market economy. One month before his death, he wrote the article "Hong Kong Wrong – What would Cowperthwaite say?" in the Wall Street Journal, criticizing Donald Tsang, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, for abandoning "positive noninterventionism." Tsang later said he was merely changing the slogan to "big market, small government," where small government is defined as less than 20% of GDP. In a debate between Tsang and his rival, Alan Leong, before the 2007 Chief Executive election, Leong introduced the topic and jokingly accused Tsang of angering Friedman to death.   === ChileEdit ===  During 1975, two years after the military coup that brought military dictator President Augusto Pinochet to power and ended the government of Salvador Allende, the economy of Chile experienced a severe crisis. Friedman and Arnold Harberger accepted an invitation of a private Chilean foundation to visit Chile and speak on principles of economic freedom. He spent seven days in Chile giving a series of lectures at the Universidad Católica de Chile. and the (National) University of Chile. One of the lectures was entitled "The Fragility of Freedom" and according to Friedman, "dealt with precisely the threat to freedom from a centralized military government." In an April 21, 1975, letter to Pinochet, Friedman considered the "key economic problems of Chile are clearly ... inflation and the promotion of a healthy social market economy". He stated that "There is only one way to end inflation: by drastically reducing the rate of increase of the quantity of money ..." and that "... cutting government spending is by far and away the most desirable way to reduce the fiscal deficit, because it ... strengthens the private sector thereby laying the foundations for healthy economic growth". As to how rapidly inflation should be ended, Friedman felt that "for Chile where inflation is raging at 10–20% a month ... gradualism is not feasible. It would involve so painful an operation over so long a period that the patient would not survive." Choosing "a brief period of higher unemployment..." was the lesser evil.. and that "the experience of Germany, ... of Brazil ..., of the post-war adjustment in the U.S. ... all argue for shock treatment". In the letter Friedman recommended to deliver what the shock approach with "... a package to eliminate the surprise and to relieve acute distress" and "... for definiteness let me sketch the contents of a package proposal ... to be taken as illustrative" although his knowledge of Chile was "too limited to enable [him] to be precise or comprehensive". He listed a "sample proposal" of 8 monetary and fiscal measures including "the removal of as many as obstacles as possible that now hinder the private market. For example, suspend ... the present law against discharging employees". He closed, stating "Such a shock program could end inflation in months". His letter suggested that cutting spending to reduce the fiscal deficit would result in less transitional unemployment than raising taxes. Sergio de Castro, a Chilean Chicago School graduate, became the nation's Minister of Finance in 1975. During his six-year tenure, foreign investment increased, restrictions were placed on striking and labor unions, and GDP rose yearly. A foreign exchange program was created between the Catholic University of Chile and the University of Chicago. Many other Chicago School alumni were appointed government posts during and after the Pinochet years; others taught its economic doctrine at Chilean universities. They became known as the Chicago Boys. Friedman did not criticize Pinochet's dictatorship at the time, nor the assassinations, illegal imprisonments, torture, or other atrocities that were well known by then. In 1976 Friedman defended his unofficial adviser position with: "I do not consider it as evil for an economist to render technical economic advice to the Chilean Government, any more than I would regard it as evil for a physician to give technical medical advice to the Chilean Government to help end a medical plague." Friedman defended his activity in Chile on the grounds that, in his opinion, the adoption of free market policies not only improved the economic situation of Chile but also contributed to the amelioration of Pinochet's rule and to the eventual transition to a democratic government during 1990. That idea is included in Capitalism and Freedom, in which he declared that economic freedom is not only desirable in itself but is also a necessary condition for political freedom. In his 1980 documentary Free to Choose, he said the following: "Chile is not a politically free system, and I do not condone the system. But the people there are freer than the people in Communist societies because government plays a smaller role. ... The conditions of the people in the past few years has been getting better and not worse. They would be still better to get rid of the junta and to be able to have a free democratic system." In 1984, Friedman stated that he has "never refrained from criticizing the political system in Chile." In 1991 he said: "I have nothing good to say about the political regime that Pinochet imposed. It was a terrible political regime. The real miracle of Chile is not how well it has done economically; the real miracle of Chile is that a military junta was willing to go against its principles and support a free market regime designed by principled believers in a free market. [...] In Chile, the drive for political freedom, that was generated by economic freedom and the resulting economic success, ultimately resulted in a referendum that introduced political democracy. Now, at long last, Chile has all three things: political freedom, human freedom and economic freedom. Chile will continue to be an interesting experiment to watch to see whether it can keep all three or whether, now that it has political freedom,that political freedom will tend to be used to destroy or reduce economic freedom." He stressed that the lectures he gave in Chile were the same lectures he later gave in China and other socialist states. During the 2000 PBS documentary The Commanding Heights (based on the book), Friedman continued to argue that "free markets would undermine [Pinochet's] political centralization and political control.", and that criticism over his role in Chile missed his main contention that freer markets resulted in freer people, and that Chile's unfree economy had caused the military government. Friedman advocated for free markets which undermined "political centralization and political control".   === IcelandEdit === Friedman visited Iceland during the autumn of 1984, met with important Icelanders and gave a lecture at the University of Iceland on the "tyranny of the status quo." He participated in a lively television debate on August 31, 1984 with socialist intellectuals, including Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson, who later became the president of Iceland. When they complained that a fee was charged for attending his lecture at the University and that, hitherto, lectures by visiting scholars had been free-of-charge, Friedman replied that previous lectures had not been free-of-charge in a meaningful sense: lectures always have related costs. What mattered was whether attendees or non-attendees covered those costs. Friedman thought that it was fairer that only those who attended paid. In this discussion Friedman also stated that he did not receive any money for delivering that lecture.   === EstoniaEdit === Although Friedman never visited Estonia, his book Free to Choose exercised a great influence on that nation's then 32-year-old prime minister, Mart Laar, who has claimed that it was the only book on economics he had read before taking office. Laar's reforms are often credited with responsibility for transforming Estonia from an impoverished Soviet Republic to the "Baltic Tiger." A prime element of Laar's program was introduction of the flat tax. Laar won the 2006 Milton Friedman Prize for Advancing Liberty, awarded by the Cato Institute.   === United KingdomEdit === After 1950 Friedman was frequently invited to lecture in Britain, and by the 1970s his ideas had gained widespread attention in conservative circles. For example, he was a regular speaker at the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA), a libertarian think tank. Conservative politician Margaret Thatcher closely followed IEA programs and ideas, and met Friedman there in 1978. He also strongly influenced Keith Joseph, who became Thatcher's senior advisor on economic affairs, as well as Alan Walters and Patrick Minford, two other key advisers. Major newspapers, including the Daily Telegraph, The Times, and The Financial Times all promulgated Friedman's monetarist ideas to British decision-makers. Friedman's ideas strongly influenced Thatcher and her allies when she became Prime Minister in 1979.   == CritiquesEdit == Econometrician David Hendry criticized part of Friedman's and Anna Schwartz's 1982 Monetary Trends. When asked about it during an interview with Icelandic TV in 1984, Friedman said that the critique applied to a different problem than that which he and Schwartz had tackled, and was thus not relevant, and also pointed to the (as of 1984) lack of consequential peer review amongst econometricians on Hendry's work. In 2006, Hendry stated that Friedman was guilty of "serious errors" of misunderstanding that meant "the t-ratios he reported for UK money demand were overstated by nearly 100 per cent", and said that, in a paper published in 1991 with Neil Ericsson, he had refuted "almost every empirical claim […] made about UK money demand" by Friedman and Schwartz. A 2004 paper updated and confirmed the validity of the Hendry–Ericsson findings through 2000. After Friedman's death in 2006, Keynesian Nobel laureate Paul Krugman praised Friedman as a "great economist and a great man," and acknowledged his many, widely accepted contributions to empirical economics. Nonetheless, Krugman criticized Friedman, writing that "he slipped all too easily into claiming both that markets always work and that only markets work. It's extremely hard to find cases in which Friedman acknowledged the possibility that markets could go wrong, or that government intervention could serve a useful purpose." In her book The Shock Doctrine, author and social activist Naomi Klein criticized Friedman's economic liberalism, identifying it with the principles that guided the economic restructuring that followed the military coups in countries such as Chile and Indonesia. Based on their assessments of the extent to which what she describes as neoliberal policies contributed to income disparities and inequality, both Klein and Noam Chomsky have suggested that the primary role of what they describe as neoliberalism was as an ideological cover for capital accumulation by multinational corporations. Because of his involvement with the Pinochet government, there were international protests when Friedman was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1976 . Friedman was accused of supporting the military dictatorship in Chile because of the relation of economists of the University of Chicago to Pinochet, and a controversial six-day trip he took to Chile during March 1975 (less than two years after the coup that deposed President Salvador Allende). Friedman answered that he never was an adviser to the dictatorship, but only gave some lectures and seminars on inflation, and met with officials, including Augusto Pinochet, while in Chile. Chilean economist Orlando Letelier asserted that Pinochet's dictatorship resorted to oppression because of popular opposition to Chicago School policies in Chile. After a 1991 speech on drug legalisation, Friedman answered a question on his involvement with the Pinochet regime, saying that he was never an advisor to Pinochet (also mentioned in his 1984 Iceland interview), but that a group of his students at the University of Chicago were involved in Chile's economic reforms. Friedman credited these reforms with high levels of economic growth and with the establishment of democracy that has subsequently occurred in Chile.   == Personal lifeEdit == According to a 2007 article in Commentary magazine, his "parents were moderately observant [Jews], but Friedman, after an intense burst of childhood piety, rejected religion altogether." He described himself as an agnostic. Friedman wrote extensively of his life and experiences, especially in 1998 in his memoirs with his wife Rose, titled Two Lucky People.   === DeathEdit === Friedman died of heart failure at the age of 94 years in San Francisco on November 16, 2006. He was still a working economist performing original economic research; his last column was published in the The Wall Street Journal the day after his death. He was survived by his wife (who died on August 18, 2009) and their two children, David, known for the anarcho-capitalist book The Machinery of Freedom, and Janet. David's son, Patri Friedman, was the executive director of the The Seasteading Institute from 2008–2011.   == Selected bibliographyEdit ==  A Theory of the Consumption Function (1957) A Program for Monetary Stability (Fordham University Press, 1960) 110 pp. online version Capitalism and Freedom (1962), highly influential series of essays that established Friedman's position on major issues of public policy excerpts A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960, with Anna J. Schwartz, 1963; part 3 reprinted as The Great Contraction "The Role of Monetary Policy." American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 1 (Mar., 1968), pp. 1–17 JSTOR presidential address to American Economics Association "Inflation and Unemployment: Nobel lecture", 1977, Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 85, pp. 451–72. JSTOR Free to Choose: A personal statement, with Rose Friedman, (1980), highly influential restatement of policy views The Essence of Friedman, essays edited by Kurt R. Leube, (1987) (ISBN 0-8179-8662-6) Two Lucky People: Memoirs (with Rose Friedman) ISBN 0-226-26414-9 (1998) excerpt and text search Milton Friedman on Economics: Selected Papers by Milton Friedman, edited by Gary S. Becker (2008)   == See alsoEdit ==  Friedman–Savage utility function Friedman rule Friedman's k-percent rule Friedman test List of economists List of Jewish Nobel laureates List of notable Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients History of economic thought   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Bernanke, Ben (2004). Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11820-5  Butler, Eamonn (2011). Milton Friedman. Harriman Economic Essentials.  Ebenstein, Alan O. (2007). Milton Friedman: a biography.  Friedman, Milton (1999). Two Lucky People: Memoirs. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-26415-7.  Wood, John Cunningham, and Ronald N. Wood, ed. (1990), Milton Friedman: Critical Assessments, v. 3. Scroll to chapter-preview links. Routledge. Ebenstein, Lanny (January 2014). "The Increasingly Libertarian Milton Friedman: An Ideological Profile" (PDF). Econ Journal Watch 11 (1): 81–96.    == Further readingEdit == "Symposium: Why Is There No Milton Friedman Today?". Econ Journal Watch 10 (2). May 2013.    == External linksEdit == Milton and Rose Friedman: An Uncommon Couple (Multiple Text, audio, video) The Milton Friedman papers at the Hoover Institution Archives Selected Bibliography for Milton Friedman at the University of Chicago Library Profile and Papers at Research Papers in Economics/RePEc Milton Friedman collected news and commentary at The New York Times Milton Friedman at the Internet Movie Database Becker Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago The Foundation for Educational Choice Milton Fridman at Scarlett Inflation and Unemployment 1976 lecture at NobelPrize.org Nobel Prize acceptance speech Milton Friedman (1912–2006). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  Milton Friedman:Why Not a Volunteer Army?, New Individualist Review, Spring 1967 The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits, Milton Friedman, The New York Times Magazine, September 13, 1970 Interview with Milton Friedman, Dominic Streatfeild, May 25, 2000, source material for Cocaine: An Unauthorised Biography Milton Friedman vs. The Fed Bailout by Michael Hirsh, Newsweek, July 17, 2009 Four Deformations of the Apocalypse, David Stockman, The New York Times, July 31, 2010 The Case for Free Trade by Milton and Rose Friedman Roberts, Russ. "Milton Friedman Podcasts". EconTalk. Library of Economics and Liberty.  McCloskey, Deirdre (Winter 2003). "Other Things Equal: Milton". Eastern Economic Journal (Palgrave Macmillan) 29 (1): 143–146. JSTOR 40326463.  Videos Appearances on C-SPAN Booknotes interview with Friedman on the 50th Anniversary Edition of F.A. Hayek's Road to Serfdom, November 20, 1994. In Depth interview with Friedman, September 3, 2000  A film clip "The Open Mind – Living Within Our Means (1975)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive A film clip "The Open Mind – A Nobel Laureate on the American Economy (1977)" is available for free download at the Internet Archive  Milton Friedman, Commanding Heights, PBS, October 1, 2000, interview, profile and video "Free To Choose" (1980) a PBS TV Series by Milton Friedman Milton Friedman at the Cato Institute Free to Choose Network How to Cure Inflation : Milton Friedman

Mir Masoom Ali (born February 1, 1937), is a Bangladeshi American statistician, Distinguished Professor, educator, researcher and author. He migrated to the United States in 1969 and became a naturalized citizen in 1981. Ali founded the graduate and undergraduate programs in Statistics at Ball State University. He co-founded the Midwest Biopharmaceutical Statistics Workshop (MBSW-History), held at Ball State University annually since 1978, and co-sponsored by the American Statistical Association. He served as editor and associate editor of several international statistical journals. He is the founding president of the North America Bangladesh Statistical Association (NABSA) and a member of advisory board at Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. In 2002 Ali received the Sagamore of the Wabash Award, the highest award given in the state of Indiana, USA by the Governor of Indiana Frank O'Bannon, for his contributions to Ball State University, to higher education in the State of Indiana, and specifically to the Statistics profession.   == Early life and career == Ali was born in Patuakhali, British India (presently Bangladesh) on February 1, 1937. His parents were Mir Muazzam Ali, a Patuakhali lawyer, and Azifa Ali, an advocate for women's education. He spent his childhood in Patuakhali until graduating from Patuakhali Jubilee High English School in 1951. In 1953, Ali received his I. Sc. degree from Dhaka College. In 1956, he obtained his B. Sc. (Honors) degree and in 1957 his M. Sc. degree, both in Statistics from University of Dhaka. After graduation, Ali was employed by the erstwhile government of Pakistan from 1958 until 1966. He held a wide array of statistical positions in various ministries of the government. In 1966, Ali, on leave of absence from his government position, completed his second master's degree in 1967 and a Ph.D. degree in 1969, both in Mathematical Statistics from the University of Toronto in Canada.   == Career in academe == In 1969, Ali began his academic career at Ball State University in Muncie, Indiana, USA as an assistant professor of Statistics, then became an associate professor in 1974 and a full professor in 1978. In 2000, he was named the George and Frances Ball Distinguished Professor of Statistics. Upon Ali's retirement in 2007, he was appointed as the George and Frances Ball Distinguished Professor of Statistics Emeritus and Professor Emeritus of Mathematical Sciences. During Ali's tenure at Ball State University, he published roughly 200 articles and presented over 120 papers at various professional meetings and universities worldwide. His earlier publications were on h-statistics, l-statistics, k-statistics and related finite sampling methods. Later his research focused on order statistics and statistical inference based on optimal spacing and goodness-of-fit procedures. He has also published in diverse areas such as ranking and selection, multivariate distributions, characterization, and mixtures of distributions. Most recently he has published in the areas of Bayesian inference and reliability theory. He is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Fellow of the Institute of Statisticians, a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, and an Expatriate Fellow of the Bangladesh Academy of Sciences. Dr. Ali has been a visiting professor at several universities and statistical institutes in the USA, Canada, Bangladesh, India, Korea, Japan and Saudi Arabia.   == Honors bestowed == Fellow of the American Statistical Association Fellow of the Institute of Statisticians Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society Expatriate Fellow of Bangladesh Academy of Sciences Elected Member, International Statistical Institute Member of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics   == Awards received == Sagamore of the Wabash Award – awarded by Former Governor of Indiana Frank O'Bannon, 2002. Gold Medal of the Islamic Society of Statistical Sciences, 2005. First recipient of the Qazi Motahar Hossain Gold Medal, 1990. Outstanding Faculty Award, Ball State University, 1993. Outstanding Researcher Award, Ball State University, 1985. “Our Pride” Award, Bangladeshi-American Federation Incorporated (BAFI), 2005.   == Special volumes published == Special Volume of the Journal of Statistics in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali, 2014. Statistics in the Twenty-first Century: A Special Volume of the Pakistan Journal of Statistics and Operation Research in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his 75th Birthday Anniversary, 2012. Festschrift in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his retirement, 2007 by Ball State University. Special Volume of the International Journal of Statistical Sciences in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his 70th Birthday Anniversary, 2007. Special Volume of the Pakistan Journal of Statistics in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali, 2004. Special Volume of the Journal of Statistical Studies in Honor of Professor Mir Masoom Ali on the occasion of his 65th Birthday Anniversary, 2002.   == Notes and references ==   == External links == Dr. Mir Masoom Ali Homepage Department of Mathematical Sciences at Ball State University Ball State University Information about George and Frances Ball Distinguished Professor Midwest Biopharmaceutical Statistics Workshop (MBSW) 30th Annual MBSW American Statistics Association Royal Statistical Society Webcite Bangladesh Academy of Sciences International Statistical Institute Institute of Mathematical Statistics

Mollie Orshansky (January 9, 1915 – December 18, 2006) was an American economist and statistician who, in 1963–65, developed the Orshansky Poverty Thresholds, which are used in the United States as a measure of the income that a household must not exceed to be counted as poor.   == Life and career == Miss Orshansky was born January 9, 1915, the third of six daughters of Samuel and Fannie Orshansky, Jewish immigrants who settled in the Bronx after leaving Ukraine. She attended Hunter College High School, and received an A.B. in mathematics and statistics from Hunter College in 1935. She continued graduate studies in economics and statistics at the Department of Agriculture Graduate School and American University. In 1939 she became a research clerk with the Children's Bureau, working on biometric studies of child health, growth, and nutrition. In January 1942, as a statistician in the New York City Department of Health, she worked on a survey of the incidence of, and therapies for, pneumonia. In 1945, Orshansky moved to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, where she spent the next thirteen years a family economist, director of the Program Statistics Division, and a food economist. In 1958, Orshansky joined the Social Security Administration as a social science research analyst in the Office of Research and Statistics. In this capacity she was responsible for analytical studies to measure income adequacy, family welfare and patterns of family income. In 1963 she developed the official measure of poverty used by the U.S. government (see Poverty in the United States). She used the cost of a nutritionally adequate diet as the basis for a cost-of-living estimate and to calculate a cost of living for families of different sizes and composition. In 1976, Orshansky received the Distinguished Service Award in recognition for her leadership in creating the first nationally accepted measures of income adequacy and applying them to public policy. She retired in 1982. She was hospitalized in the autumn of 2001 and a legal battle ensued over her care. Orshansky was taken to New York according to her wishes, but a judge who had appointed a guardian tried to compel her return to Washington DC. The judge was overruled on appeal, and Orshansky died in Manhattan several years later.   == Popular culture == Orshansky's development of the Poverty Thresholds was a plot element in an episode of the United States television program The West Wing. In the episode "The Indians in the Lobby," the federal government was considering a reclassification of poverty forty years later that would have made use of a new formula to add four million additional citizens to the category. Orshansky, a native-born U.S. citizen, was characterized incorrectly in the show as an Eastern European immigrant who created a United States "cost of living formula ... based on life in Poland during the Cold War."   == References ==   == External links == A Chronological Bibliography of Mollie Orshansky’s Publications (Including Congressional Testimony). Compiled and annotated by Gordon M. Fisher, at hhs.gov

Morris Herman DeGroot (June 8, 1931 – November 2, 1989) was an American statistician.   == Biography == Born in Scranton, Pennsylvania, DeGroot graduated from Roosevelt University and earned master's and doctor's degrees from the University of Chicago. DeGroot joined Carnegie Mellon in 1957 and became a University Professor, the school's highest faculty position. He was the founding editor of the review journal Statistical Science.   == Academic works == He wrote six books, edited four volumes and authored over one hundred papers. Most of his research was on the theory of rational decision-making under uncertainty. His Optimal Statistical Decisions, published in 1970, is still recognized as one of the great books in the field. His undergraduate text, Probability and Statistics, published in 1975, is widely recognized as a classic textbook.   === Books === DeGroot, M.H. & M.J. Schervish (2011), Probability and Statistics, 4th Ed, Pearson, ISBN 978-0-3215-0046-5 DeGroot, M.H. & M.J. Schervish (2011), Student Solutions Manual for Probability and Statistics, Pearson, ISBN 978-0-3217-1598-2 DeGroot, M.H. and M.J. Schervish (2002). Probability and Statistics (third ed.). Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-201-52488-8.  DeGroot, M.H. & M.J. Schervish (1989), Probability and Statistics, 2nd Ed, Wiley, ISBN 978-0-2011-1366-2 DeGroot, Morris H., Optimal Statistical Decisions. Wiley Classics Library. 2004. (Originally published (1970) by McGraw-Hill.) ISBN 0-471-68029-X. DeGroot, M.H., S.E. Fienberg & J.B. Kadane (1994), Statistics and the Law (1994), Wiley, ISBN 978-0-4710-5538-9 DeGroot, M.H. and R.M. Cyert (1987). Bayesian Analysis and Uncertainty in Economic Theory. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-7471-8.    == Awards and honors == DeGroot was elected fellow of the American Statistical Association, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the International Statistical Institute, the Econometric Society and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. ISBA's DeGroot Prize is named for him.   == See also == Becker–DeGroot–Marschak method   == References ==   == Further reading == "Biography of Morris H. DeGroot", Statistical Science, Vol. 6, No. 1. (Feb., 1991), pp. 3–14. "Morris DeGroot, 58, A Statistics Professor", Obituary, New York Times, November 3, 1989.   == External links == Morris H. DeGroot at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Nathaniel Read "Nate" Silver (born January 13, 1978) is an American statistician and writer who analyzes baseball (see sabermetrics) and elections (see psephology). He is currently the editor-in-chief of ESPN's FiveThirtyEight blog and a Special Correspondent for ABC News. Silver first gained public recognition for developing PECOTA, a system for forecasting the performance and career development of Major League Baseball players, which he sold to and then managed for Baseball Prospectus from 2003 to 2009. After Silver successfully called the outcomes in 49 of the 50 states in the 2008 U.S. Presidential election, in 2009 Silver was named one of The World's 100 Most Influential People by Time. In 2010, the FiveThirtyEight blog was licensed for publication by The New York Times. In 2012 and 2013, FiveThirtyEight won Webby Awards as the "Best Political Blog" from the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences. In the 2012 United States presidential election between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney, Silver correctly predicted the winner of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In July 2013, FiveThirtyEight was sold to ESPN, and Silver became its Editor in Chief. The ESPN-owned FiveThirtyEight launched on March 17, 2014. The site focused on a broad range of subjects under the rubric of "data journalism". Silver's book, The Signal and the Noise, was published in September 2012. It subsequently reached The New York Times best seller list for nonfiction, and was named by Amazon.com as the #1 best nonfiction book of 2012. The Signal and the Noise won the 2013 Phi Beta Kappa Award in Science. The book has been published in nine foreign languages: Chinese (separate editions in traditional and simplified characters), Czech, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, Spanish, and Romanian. Having earned a bachelor's degree from The University of Chicago in 2000, Silver has since been awarded four honorary doctoral degrees: from Ripon College (2013), The New School (2013), The University of Leuven (2013), and Amherst College (2014).   == Early life == Silver was born in East Lansing, Michigan, the son of Sally (née Thrun), a community activist, and Brian David Silver, a former chair of the political science department at Michigan State University. Silver's mother's family, of English and German descent, includes several distinguished men and women, including his maternal great-grandfather, Harmon Lewis, who was president of the Alcoa Steamship Company, Inc. Silver has been known to describe himself as "half-Jewish" (Silver's father is Jewish). Silver showed a proficiency in math from a young age. According to journalist William Hageman, "Silver caught the baseball bug when he was 6.... It was 1984, the year the Detroit Tigers won the World Series. The Tigers became his team and baseball his sport. And if there's anything that goes hand in glove with baseball, it's numbers, another of Silver's childhood interests ("It's always more interesting to apply it to batting averages than algebra class"). As a student at East Lansing High School, in 1996 Silver won first place in the State of Michigan in the 49th annual John S. Knight Scholarship Contest for senior high school debaters. Silver first showed his journalism skills as a writer and opinion page editor for The Portrait, East Lansing High School's student newspaper, from 1993–1996. In 2000, Silver graduated with Honors with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics from the University of Chicago. He also wrote for the Chicago Weekly News and the Chicago Maroon. He spent his third year at the London School of Economics.   == Career ==   === Economic consultant: 2000–2003 === After college graduation in 2000, Silver worked for three and a half years as an economic consultant with KPMG in Chicago. When asked in 2009, "What is your biggest regret in life?" Silver responded, "Spending four years of my life at a job I didn't like". While employed at KPMG, however, Silver continued to nurture his lifelong interest in baseball and statistics, and on the side he began to work on his PECOTA system for projecting player performance and careers. He quit his job at KPMG in April 2004 and for a time earned his living mainly by playing online poker.   === Baseball analyst: 2003–2008 === In 2003, Silver became a writer for Baseball Prospectus (BP), after having sold PECOTA to BP in return for a partnership interest. After resigning from KPMG in 2004, he took the position of Executive Vice-President, later renamed Managing Partner of BP. Silver further developed PECOTA and wrote a weekly column under the heading "Lies, Damned Lies". He applied sabermetric techniques to a broad range of topics including forecasting the performance of individual players, the economics of baseball, metrics for the valuation of players, and developing an Elo rating system for Major League baseball. Between 2003 and 2009, Silver co-authored the Baseball Prospectus annual book of Major League Baseball forecasts, as well as other books, including Mind Game: How the Boston Red Sox Got Smart, Won a World Series, and Created a New Blueprint for Winning, Baseball Between the Numbers, and It Ain't Over 'til It's Over: The Baseball Prospectus Pennant Race Book. He contributed articles about baseball to ESPN.com, Sports Illustrated, Slate, the New York Sun, and The New York Times. Silver authored more than 200 articles for Baseball Prospectus.   ==== PECOTA ====  PECOTA (Player Empirical Comparison and Optimization Test Algorithm) is a statistical system that projects the future performance of hitters and pitchers. It is designed primarily for two uses: fans interested in fantasy baseball, and professionals in the baseball business trying to predict the performance and valuation of major league players. Unlike most other baseball projection systems, PECOTA relies on matching a given current player to a set of "comparable" players whose past performance can serve as a guide to how the given current player is likely to perform in the future. Unlike most other such systems, PECOTA also calculates a range of probable performance levels rather than a single predicted value on a given measure such as earned run average or batting average. PECOTA projections were first published by Baseball Prospectus in the 2003 edition of its annual book as well as online by BaseballProspectus.com. Silver produced the PECOTA forecasts for each Major League Baseball season from 2003 through 2009.   === Political analyst and blogger: 2008–present ===   ==== FiveThirtyEight blog ====   ===== Creation and motivation ===== On November 1, 2007, while still employed by Baseball Prospectus, Silver began publishing a diary under the pseudonym "Poblano" on the progressive political blog Daily Kos. Silver set out to analyze quantitative aspects of the political game to enlighten a broader audience. Silver reports that "he was stranded in a New Orleans airport when the idea of FiveThirtyEight.com came to him. 'I was just frustrated with the analysis. ... I saw a lot of discussion about strategy that was not all that sophisticated, especially when it came to quantitative things like polls and demographics'". His forecasts of the 2008 United States presidential primary elections drew a lot of attention, including being cited by The New York Times Op-Ed columnist William Kristol. On March 7, 2008, while still writing as "Poblano," Silver established his own blog, FiveThirtyEight.com. Often colloquially referred to as just 538, the website takes its name from the number of electors in the United States electoral college. Silver described his partisan orientation as follows in the FAQ on his website: "My state [Illinois] has non-partisan registration, so I am not registered as anything. I vote for Democratic candidates the majority of the time (though by no means always). This year, I have been a supporter of Barack Obama". With respect to the impartiality of his electoral projections, Silver stated, "Are [my] results biased toward [my] preferred candidates? I hope not, but that is for you to decide. I have tried to disclose as much about my methodology as possible". On May 30, 2008, Poblano revealed his identity to FiveThirtyEight.com readers. On June 1, 2008, Silver published a two-page Op-Ed article in the New York Post outlining the rationale underlying his focus on the statistical aspects of politics. He first appeared on national television on CNN's American Morning on June 13, 2008.   ===== 2008 election and aftermath ===== Shortly after the November 4 election, ESPN writer Jim Caple observed, "Forget Cole Hamels and the Phillies. No one in baseball had a more impressive fall than Nate Silver.... [R]ight now Silver is exhausted. He barely slept the last couple weeks of the campaign—'By the end, it was full-time plus'—and for that matter, he says he couldn't have kept it up had the campaign lasted two days longer. Plus, he has his Baseball Prospectus duties. 'We write our [Baseball Prospectus 2009] book from now through the first of the year,' [Silver] said. 'I have a week to relax and then it gets just as busy again. In February 2009 I will just have to find an island in the Caribbean and throw my BlackBerry in the ocean'". Later in November 2008, Silver signed a contract with Penguin Group USA to write two books, reportedly for a $700,000 advance. Silver was invited to be a speaker at TED 2009 in February 2009, and keynote speaker at the 2009 South by Southwest (SXSW) Interactive conference (March 2009). While maintaining his FiveThirtyEight.com website, in January 2009 Silver began a monthly feature column, "The Data", in Esquire as well as contributed occasional articles to other media such as The New York Times and the Wall Street Journal. He also tried his luck in the 2009 World Series of Poker. The success of his FiveThirtyEight.com blog marked the effective end of Silver's career as baseball analyst, though he continued to devote some attention to sports statistics and sports economics in his blog. In March 2009, he stepped down as Managing Partner of Baseball Prospectus and handed over responsibility for producing future PECOTA projections to other Baseball Prospectus staff members. In April 2009, he appeared as an analyst on ESPN's Baseball Tonight. After March 2009, he published only two "Lies, Damned Lies" columns on BaseballProspectus.com. In November 2009, ESPN introduced a new Soccer Power Index (SPi), designed by Nate Silver, for predicting the outcome of the 2010 FIFA World Cup. He published a post-mortem after the tournament, comparing his predictions to those of alternative rating systems. In April 2010, in an assignment for New York Magazine, Silver created a quantitative index of "The Most Livable Neighborhoods in New York".   ===== Transition to The New York Times ===== On June 3, 2010, Silver announced on FiveThirtyEight.com,  In the near future, the blog will "re-launch" under a NYTimes.com domain. It will retain its own identity (akin to other Times blogs like DealBook), but will be organized under the News:Politics section. Once this occurs, content will no longer be posted at FiveThirtyEight.com on an ongoing basis, and the blog will re-direct to the new URL. In addition, I will be contributing content to the print edition of The New York Times, and to the Sunday Magazine. The partnership agreement, which is structured as a license, has a term of three years.  The New York Times "FiveThirtyEight: Nate Silver's Political Calculus" commenced on August 25, 2010, with the publication of "New Forecast Shows Democrats Losing 6 to 7 Senate Seats". From that date the blog focused almost exclusively on forecasting the outcomes of the 2010 U.S. Senate and U.S. House of Representatives elections as well as state gubernatorial contests. Silver's Times Sunday Magazine feature first appeared on November 19, 2010, under the heading "Go Figure". It was later titled "Acts of Mild Subversion". While blogging for The Times, Silver also worked on his book about prediction, which was published in September 2012. At that time, Silver began to drop hints that after 2012 he would turn his attention to matters other than detailed statistical forecasting of elections. As reported in New York magazine: " 'I view my role now as providing more of a macro-level skepticism, rather than saying this poll is good or this poll is evil,' he says. And in four [years], he might be even more macro, as he turns his forecasting talents to other fields. 'I’m 97 percent sure that the FiveThirtyEight model will exist in 2016,' he says, 'but it could be someone else who’s running it or licensing it.'" During the last year of FiveThirtyEight's license to The Times, it drew a very large volume of online traffic to the paper:  The Times does not release traffic figures, but a spokesperson said yesterday that Silver’s blog provided a significant—and significantly growing, over the past year—percentage of Times pageviews. This fall, visits to the Times’ political coverage (including FiveThirtyEight) have increased, both absolutely and as a percentage of site visits. But FiveThirtyEight’s growth is staggering: where earlier this year, somewhere between 10 and 20 percent of politics visits included a stop at FiveThirtyEight, last week that figure was 71 percent.  But Silver’s blog has buoyed more than just the politics coverage, becoming a significant traffic-driver for the site as a whole. Earlier this year, approximately 1 percent of visits to the New York Times included FiveThirtyEight. Last week, that number was 13 percent. Yesterday, it was 20 percent. That is, one in five visitors to the sixth-most-trafficked U.S. news site took a look at Silver’s blog.   ===== Departure from The Times ===== In an online chat session a week after the 2012 election Silver commented: "As tempting as it might be to pull a Jim Brown/Sandy Koufax and just mic-drop/retire from elections forecasting, I expect that we'll be making forecasts in 2014 and 2016. Midterm elections can be dreadfully boring, unfortunately. But the 2016 G.O.P. primary seems almost certain to be epic". In late November 2012, Times executive editor Jill Abramson declared her wish to keep Silver and his blog: "We would love to have Nate continue to be part of the New York Times family, and to expand on what he does," she said. "We know he began in sports anyway, so it is not an exclusively political product. I am excited to talk to Nate when he finishes his book tour about ways to expand that kind of reporting". On July 22, 2013, ESPN announced that it had acquired ownership of the FiveThirtyEight website and brand, and that "Silver will serve as editor-in-chief of the site and will build a team of journalists, editors, analysts and contributors in the coming months". The New York Times public editor Margaret Sullivan wrote upon Silver's decision to leave for ESPN:  I don’t think Nate Silver ever really fit into the Times culture and I think he was aware of that. He was, in a word, disruptive. Much like the Brad Pitt character in the movie “Moneyball” disrupted the old model of how to scout baseball players, Nate disrupted the traditional model of how to cover politics.  She added, "A number of traditional and well-respected Times journalists disliked his work". Later, Sullivan wrote in The Times that "I don’t feel so good about not being able to investigate every complaint from every individual reader fully, or about making some misjudgments in individual posts — my Nate Silver commentary, among others, has probably been off-base...". New York magazine reported that executive editor Jill Abramson "put on a full-court press" to keep Silver at The Times and that "for Abramson, Silver was a tentpole attraction for her favorite subject, national politics, and brought the kind of buzz she thought valuable," but the company's CEO and President Mark Thompson "confirmed that keeping Silver was not at the top of his agenda". The article stated that "the major reason Silver left was because he felt it was Thompson who had not committed to building his franchise. The mixed signals from Thompson and Abramson—his lack of enthusiasm for committing resources to Silver, her desire to keep a major star—frustrated Silver and his lawyer".   ===== FiveThirtyEight under ESPN ownership ===== When FiveThirtyEight was relaunched under ESPN's ownership on March 17, 2014, Silver outlined the scope of topics that would be covered under the rubric of "data journalism":  We’ve expanded our staff from two full-time journalists to 20 and counting. Few of them will focus on politics exclusively; instead, our coverage will span five major subject areas — politics, economics, science, life and sports.  Our team also has a broad set of skills and experience in methods that fall under the rubric of data journalism. These include statistical analysis, but also data visualization, computer programming and data-literate reporting. So in addition to written stories, we’ll have interactive graphics and features. Within a couple of months we’ll launch a podcast, and we’ll be collaborating with ESPN Films and Grantland to produce original documentary films.   ==== FiveThirtyEight's election forecasts ====   ===== 2008 U.S. elections =====  In March 2008, Silver established his blog FiveThirtyEight.com, in which he developed a system for tracking polls and forecasting the outcome of the 2008 general election. At the same time, he continued making forecasts of the 2008 Democratic primary elections. That several of his forecasts based on demographic analysis proved to be substantially more accurate than those of the professional pollsters gained visibility and professional credibility for "Poblano," the pseudonym that Silver was then using. After the North Carolina and Indiana primaries on May 6 the popularity of FiveThirtyEight.com "really exploded. Silver recalls the scenario: 'I know the polls show it's really tight in NC, but we think Obama is going to win by thirteen, fourteen points, and he did. ... Any time you make a prediction like that people give you probably too much credit for it.... But after that [Silver's and the website's popularity] started to really take off. It's pretty nonlinear, once you get one mention in the mainstream media, other people [quickly follow suit]'". As a CNET reporter wrote on election eve, "Even though Silver launched the site as recently as March, its straightforward approach, daring predictions, and short but impressive track record has put it on the map of political sites to follow. The Washington Post featured Silver in its 14th annual election prediction contest this year, and he'll be reporting on Tuesday night's results with Dan Rather on HDNet". Silver's final 2008 presidential election forecast accurately predicted the winner of 49 of the 50 states as well as the District of Columbia (missing only the prediction for Indiana). As his model predicted, the races in Missouri and North Carolina were particularly close. He also correctly predicted the winners of every U.S. Senate race. The accuracy of his predictions won him further acclaim, including abroad, and added to his reputation as a leading political prognosticator. Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign signed off on a proposal to share all of its private polling with Silver. After signing a confidentiality agreement, Silver was granted access to hundreds of polls the campaign had conducted.   ===== 2010 U.S. elections =====  Shortly after FiveThirtyEight relocated to The New York Times, Silver introduced his prediction models for the 2010 elections to the U.S. Senate, the U.S. House of Representatives, and state Governorships. Each of these models relied initially on a combination of electoral history, demographics, and polling. Silver eventually published detailed forecasts and analyses of the results for all three sets of elections. He correctly predicted the winner in 34 of the 37 contested Senate races. His 2010 congressional mid-term predictions were not as accurate as those made in 2008, but were still within the reported confidence interval. Silver predicted a Republican pickup of 54 seats in the House of Representatives; the GOP won 63 seats. Of the 37 gubernatorial races, FiveThirtyEight correctly predicted the winner of 36.   ===== 2012 U.S. elections =====  Although throughout 2011 Silver devoted a lot of attention on his blog to the 2012 Republican party primaries, his first effort to handicap the 2012 Presidential general election appeared as the cover story in The New York Times Magazine a year prior to the election: "Is Obama Toast? Handicapping the 2012 Election". Accompanying the online release of this article, Silver also published "Choose Obama's Re-Election Adventure", an interactive toy that allowed readers to predict the outcome of the election based on their assumptions about three variables: President Obama's favorability ratings, the rate of GDP growth, and how conservative the Republican opponent would be. This analysis stimulated a lot of critical discussion. While publishing numerous stories on the Republican primary elections, in mid-February 2012 Silver reprised and updated his previous Magazine story with another one, "What Obama Should Do Next". This story painted a more optimistic picture of President Obama's re-election chances. A companion article on his FiveThirtyEight blog, "The Fundamentals Now Favor Obama", explained how the model and the facts on the ground had changed between November and February. Silver published the first iteration of his 2012 general election forecasts on June 7, 2012. According to the model, at that time Barack Obama was projected to win 291 electoral votes—21 more than the 270 required for a majority. Obama then had an estimated 61.8% chance of winning a majority. On the morning of the November 6, 2012, presidential election, the final update of Silver's model at 10:10 A.M. gave President Barack Obama a 90.9% chance of winning a majority of the 538 electoral votes. Both in summary tables and in an electoral map, Silver forecast the winner of each state. At the conclusion of that day, when Mitt Romney had conceded to Barack Obama, Silver's model had correctly predicted the winner of every one of the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Silver, along with at least three academic-based analysts—Drew Linzer, Simon Jackman, and Josh Putnam—who also aggregated polls from multiple pollsters—thus was not only broadly correct about the election outcome, but also specifically predicted the outcomes for the 9 swing states. In contrast, individual pollsters were less successful. For example, Rasmussen Reports "missed on six of its nine swing-state polls".   == Book ==  The Signal and The Noise was published in the United States on September 27, 2012. It reached the New York Times Best Sellers list as #12 for non-fiction hardback books after its first week in print. It dropped to #20 in the second week, before rising to #13 in the third, and remaining on the non-fiction hardback top 15 list for the following 13 weeks, with a highest weekly ranking of #4. Sales increased after the election on November 6, jumping 800% and becoming the second best seller on Amazon. The book describes methods of mathematical model building using probability and statistics. Silver takes a big-picture approach to using statistical tools, combining sources of unique data (e.g., timing a minor league ball player's fastball using a radar gun), with historical data and principles of sound statistical analysis; Silver argues that many of these are violated by many pollsters and pundits who nonetheless have important media roles. Case studies in the book include baseball, elections, climate change, the financial crash, poker, and weather forecasting. These different topics illustrate different statistical principles. As a reviewer in The New York Times notes: "It’s largely about evaluating predictions in a variety of fields, from finance to weather to epidemiology. We learn about a handful of successes: when, for instance, meteorologists predict a hurricane’s landfall 72 hours in advance.... But mostly we learn about failures. It turns out we’re not even close to predicting the next catastrophic earthquake or the spread of the next killer bird flu, despite the enormous amounts of brainpower trained on these questions in the past few decades".   == Blogs and other publications == Blogs FiveThirtyEight blog, now owned by ESPN Nate Silver's Baseball Prospectus article archive (2003–2009) Nate Silver's The Burrito Bracket (2007) Nate Silver's diaries as "Poblano" on Daily Kos (2007–2009) FiveThirtyEight.com from pre-NYT period (2008–2010) and from ESPN period (2013–) FiveThirtyEight/NYT (2010–2013) Other publications  Nate Silver, "The Most Livable Neighborhoods in New York: A Quantitative Index of the 50 Most Satisfying Places to Live," New York, April 11, 2010. Nate Silver, "The Influence Index," Time, April 29, 2010. Nate Silver and Walter Hickey, "Best Picture Math," Vanity Fair, March 2014. Gareth Cook (Editor), Nate Silver (Introduction). The Best American Infographics 2014, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0547974514. Review of two children's books, with an autobiographical comment: "Beautiful Minds: The Boy Who Loved Math and On a Beam of Light," The New York Times, July 12, 2013. Andrew Gelman, Nate Silver, Aaron S. Edlin, "What Is the Probability Your Vote Will Make a Difference," Economic Inquiry, 2012, 50(2): 321-326. As Silver pointed out in his review of the two children's books listed above, this publication gives him an Erdős number of 4. In addition to chapters in several issues of the Baseball Prospectus annual, Silver contributed chapters to one-off monographs edited by Baseball Prospectus, including: Mind Game: How the Boston Red Sox Got Smart, Won a World Series, and Created a New Blueprint for Winning. Steven Goldman, Ed. New York: Workman Publishing Co., 2005. ISBN 0-7611-4018-2. Baseball Between the Numbers: Why Everything You Know about the Game Is Wrong. Jonah Keri, Ed. New York: Basic Books, 2006. ISBN 0-465-00596-9 (hardback) and ISBN 0-465-00547-0 (paperback). It Ain't over 'til It's over: The Baseball Prospectus Pennant Race Book. Steven Goldman, Ed. New York: Basic Books. Hardback 2007. ISBN 0-465-00284-6; paperback 2008. ISBN 0-465-00285-4.   == Media == Silver's self-unmasking at the end of May 2008 brought him a lot of publicity focused on his combined skill as both baseball statistician-forecaster and political statistician-forecaster, including articles about him in the Wall Street Journal, Newsweek, Science News, and his hometown Lansing State Journal. In early June he began to cross-post his daily "Today's Polls" updates on "The Plank" in The New Republic. Also, Rasmussen Reports began to use the FiveThirtyEight.com poll averages for its own tracking of the 2008 state-by-state races. He appeared on CNN's American Morning and D.L. Hughley Breaks the News, MSNBC's Countdown with Keith Olbermann and Hardball with Chris Matthews, CNBC's Fast Money, Comedy Central's The Colbert Report, WNYC's The Brian Lehrer Show, HDNet's Dan Rather Reports, Amy Goodman's Democracy Now!, PBS's The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, The Charlie Rose Show, and The Rachel Maddow Shows on both Air America Radio and MSNBC, and published articles in The New Republic, the New York Post, the Los Angeles Times, and Newsweek. In 2009 through 2012, Silver appeared as a political analyst on MSNBC, CNN and Bloomberg Television, PBS, NPR, Democracy Now!, The Charlie Rose Show, ABC News, and Current TV. Silver also appeared on the The Colbert Report (October 7, 2008 and November 5, 2012), The Daily Show (October 17, 2012 and November 7, 2012), and Real Time with Bill Maher (October 26, 2012). His forecasts and book were featured on CBS News Sunday Morning (November 4, 2012). That Silver accurately predicted the outcome of the 2012 presidential race, in the face of numerous public attacks on his forecasts by critics, inspired many articles in the press, ranging from Gizmodo, to online and mainstream newspapers, news and commentary magazines, business media, trade journals, media about media, and Scientific American, as well as a feature interview on The Today Show, a return appearance on The Daily Show, and an appearance on Morning Joe. Silver's first appearance on ABC News as Editor-in-Chief of the new FiveThirtyEight.com was on George Stephanopoulos's This Week on November 3, 2013.   == Recognition and awards == In September 2008, FiveThirtyEight became the first blog ever selected as a Notable Narrative by the Nieman Foundation for Journalism at Harvard University. November 2008: Crain's Chicago Business profiled Silver as one of Chicago's "40 under 40" notable young entrepreneurs. November 9, 2008: the New York Times called Silver "perhaps the most unlikely media star to emerge" out of "an election season of unlikely outcomes" and described FiveThirtyEight with its almost five million page views on Election Day as "one of the breakout online stars of the year". December 2008: Newsweek.com identified Silver's November 3, 2008 article "What to Watch For – An hour-by-hour guide to election night" as the 4th most viewed story on Newsweek.com in 2008. December 2008: named by The Daily Beast as one of the "Breakout Stars of 2008". February 2009: named by James Wolcott in Vanity Fair as one of the "Winners of 2008": "No shiny arrow shot swifter and loftier from obscurity to quotable authority than Nate Silver, whose FiveThirtyEight.com site became the expert sensation of the election season ... January 2009: Silver was named by Forbes.com to its third annual "Web Celeb 25", which "track[s] the biggest and brightest stars on the Web, the people who have turned their passions into new-media empires". April 2009: Silver was named as one of the "Rolling Stone 100: Agents of Change". April 27, 2009: named "Blogger of the Year" by The Week in its 6th annual Opinion Awards. April 30, 2009: Silver was named one of "The World's 100 Most Influential People" by TIME magazine. December 2009: Silver was recognized by The New York Times Magazine in its "Ninth Annual Year in Ideas" article for his "Forensic Polling Analysis" of the possible falsification of data by a polling firm. 2009: named "Speaker of the Year" by the intercollegiate Cross Examination Debate Association (CEDA). November 2010: John F. Harris, Editor-in-Chief of Politico writing in Forbes magazine, listed Nate Silver as one of seven bloggers among "The Most Powerful People on Earth". In December 2010: Out magazine included Silver on its list of the top 100 LGBT people of the year. May 2011: Presented the Henry Pringle Lecture at the Columbia Journalism School. March 2012: Crain's New York Business featured Silver as one of New York City's "Forty Under Forty" notable young entrepreneurs. May 2012: FiveThirtyEight won a Webby Award for "Best Political Blog" from the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences in the 16th annual Webby Awards. December 2012: Rolling Stone named Silver one of its Game Changers in 2012. December 2012: Out named Silver as Person of the Year. December 2012: Named by Washington Post columnist Chris Cillizza as having the "Best Year in Washington in 2012" among the "winners and losers of 2012". April 2013: Out ranked Silver No. 6 on its "Power List 50," the "7th annual ranked list of the gay men and women whose power and prestige is instrumental in influencing the way Americans think about, and engage with, the world". April 2013: FiveThirtyEight won a Webby Award for "Best Political Blog" from the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences in the 17th annual Webby Awards. May 2013: Silver was named by Fast Company as No. 1 of its "100 Most Creative People in Business 2013". May 12, 2013: Silver received an honorary Doctor of Science degree (Scientiæ Doctor honoris causa – D.Sc. h.c.) and gave the commencement address at Ripon College. May 24, 2013: Silver received an honorary Doctor of Literature degree (Doctor of Literature honoris causa) and presented a commencement address at The New School. June 2013: The University of Chicago granted Silver a "Professional Achievement Award" at its 72nd annual Alumni Awards Ceremony. June 2013: The S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications at Syracuse University gave Silver the "i3 award for impact, innovation and influence" at its 13th annual Mirror Awards ceremony. August 2013: Presented the President's Invited Address at the Joint Statistical Meetings in Montreal, Canada. October 2013: Silver's The Signal and the Noise won the 2013 Phi Beta Kappa Award in Science, which recognizes "outstanding contributions by scientists to the literature of science". December 2013: The University of Leuven (KU Leuven) (Belgium) and the Leuven Statistics Research Centre awarded Silver an honorary doctoral degree "for his prominent role in the development, application, and dissemination of proper prediction methods in sports and in political sciences". January 2014: Silver was named to Advertising Age's "40 Under 40" list of "the Bright Young Stars of Marketing". May 25, 2014: Silver received a Doctorate of Humane Letters, honoris causa, from Amherst College. May 2015: Silver won the Warren J. Mitofsky Innovators Award from the American Association for Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) "for Contributions to the General Public and Mass Media in the Realm of Statistical Literacy and Thinking".   == Criticism == Silver has been criticized for inaccurate predictions. In January 2010, journalist and blogger Colby Cosh criticized Silver's performance during the Massachusetts special Senate election, saying he was "still arguing as late as Thursday afternoon that Coakley was the clear favourite; he changed his mind at midnight that evening and acknowledged that Scott Brown had a puncher’s chance." (Brown won the election.) Silver's quantitative focus on polling data, without insight from experience in political organizing or journalism, has been a recurring critique from experienced commentators. Huffington Post columnist Geoffrey Dunn described Silver as someone who "has never organized a precinct in his life, much less walked one, pontificating about the dynamics in the electoral processes as if he actually understood them." Considerable criticism during the 2012 elections came from political conservatives, who argued that Silver's election projections were politically biased against Mitt Romney, the Republican candidate for President. For example, Silver was accused of applying a double standard to his treatment of Rasmussen Reports polls, such as a 2010 analysis asserting a statistical bias in its methodology. Mendy Finkel of Daily Caller wrote that "Silver rigged his entire pollster ratings for the sole purpose of lowering Rasmussen's rank". Josh Jordan wrote in National Review that Silver clearly favored Obama and adjusted the weight he gave polls "based on what [he] think[s] of the pollster and the results and not based on what is actually inside the poll". On MSNBC's Morning Joe, host Joe Scarborough stated that Silver's prediction that day of a 73.6% chance of a win for Obama greatly exceeded the confidence of the Obama campaign itself, which Scarborough equated to that of the Romney campaign, both believing "they have a 50.1 percent chance of winning", and calling Silver an "ideologue" and a "joke". Silver responded with the offer of a $1,000 wager (for charity) over the outcome of the election. The New York Times public editor Margaret Sullivan, while defending Silver's analysis, characterized the wager as "a bad idea" as it gave the appearance of a partisan motive for Silver, and "inappropriate" for someone perceived as a Times journalist (although Silver was not a member of the newspaper's staff). After a post-election appearance by Silver on Joe Scarborough's Morning Joe, Scarborough published what he called a "(semi) apology," in which he concluded:  I won’t apologize to Mr. Silver for predicting an outcome that I had also been predicting for a year. But I do need to tell Nate I’m sorry for leaning in too hard and lumping him with pollsters whose methodology is as rigorous as the Simpsons’ strip mall physician, Dr. Nick. For those sins (and a multitude of others that I’m sure I don’t even know about), I am sorry. Politics is a messy sport. And just as ball players who drink beer and eat fried chicken in dugouts across America can screw up the smartest sabermatrician’s forecast, Nate Silver’s formula is sure to let his fervent admirers down from time to time. But judging from what I saw of him this morning, Nate is a grounded guy who admits as much in his book. I was too tough on him and there’s a 84.398264% chance I will be less dismissive of his good work in the future".  Silver's nondisclosure of the details of his analytical model has resulted in some skepticism. Washington Post journalist Ezra Klein wrote: "There are good criticisms to make of Silver's model, not the least of which is that, while Silver is almost tediously detailed about what's going on in the model, he won’t give out the code, and without the code, we can't say with certainty how the model works." Colby Cosh wrote that the model "is proprietary and irreproducible. That last feature makes it unwise to use Silver's model as a straw stand-in for "science", as if the model had been fully specified in a peer-reviewed journal". On August 13, 2014, Silver was criticized for comparing his own experience of being arrested with those of journalists and members of the public during protests and riots in response to the shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri  In a series of eight consecutive postings to Twitter, Silver recounted a story of being arrested but later placating officers with the words "sorry guys, was just stressed out and having a rough day ... my bad!", after which he was given back his burrito to eat in his cell and received a ride home from officers. Silver later publicly apologized, describing his posts as being "misguided and naive".   == Personal life == Political orientation In a 2012 interview with Charlie Rose he stated, "I'd say I am somewhere in-between being a libertarian and a liberal. So if I were to vote it would be kind of a Gary Johnson versus Mitt Romney decision, I suppose." Family links Silver is a grandnephew of geologists Caswell Silver and Leon Silver. Personal Silver is openly gay. "I've always felt like something of an outsider. I've always had friends, but I've always come from an outside point of view. I think that's important. If you grow up gay, or in a household that's agnostic, when most people are religious, then from the get-go, you are saying that there are things that the majority of society believes that I don't believe," he told an interviewer in 2012. "When asked what made you feel more of a misfit, being gay or being a geek, he replied, 'Probably the numbers stuff since I had that from when I was six.'" When asked in 2008 if he had noticed people looking at him as a "gay icon," he responded, "I've started to notice it a little bit, although so far it seems like I'm more a subject of geek affection than gay affection". Silver discussed his sexuality in the context of growing up in East Lansing, in an article about the SCOTUS ruling in favor of recognizing same-sex marriage on the date of its announcement. He analysed the speed of the change of public sentiment, pointing out that the change over only several decades has been palpable to the current generations. Silver has long been interested in fantasy baseball, especially Scoresheet Baseball. While in college he served as an expert on Scoresheet Baseball for BaseballHQ. When he took up political writing, Silver abandoned his blog, The Burrito Bracket, in which he ran a one-and-done competition among the taquerias in his Wicker Park neighborhood in Chicago. Silver plays poker semi-professionally.   == Notes ==   == External links ==  Appearances on C-SPAN Appearances in the Internet Movie Database Interviews, appearances, presentations available on YouTube. Silver discussing his methodology for polling aggregation on Bloggingheads.tv (August 21, 2008) [video] TED 2009 talk about race and the 2008 U.S. presidential election (February 2009) [video] Archive of Esquire "The Data" series of articles, 2008-9 The Signal and the Noise "Authors at Google" talk (November 26, 2012) [video] "Serious Jibber-Jabber with Conan O'Brien" (December 7, 2012) [video] "A Conversation with Nate Silver" at MIT Communications Forum, (Seth Mnookin, interviewer) (February 28, 2013) [video] Video interview about his career in statistics at Joint Statistical Meeting, August 5, 2013 interview on Baseball Prospectus podcast "Effectively Wild (August 17, 2014) [audio]

Nils Lid Hjort (born 12 January 1953) is a Norwegian statistician, and has been a professor of mathematical statistics at the University of Oslo since 1991. Hjort's research themes are varied, with particularly noteworthy contributions in the fields of Bayesian probability (Beta processes for use in non- and semi-parametric models, particularly within survival analysis and event history analysis, but also with links to Indian buffet processes in machine learning), density estimation and nonparametric regression (local likelihood methodology), and model selection (focused information criteria and model averaging). An article on frequentist model averaging, with co-author Gerda Claeskens, was selected as Fast Breaking Paper in the field of mathematics by the Essential Science Indicators in 2005. He has also worked with spatial statistics, statistics of remote sensing, pattern recognition, etc. Hjort is a core member of the Centre of Excellence Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, on the scientific advisory board of the Centre for Innovation Statistics for Innovation, and also involved with the Centre for Biostatistical Modelling in the Medical Sciences, all within the University of Oslo. Hjort is an elected member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters since 1999, and was the third recipient of the Sverdrup Prize, awarded by the Norwegian Statistical Association in 2013. Hjort has also served on the editorial boards on various journals dedicated to the methodology and application of statistical research, including the Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, and the Annals of Statistics, and has been on the programme committees of numerous international conferences. He is leading the 2014–2018 Research Council of Norway funded project FocuStat: Focus Driven Statistical Inference With Complex Data at the University of Oslo. On the applied side, Hjort demonstrated in 1994 that there is a small but Olympically significant difference between inner-lane and outer-lane starts for 500 m speedskating races, after a systematic analysis of world sprint championships data, implying that the Olympic 500 m event has been unfair since 1924. As a result of Hjort's work and initiative, the International Skating Union and the International Olympic Committee changed the rules; since Nagano 1998 onwards, the sprint skaters race the 500 m twice, with one start in inner lane and one start in the outer lane. He is also a regular contributor to the Speedskating World magazine. Other applied work has involved analysis of literary texts. In the famous case of potential plagiarism where Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and others accused Mikhail Sholokhov of not being the rightful author of And Quiet Flows the Don, Hjort's analysis gives full support to Sholokhov. Hjort's other interests include Disney comics (where he has given public lectures and written scholarly articles for various publishers), chamber music and choir singing (taking part in more than ten CD recordings with Grex Vocalis), gøbbing (exchanging ideas with members of a think tank) and cross-country skiing. He has edited two books with the works of notable Disney comics artist Don Rosa. Nils Lid Hjort is one of five sons of Supreme Court lawyer Johan Hjort and Helga Lid, and his grandfathers were Supreme Court lawyer Johan Bernhard Hjort and ethnologist Nils Lid. Among his brothers is typographer, designer and rock music historian Christopher Hjort, and his cousins include writer and publisher Anders Heger, mayor of Tromsø Jens Johan Hjort, violinist and conductor Gottfried von der Goltz, and cellist Kristin von der Goltz.   == External links == List of Hjort's publications via Google Scholar Hjort's page with the University of Oslo The FocuStat website: Focus Driven Statistical Inference With Complex Data Interview on frequentist model averaging Essential Science Indicators interview regarding "this month's fast breaking paper in the field of Mathematics", August 2005 Mangfoldig talltrollmann Interview in forskning.no The physics of Santa Claus Hjort and other scholars argue for the existence of Santa Claus The annual World Cup Speedskating Contest Each year participants from a dozen countries compete for the Nils Lid Hjort trophy The Annual Ludwig von Drake Award Hjort was its first recipient The two Don Rosa books These feature Lancelot Pertwillaby and Captain Kentucky Speedskating Race of the Burg of Ducks With Disney comics artist Don Rosa The Olympic 500-m The Statistical Research Report that contributed to changing the Olympic Rules The Olympic 500-m, Appendix Part two of the Research Report The Olympic 1000-m Research implying an Olympically significant unfairness also for the 1000-m And Quiet Does not Flow the Don: Statistical Analysis of a Quarrel between Nobel Laureates Solzhenitsyn vs. Sholokhov, 2007 Bayesian Nonparametrics at the Isaac Newton Institute The research programme and conference on Bayesian Nonparametrics, 2007 Highly Structured Stochastic Systems Oxford University Press book, 2003 Model Selection and Model Averaging Cambridge University Press book, 2008 Bayesian Nonparametrics Cambridge University Press book, 2010

Octav Onicescu (Romanian pronunciation: [okˈtav oniˈt͡ʃesku]; August 20, 1892 – August 19, 1983) was a Romanian mathematician, member of the Romanian Academy, and founder of the Romanian school of probability theory and statistics.   == Biography == He was born in Botoşani, the son of Vlad Onicescu, from Ștefănești, Botoșani, and Ana, from Oniceni, Neamţ County. He graduated from the Botoşani A. T. Laurian High School in 1911 with a perfect average grade of 10. That same year, he entered the University of Bucharest, from where he graduated with degrees in mathematics and philosophy in 1913. From 1914 to 1916 he was a mathematics teacher at the military gymnasium of Dealu Monastery, near Târgovişte. From 1916 to 1918 he fought in World War I. In 1919, Onicescu went to study geometry at the University of Rome, under the guidance of Tullio Levi-Civita. He earned his Ph.D. in June, 1920 for a thesis titled Sopra gli spazi einsteiniani a gruppi continui di transformazione ("On Einstein manifolds and groups of continuous transformations"). The thesis, which dealt with problems in differential geometry related to Albert Einstein's theory of relativity, was defended in front of a jury of 11 mathematicians, including Levi-Civita, Vito Volterra, and Guido Castelnuovo. In the Fall of 1920 he went to Paris, where he gave talks in Jacques Hadamard's seminar at the Collège de France. While in Paris, he organized a seminar with other Romanian mathematicians, including Petre Sergescu, Şerban Gheorghiu, Alexandru Pantazi, and Şerban Coculescu. In 1922, he returned to Bucharest, where he embarked on a 40-year-long university career. In 1924, he started teaching the first college-level probability theory course in Romania. From 1928 on, he was professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Bucharest, and was appointed full professor in 1931. In 1930, he organized the School of Statistics and established an Institute of Calculus, serving as its director for many years. In 1936 he entered the Legionary Movement. The Romanian poet and mathematician Ion Barbu (Dan Barbilian) was a close friend of his. He was elected corresponding member of the Romanian Academy in 1933, and became full member on February 4, 1965. He was in charge of the Probability Theory section of the Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy. He died in Bucharest on the eve of his 91st birthday, after a short illness.   == Legacy == Onicescu was one of the founders of the Balkan Union of Mathematicians (in 1934) and of the International Centre for Mechanical Sciences in Udine (in 1968). The "Octav Onicescu" museum, founded in Botoşani in October 1995, houses furniture and memorabilia that belonged to him, including manuscripts, letters, diplomas, books, photographs, and military decorations. The memorial house doesn't exist anymore.   == References == (Romanian) Biography, at the Octav Onicescu National College, in Bucharest Marius Iosifescu, "Octav Onicescu, 1892-1983", International Statistical Review, vol. 54, no. 1 (1986), pp. 97–108 Christopher Charles Heyde and Eugene Seneta, "Statisticians of the Centuries", Springer, New York, 2006. ISBN 0-387-95329-9   == External links == Octav Onicescu at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Oskar Johann Viktor Anderson (Belarusian: Оскар Віктар Андэрсан; 2 August 1887, Minsk, Russian Empire – 12 February 1960, Munich, Germany) was a German-Russian mathematician. He was most famously known for his work on mathematical statistics.   == Life == Anderson was born from a German family in Minsk (now in Belarus), but soon moved to Kazan (Russia). His father, Nikolai Anderson, was professor in Finno-Ugric languages at the University of Kazan. His older brothers were the folklorist Walter Anderson and the astrophysicist Wilhelm Anderson. Oskar Anderson graduated from Kazan Gymnasium with a gold medal in 1906. After studying mathematics for one year at the University of Kazan, he moved to St. Petersburg to study economics at the Polytechnic Institute. From 1907 to 1915, he was Aleksandr Chuprov's assistant. In 1912 he started lecturing at a commercial school in St. Petersburg. In 1918 he took on a professorship in Kiev but he was forced to flee Russia in 1920 due to the Russian Revolution, first taking a post in Budapest (Hungary) before becoming a professor at the University of Economics at Varna (Bulgaria) in 1924. Anderson was one of the charter members of the Econometric Society, whose members also elected him to be a fellow of the society in 1933. In 1935 he was appointed director of the Statistical Institute for Economic Research at the University of Sofia and in 1942 he took up a full professorship of statistics at the University of Kiel, where he was joined by his brother Walter Anderson after the end of the second world war. In 1947 he took a position at the University of Munich, teaching there until 1956, when he retired.   == Writings == Über die repräsentative Methode und deren Anwendung auf die Aufarbeitung der Ergbnisse der bulgarischen landwirtschaftlichen Betriebszählung vom 31. Dezember 1926, München : Bayer. Statist. Landesamt, 1949 Die Saisonschwankungen in der deutschen Stromproduktion vor und nach dem Kriege , München : Inst. f. Wirtschaftsforschung, 1950   == External links == "Oskar Anderson". University of St. Andrews on Oskar Anderson. Retrieved March 15, 2005.  "Oskar Anderson". Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Famous scholars from Kiel. Retrieved November 16, 2015.    == References/Further reading ==  Sheynin, O.B. (1970). "Anderson, Oskar Johann Viktor". Dictionary of Scientific Biography 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 154–155. ISBN 0-684-10114-9.

Oswald "Ozzie", "Jake" Jacoby (December 8, 1902 – June 27, 1984) was an American contract bridge player and author, considered one of the greatest bridge players of all time. He also excelled at, and wrote about, other games including backgammon, gin rummy, and poker. He was from Dallas, Texas.   == Early life == Born in Brooklyn, he was taught to play whist at the age of six and played his first bridge at ten. During World War I, he joined the army at 15 by lying about his age but spent most of his time there playing poker. Dropping out of Columbia University as a math major to become an actuary, he became the youngest person ever to pass the examination of the Society of Actuaries at the age of 21. Having an exceptional aptitude for mathematics, Jacoby could multiply three and four digit numbers in his head without benefit of paper. During World War II and the Korean War, he applied these abilities to counterintelligence and cryptanalysis being referred to as a human computer; later, he lectured on probability at M.I.T. and wrote books on mathematics. However, his passion and lifelong focus was games, especially bridge.   == Bridge career == By the end of the twenties, Jacoby had achieved fame as a player at both auction and contract bridge, further gaining international recognition when chosen by Sidney Lenz to be his partner in the famous Culbertson–Lenz match of 1931. Jacoby's more aggressive bidding style confused Lenz and Jacoby withdrew after Lenz's criticism. Years later the analyst Terence Reese wrote, "That the Culbertsons did not win more easily ... was due to the fact that Jacoby was a player of quite different class from any of the others". Jacoby subsequently solidified his position as the most successful tournament player in the thirties as a member of the famous "Four Horsemen" from 1931 to 1933 and the "Four Aces" from 1933 to 1941, dominating tournament play. He is recognized by the American Contract Bridge League (ACBL) as Life Master #2, one of ten named in 1936. LM #1 is David Burnstine, his partner on the Four Horsemen and co-founder of the Four Aces. He pionereed many bidding ideas, including the Jacoby transfer and Jacoby 2NT bids. Throughout his career, he also worked as a bridge columnist; a prolific writer, he wrote over 10,000 newspaper articles on bridge, and his many books include not only bridge but volumes on poker, gin rummy, canasta, and the mathematics of card games and gambling, which he played at high stakes. He also released a record titled How to Win at Championship Bridge. Jacoby captained the North American and US teams that won the Bermuda Bowl in both 1970 and 1971. During a long playing career, he won tournaments with many partners including his son and co-author, James Jacoby (1933–1991), as well as his wife of more than 50 years, Mary Zita Jacoby. Terminally ill, his final tournament victory came in a major event at the ACBL North American Bridge Championships late in 1983, as a member of the team-of four champions for the Reisinger trophy with Edgar Kaplan, Norman Kay, Bill Root and Richard Pavlicek. In the same year, he was named Personality of the Year by the international bridge writers (Charles H. Goren Award). He died at his Dallas home of cancer on June 27, 1984. Jacoby, Lenz, and Milton Work were named to its hall of fame by The Bridge World in 1965, which brought the number of members to six. They were all made founding members of the ACBL Hall of Fame in 1995.   == Bridge accomplishments ==   === Honors === ACBL Hall of Fame, 1965 ACBL Honorary Member of the Year 1967 Honorary World Bridge Federation Grand Master   === Awards === Charles H. Goren Award (Personality of the Year), 1983, from the International Bridge Press Association McKenney Trophy 1959, 1961, 1962, 1963 Herman Trophy 1960   === Wins === IBL World Championship (1) 1935 North American Bridge Championships (31) Vanderbilt (7) 1931, 1934, 1935, 1937, 1938, 1946, 1965 Asbury Park Trophy (now Spingold) (4) 1931, 1932, 1933, 1937 Masters Teams-of-Four (now Spingold) (2) 1934, 1936 Spingold (5) 1938, 1939, 1945, 1950, 1959 Chicago (now Reisinger) (1) 1955 Reisinger (1) 1983 Men's Board-a-Match Teams (2) 1952, 1959 Master Mixed Teams (1) 1968 Life Master Pairs (1) 1936 Fall National Open Pairs (2) 1935, 1960 Open Pairs (1) 1964 Men's Pairs (3) 1934, 1939, 1949 Master Individual (1) 1935  United States Bridge Association (5) Grand National Open Teams (3) 1934, 1935, 1937 Open Pairs (2) 1936, 1937  American Bridge League (2) Men's Teams (2) 1931, 1932   === Runners-up === North American Bridge Championships (21) Vanderbilt (3) 1930, 1941, 1949 Spingold (4) 1941, 1948, 1949, 1957 Chicago (now Reisinger) (5) 1931, 1932, 1939, 1956, 1960 Men's Board-a-Match Teams (2) 1954, 1956 Master Mixed Teams (2) 1935, 1941 Life Master Pairs (2) 1939, 1941 Fall National Open Pairs (1) 1932 Hilliard Mixed Pairs (2) 1931, 1939   == Other games == A poker player and author on the subject, Jacoby was convicted of a gambling charge in 1944 while in the navy but acquitted of a charge of conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman. Although he did not pursue a career in competitive chess and did not write on the game, he was nevertheless a strong player. When in college, Jacoby beat US chess champion Frank Marshall, and in 1963, in a rapid-transit game, he played a draw with Tigran Petrosian, the then world champion. Jacoby was also an expert backgammon player, and in 1972 he was crowned World Backgammon Champion. In 1970, he wrote The Backgammon Book with John R. Crawford, which is considered the first book to deal with backgammon from an analytical viewpoint. The Jacoby Rule, which states that gammons and backgammons count only after the cube has been turned, is named after him.   == Publications ==  Bridge Famous hands of the Culbertson-Lenz match, 1932 Watson on the play of the hand at contract bridge, 1934. Foreword by Oswald Jacoby. The four aces system of contract bridge, 1935 Five-suit bridge, 1938 What's new in bridge, 1954 Hear how to play winning bridge, 1960 The complete book of duplicate bridge, 1965 Win at bridge with Jacoby & son, 1966 Jacoby transfer bids, 1981 Major suit raises, 1981 Improve Your Bridge With Oswald Jacoby: 125 Bridge Hands from the Master, 1983, ISBN 0-07-032238-4 Win at bridge with Oswald Jacoby : America's winningest bridge champion, 1963 Win at bridge with Jacoby modern, 1973 Poker Poker, 1940 Oswald Jacoby on Poker ... Revised edition, 1948 Winning poker, 1949 Oswald Jacoby on Poker, 1981, ISBN 978-0-385-17590-6 Backgammon The Backgammon Book (with John R. Crawford), 1970, ISBN 0-670-14409-6 Rummy Laws of Oklahoma, 1946 Oswald Jacoby on Oklahoma, the wild, wild rummy game, 1948 How to Win at Gin Rummy, 1978 Oswald Jacoby on Gin Rummy, etc., 1947 Canasta Oswald Jacoby's Complete Canasta, 1950 How to win at canasta, 1951 Other card games The book of card game rules and strategies, 1989 The fireside book of cards, 1957 Oswald Jacoby on Gambling, 1963, New Recreations with Magic Squares (with William H. Benson), 1976 Jacoby on card games, 1986 Magic cubes : new recreations, 1981 Mathematics Intriguing Mathematical Problems (with William H. Benson), 1996 How to figure the odds, 1947 Mathematics for pleasure, 1962   == Notes ==   == References ==   == External links == Citation at the ACBL Hall of Fame Oswald Jacoby international record at the World Bridge Federation. Biography at Bridge Bum Biographical information at the Wayback Machine (archived December 3, 2002) at Bridge Guys Oswald Jacoby at Library of Congress Authorities, with 29 catalog records James Jacoby at Library of Congress Authorities, with 6 catalog records

P. N. Mari Bhat (1951–2007), distinguished Indian demographer, was a student of Samuel H. Preston at the University of Pennsylvania from where he received his Ph.D. in 1987. At the time of his death he was the director of the International Institute of Population Science (IIPS) in Mumbai, which he formerly attended as a student.   == Professional career == P. N. Mari Bhat was an associate professor at the Center of Developmental Studies, Thiruvananthapuram, 1987-90. From there he moved on to become the director of the Population Research Center, Dharwad, between 1991 and 1997. Pravin Visaria (1937-2001), the then Director of Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi persuaded Bhat to move to New Delhi and join IEG as a Professor. Bhat joined IIPS in 2005 as its Director. He was a Visiting Professor at the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada, in 1996.   == Research == Bhat’s research career was focused exclusively on Indian demography. His work covered three major areas of Indian demography: mortality, fertility and nuptiality. In his research he always emphasized the primacy of facts and the importance of opinion to be based on facts. Beginning with his first major work, a monograph on Indian vital rates for 1961-81 co-authored with Tim Dyson and Samuel Preston and published in 1984 by the National Academy of Science, he showed exceptional grasp of technical demography, and was able to apply his skills in illuminating issues of public and policy concern. His work could be classified under two headings: the first, work dealing with the compilation and derivation of various demographic estimates and related methodologies; and second, work dealing with various theoretical issues. Bhat’s work provides an unparalleled source for Indian demographic data. Below are the selected references that show the breadth of his work on demographic estimates: 1984: Estimating the Incidence of Widow and Widower Remarriages in India from Census Data ("Population Studies", 38, 1, pp 89-103, co-authored with R Kanbargi). 1990: Fertility and Mortality in Colonial India ("Economic and Political Weekly, 25 (37): 2107-08). 1998: Demographic Estimates for Post-Independence India: A New Integration (Demography India, 27(1), 23-27). 2002: Maternal Mortality in India: An Update ("Studies in Family Planning", 33(3): 227-36). 2004: Indian Demographic Scenario: Vision 2020 in "Planning Commission (ed), India Vision 2020: The Report", Academic Foundation, New Delhi Besides demographic estimates, Bhat’s work covered various theoretical issues in demography. His work on fertility examined the role of education, regional fertility variation and the religious differences in fertility. Selected references for his work in this area are as follows: 1996: Contours of Fertility Decline in India: A District-level Study Based on the 1991 Census in K Srinivasan (ed.), Population Policy and Reproductive Health, Hindustan Publications, New Delhi. 2002: Returning a Favour: Reciprocity between Female Education and Fertility in India ("World Development", 30(10):1791-1803). 2005: Role of Religion in Fertility Decline: The Case of Indian Muslims ("Economic and Political Weekly", 40(5): 385-402; co-authored with F. Zavier) He also explored how fertility decline impacted sex ratios, that is whether preference for smaller families reduced the preference for sons in India. 1997: Fertility Decline and Increased Manifestation of Sex Bias in India ("Population Studies, 51(3): 307-15; co-authored with Monica Das Gupta). 2003: Fertility Decline and Gender Bias in Northern India ("Demography", 40(4): 637-57; co-authored with F. Zavier) His major work on nuptiality in India dealt with the impact of marriage squeeze on marriage age and rates. He and his co-author (S. Halli) proposed five new indicators that allow the examination of the influence of marriage squeeze on marriage rates. 1999: Demography of Brideprice and Dowry: Causes and Consequences of the Indian Marriage Squeeze ("Population Studies, 53:129-48; co-authored with S.S Halli).   == Administrative contribution == Mari Bhat played a key role in the implementation of the third round of the National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3, 2005-6). In recognition of his contribution, the final report of the survey is dedicated in his memory.   == Sources == P N Mari Bhat: An Intellectual Tribute ("Economic and Political Weekly", 3611-15, 8 September 2007: Monica Das Gupta, Samuel H Preston, Vijayendra Rao, T V Sekher); contains a complete bibliography of his work and a discussion of his contributions to Indian demography   == External links == UNESCAP:Obituary of Professor Mari Bhat ICDCM2010-International Conference on Demography, Culture, and Marketing: Best Research Paper Award in DemographyProfessor Mari Bhat

Pafnuty Lvovich Chebyshev (Russian: Пафну́тий Льво́вич Чебышёв; IPA: [pɐfˈnutʲɪj ˈlʲvovʲɪtɕ tɕɪbɨˈʂof]) (May 16 [O.S. May 4] 1821 – December 8 [O.S. November 26] 1894) was a Russian mathematician. His name can be alternatively transliterated as Chebychev, Chebysheff, Chebyshov; or Tchebychev, Tchebycheff (French transcriptions); or Tschebyschev, Tschebyschef, Tschebyscheff (German transcriptions).   == Biography == One of nine children, Chebyshev was born in the central Russian village of Akatovo near Borovsk, to Agrafena Ivanova Pozniakova and Lev Pavlovich Chebyshev. His father had fought as an officer against Napoleon Bonaparte's invading army. Chebyshev was originally home schooled by his mother and his cousin, Avdotia Kvintillianova Soukhareva. He learned French early in life, which later helped him communicate with other mathematicians. A stunted leg prevented him from playing with other children, leading him to concentrate on his studies instead. Chebyshev studied at the college level at Moscow University, where he earned his bachelor's degree in 1841. At Moscow University, Chebyshev was a graduate student of Nikolai Brashman. After Chebyshev became a professor of mathematics in Moscow himself, his two most illustrious graduate students were Andrei Andreyevich Markov (the elder) and Aleksandr Lyapunov. Later he moved to St. Petersburg, where he founded one of the most important schools of mathematics in Russia, and there is today a research institute in mathematics called the Chebyshev Laboratory in that city.   == Mathematical contributions == Chebyshev is known for his work in the fields of probability, statistics, mechanics, and number theory. The Chebyshev inequality states that if  is a random variable with standard deviation σ > 0, then the probability that the outcome of  is no less than  away from its mean is no more than :  The Chebyshev inequality is used to prove the Weak Law of Large Numbers. The Bertrand–Chebyshev theorem (1845,1852) states that for any , there exists a prime number  such that . This is a consequence of the Chebyshev inequalities for the number  of prime numbers less than , which state that  is of the order of . A more precise form is given by the celebrated prime number theorem: the quotient of the two expressions approaches 1.0 as  tends to infinity. Chebyshev is also known for the Chebyshev polynomials and the Chebyshev bias – the difference between the number of primes that are 3 (modulo 4) and 1 (modulo 4).   == Legacy ==  Chebyshev is considered to be a founding father of Russian mathematics. Among his well-known students were the mathematicians Dmitry Grave, Aleksandr Korkin, Aleksandr Lyapunov, and Andrei Markov. According to the Mathematics Genealogy Project, Chebyshev has 10,629 mathematical "descendants" as of 2015. The lunar crater Chebyshev and the asteroid 2010 Chebyshev were named in his honour.   == Publications == Tchebychef, P. L. (1899), Markov, Andreĭ Andreevich; Sonin, N., eds., Oeuvres I, New York: Commissionaires de l'Académie impériale des sciences, MR 0147353, Reprinted by Chelsea 1962  Tchebychef, P. L. (1907), Markov, Andreĭ Andreevich; Sonin, N., eds., Oeuvres II, New York: Commissionaires de l'Académie impériale des sciences, MR 0147353, Reprinted by Chelsea 1962  Butzer, P. L. Chebyshev (1821–1894): A Guide to his Life and Work, doi:10.1006/jath.1998.3289    == See also == Chebyshev cube root Chebyshev distance Chebyshev filter, a family of analog filters in electronics and signal processing Chebyshev function in number theory Chebyshev polynomials and the "Chebyshev form" Chebyshev's inequality in probability and statistics Chebyshev's sum inequality Chebyshev equation Chebyshev iteration Chebyshev linkage, a straight line generating linkage Roberts–Chebyshev theorem on the generation of cognate coupler-curves. Chebyshev–Markov–Stieltjes inequalities Chebychev–Grübler–Kutzbach criterion for the mobility analysis of linkages Chebyshev nodes Chebyshev rational functions Chebyshev's bias Discrete Chebyshev polynomials Chebyshev integral   == References ==   == External links == Mechanisms by Chebyshev – short 3d films – embodiment of Tchebishev's inventions Pafnuty Chebyshev at the Mathematics Genealogy Project O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Pafnuty Chebyshev", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Works by or about Pafnuty Chebyshev in libraries (WorldCat catalog) Biography, another one, and yet another (all in Russian). Œuvres de P.L. Tchebychef (in French)

Paola Sebastiani is a biostatistician and a Professor at Boston University working in the field of genetic epidemiology, building prognostic models that can be used for the dissection of complex traits. Her most important contribution is a model based on a Bayesian network that integrates more than 60 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and other biomarkers to compute the risk for stroke in patients with sickle cell anemia. This model was shown to have high sensitivity and specificity and demonstrated, for the first time, how an accurate risk prediction model of a complex genetic trait that is modulated by several interacting genes can be built using Bayesian networks. Sebastiani obtained a first degree in Mathematics from the University of Perugia, Italy (1987), an M.Sc. in Statistics from University College London (1990), and a Ph.D. in Statistics from the Sapienza University of Rome (1992). Her research interests include Bayesian modeling of biomedical data, particularly genetic and genomic data. She came to Boston University in 2003, after previously having been an Assistant Professor in the Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. A controversial paper regarding the genetics of aging with which she was associated was retracted from the journal Science in 2011 due to flawed data. The corrected version was published in PLOS ONE, and several of the genes found associated with exceptional human longevity were replicated in other studies of centenarians.   == Publications == She has published several peer-reviewed papers. According to Scopus the most cited ones are: Ramoni, M.F., Sebastiani, P., Kohane, I.S., "Cluster analysis of gene expression dynamics" (2002) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 99 (14), pp. 9121–9126. Sebastiani, P., Ramoni, M.F., Nolan, V., Baldwin, C.T., Steinberg, M.H., "Genetic dissection and prognostic modeling of overt stroke in sickle cell anemia" (2005) Nature Genetics, 37 (4), pp. 435–440. Mandl, K.D., Overhage, J.M., Wagner, M.M., Lober, W.B., Sebastiani, P., Mostashari, F., Pavlin, J.A., Gesteland, P.H., Treadwell, T., Koski, E., Hutwagner, L., Buckeridge, D.L., Aller, R.D., Grannis, S., "Implementing syndromic surveillance: A practical guide informed by the early experience" (2004) Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 11 (2), pp. 141–150. Sebastiani, P., Gussoni, E., Kohane, I.S., Ramoni, M.F., Baker, H.V., "Statistical challenges in functional genomics" (2003) Statistical Science, 18 (1), pp. 33–70.   == References ==

Paul Richard Halmos (Hungarian: Halmos Pál; March 3, 1916 – October 2, 2006) was a Hungarian-Jewish-born American mathematician who made fundamental advances in the areas of mathematical logic, probability theory, statistics, operator theory, ergodic theory, and functional analysis (in particular, Hilbert spaces). He was also recognized as a great mathematical expositor.   == Early life and educationEdit == Halmos arrived in the U.S. at 13 years of age, but never lost his Hungarian accent. Halmos obtained his B.A. from the University of Illinois, majoring in mathematics, but fulfilling the requirements for both a math and philosophy degree. He took only three years to obtain the degree, and was only 19 when he graduated. He then began a Ph.D. in philosophy; but, after failing his masters' oral exams, he shifted to mathematics, graduating in 1938. Joseph L. Doob supervised his dissertation, titled Invariants of Certain Stochastic Transformations: The Mathematical Theory of Gambling Systems.   == CareerEdit == Shortly after his graduation, Halmos left for the Institute for Advanced Study, lacking both job and grant money. Six months later, he was working under John von Neumann, which proved a decisive experience. While at the Institute, Halmos wrote his first book, Finite Dimensional Vector Spaces, which immediately established his reputation as a fine expositor of mathematics. Halmos taught at Syracuse University, the University of Chicago (1946–60), the University of Michigan, the University of California at Santa Barbara (1976–78), the University of Hawaii, and Indiana University. From his 1985 retirement from Indiana until his death, he was affiliated with the Mathematics department at Santa Clara University.   == AccomplishmentsEdit == In a series of papers reprinted in his 1962 Algebraic Logic, Halmos devised polyadic algebras, an algebraic version of first-order logic differing from the better known cylindric algebras of Alfred Tarski and his students. An elementary version of polyadic algebra is described in monadic Boolean algebra. In addition to his original contributions to mathematics, Halmos was an unusually clear and engaging expositor of university mathematics. He won the Lester R. Ford Award in 1971 and again in 1977 (shared with W. P. Ziemer, W. H. Wheeler, S. H. Moolgavkar, J. H. Ewing and W. H. Gustafson). Halmos chaired the American Mathematical Society committee that wrote the AMS style guide for academic mathematics, published in 1973. In 1983, he received the AMS's Steele Prize for exposition. In the American Scientist 56(4): 375–389, Halmos argued that mathematics is a creative art, and that mathematicians should be seen as artists, not number crunchers. He discussed the division of the field into mathology and mathophysics, further arguing that mathematicians and painters think and work in related ways. Halmos's 1985 "automathography" I Want to Be a Mathematician is an account of what it was like to be an academic mathematician in 20th century America. He called the book "automathography" rather than "autobiography", because its focus is almost entirely on his life as a mathematician, not his personal life. The book contains the following quote on Halmos' view of what doing mathematics means:  Don't just read it; fight it! Ask your own questions, look for your own examples, discover your own proofs. Is the hypothesis necessary? Is the converse true? What happens in the classical special case? What about the degenerate cases? Where does the proof use the hypothesis?  In these memoirs, Halmos claims to have invented the "iff" notation for the words "if and only if" and to have been the first to use the “tombstone” notation to signify the end of a proof, and this is generally agreed to be the case. The tombstone symbol ∎ (Unicode U+220E) is sometimes called a halmos. In 2005, Halmos and his wife Virginia funded the Euler Book Prize, an annual award given by the Mathematical Association of America for a book that is likely to improve the view of mathematics among the public. The first prize was given in 2007, the 300th anniversary of Leonhard Euler's birth, to John Derbyshire for his book about Bernhard Riemann and the Riemann hypothesis: Prime Obsession.   == Books by HalmosEdit == 1942. Finite-Dimensional Vector Spaces. Springer-Verlag. 1950. Measure Theory. Springer Verlag. 1951. Introduction to Hilbert Space and the Theory of Spectral Multiplicity. Chelsea. 1956. Lectures on Ergodic Theory. Chelsea. 1960. Naive Set Theory. Springer Verlag. 1962. Algebraic Logic. Chelsea. 1963. Lectures on Boolean Algebras. Van Nostrand. 1967. A Hilbert Space Problem Book. Springer-Verlag. 1978 (with V. S. Sunder). Bounded Integral Operators on L² Spaces. Springer Verlag 1985. I Want to Be a Mathematician. Springer-Verlag. 1987. I Have a Photographic Memory. Mathematical Association of America. 1991. Problems for Mathematicians, Young and Old, Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, Mathematical Association of America. 1996. Linear Algebra Problem Book, Dolciani Mathematical Expositions, Mathematical Association of America. 1998 (with Steven Givant). Logic as Algebra, Dolciani Mathematical Expositions No. 21, Mathematical Association of America.   == See alsoEdit == Criticism of non-standard analysis   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == J. H. Ewing; F. W. Gehring (1991). Paul Halmos: Celebrating 50 Years of Mathematics. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-97509-8. OCLC 22859036.  Includes a bibliography of Halmos's writings through 1991. John Ewing (October 2007). "Paul Halmos: In His Own Words" (PDF). Notices of the American Mathematical Society 54 (9): pp.1136–1144. Retrieved 2008-01-15.  CS1 maint: Extra text (link) Paul Halmos (1985). I want to be a Mathematician: An Automathography. Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-96470-3. OCLC 230812318.    == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Paul Halmos", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . "Paul Halmos: A Life in Mathematics", Mathematical Association of America (MAA) Paul Halmos at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Peter James Donnelly, FRS FMedSci (born 15 May 1959) is an Australian mathematician and Professor of Statistical Science at the University of Oxford. He is a specialist in applied probability and has made contributions to coalescent theory. His research group at Oxford has an international reputation for the development of statistical methodology to analyze genetic data.   == Background, family and education == Donnelly was born and raised in Brisbane, Queensland, the son of financial adviser, economic theorist and author Austin Donnelly and Sheila Donnelly. He is the brother of Sharon Donnelly and of eminent Australian financier, funds manager and company director Melda Donnelly. He was educated at St. Joseph's Christian Brothers College, Gregory Terrace, the University of Queensland and Balliol College, Oxford.   == Professional life == When elected to a chair at Queen Mary College, London in 1988 Donnelly was only 29, and possibly the youngest Professor in Great Britain. He held a chair at the University of Chicago (1994–96) and was head of the Department of Statistics at the University of Oxford from 1996 to 2001. Since 2007, he has been Director, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics (WTCHG) in Oxford, where he is currently based. He is a fellow at St Anne's College, Oxford. Many leading statistical geneticists worked with Donnelly as young researchers including David Balding, Carsten Wiuf, Matthew Stephens and Jonathan Pritchard. One area in which he has a leading reputation is in the interpretation of DNA evidence. He has acted as an expert witness on forensic science in criminal trials. He is noted for his collaborative work with biologists. He has been heavily involved in a number of large scale projects, such as the International HapMap Project and the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, a genome-wide association study.   == Awards and honours == Donnelly was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2006 and also elected as a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences in 2008. Other significant awards and honours have included: 1980 University Medal, University of Queensland 1980-1983 Rhodes Scholarship 1984-1985 University of Wales Research Fellowship 1988 Elected Ordinary Member of the International Statistical Institute 1990 Special Invited Lecturer, Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1990-1995 SERC Advanced Fellowship 1995 Elected Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics 1999 Elected Honorary Fellow, Institute of Actuaries 2000 Bernoulli Lecturer, 5th World Congress of the Bernoulli Society 2001 Forum Lecturer, European Meeting of Statisticians 2002 Editor’s Invited Paper, Statistical Society of Australia 2002 Mitchell Prize, of the American Statistical Association and ISBA 2004 Guy Medal in Silver, Royal Statistical Society 2007 Medallion Lecturer, Institute of Mathematical Statistics. 2007 The main paper from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, which Donnelly chaired, won several awards, including The Lancet 's Paper of the Year, Scientific American 's Research Leader of the Year, the Amadeus Prize, and one of Nature's Editor's Picks for 2007. 2009 Awarded the Weldon Memorial Prize    == See also == R v Adams   == References ==   == External links == Peter Donnelly at TED Peter Donnelly: How juries are fooled by statistics (TEDGlobal 2005)  Nuffield department of Medicine-Podcast meet our researchers BBC Inside Science program -interview with Adam Rutherford re his work on the genetic map of the UK

Peter Gavin Hall FAA FRS AO (born 20 November 1951) is an Australian researcher in probability theory and mathematical statistics. He earned his Doctorate at the University of Oxford in 1976.   == Biography == Dr. Hall was born to radiophysics and radio astronomy pioneer Ruby Payne-Scott and telephone technician William Holman Hall. His younger sister is artistic photographer and sculptor, Fiona Margaret Hall. Hall is an author in probability and statistics. Mathscinet lists him with more than 500 publications as of January 2008. He has made contributions to nonparametric statistics, in particular for curve estimation and resampling: the bootstrap method, smoothing, density estimation, and bandwidth selection. He has worked on numerous applications across fields of economics, engineering, physical science and biological science. Hall has also made contributions to surface roughness measurement using fractals. In probability theory he has made many contributions to limit theory, spatial processes and stochastic geometry. His paper "Theoretical comparison of bootstrap confidence intervals" (Annals of Statistics, 1988) has been reprinted in the Breakthroughs in Statistics collection. Professor Hall is currently an ARC Laureate Fellow at the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne, and also has a joint appointment at University of California Davis. He previously held a professorship at the Centre for Mathematics and its Applications at the Australian National University.   == Main Honours and Awards == 2013 Foreign Associate, National Academy of Sciences 2013 Officer of the Order of Australia 2011 Guy Medal in Silver 2010 George Szekeres Medal 2007 Matthew Flinders Medal and Lecture  2000 Fellow of the Royal Society of London 1996 Fellow of the American Statistical Association 1994 Hannan Medal of the Australian Academy of Science 1989 Committee of Presidents of Statistical Societies Award 1987 Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science 1986 Rollo Davidson Prize, University of Cambridge 1986 Australian Mathematical Society Medal 1984 Fellow of Institute of Mathematical Statistics   == Bibliography == P. Hall; C.C. Heyde (1980): Martingale Limit Theory and its Application, Academic Press, New York. ISBN 0-12-319350-8 P. Hall (1982): Rates of Convergence in the Central Limit Theorem, Pitman, London. ISBN 0-273-08565-4 P. Hall (1988): Introduction to the Theory of Coverage Processes, Wiley, New York. ISBN 0-471-85702-5 P. Hall (1992): The Bootstrap and Edgeworth Expansion, Springer, New York. ISBN 0-387-97720-1   == References == ^ http://www.arc.gov.au/media/fl11/pdf/Peter_Hall_bio.pdf ^ "UCDavis - History of the Department of Statistics". Retrieved 4 March 2011.  ^ "News from the National Academy of Sciences 2013". 30 April 2013.  ^ "Science staff and alumni receive Australia Day honours 2013". 14 February 2013.  ^ "Peter Hall accepts Guy Medal". RSSeNews. Royal Statistical Society. 3 June 2011.  ^ "George Szekeres Medal for 2010". 10 January 2010.  ^ "Awardees for 2007". Australian Academy of Science. Retrieved 18 September 2015.  ^ List of Fellows of the Royal Society G,H,I ^ http://www.amstat.org/awards/fellowslist.cfm ^ COPSS Presidents' Award ^ http://www.sciencearchive.org.au/fellows/fellowship-list.html ^ Rollo Davidson Prize ^ Australian Mathematical Society Medal ^ http://imstat.org/awards/honored_fellows.htm   == External links == Mathematical genealogy of Peter Hall Peter Hall's Homepage at the University of Melbourne ISI Highly Cited Researcher: Peter Hall

Peter Laslett (18 December 1915 – 8 November 2001) was an English historian.   == Biography == Born Thomas Peter Ruffell Laslett and educated at the Watford Grammar School for Boys, Peter Laslett studied history at St John's College, Cambridge in 1935 and graduated with a double first in 1938. During World War II he learned Japanese and worked at Bletchley Park and Washington decoding Japanese naval intelligence. It was at Bletchley Park that he met his future wife, Janet Crockett Clark, whom he married in 1947. Returning to Cambridge in 1948 with a research fellowship at St John's College, Laslett edited Robert Filmer's political writings (Patriarcha and Other Political Writings, 1949). According to noted historian J.G.A. Pocock, it was with this work that Laslett provided the initial inspiration for the 'Cambridge School' of the history of political thought, the methods of which are now widely practised throughout the profession. Laslett combined such academic activity with a lifelong concern to engage a wider audience. He worked simultaneously as a BBC radio producer for the Third Programme. One product of this desire to reach a wider audience was his pathbreaking and highly-popular book The World We Have Lost: England Before the Industrial Age (1965; US edition, 1966), issued in a second edition in 1971 and in a retitled third revised edition, The World We Have Lost: Further Explored (1983; US edition, 1984). Simon Mitton credits Laslett with having launched in 1948 the radio broadcasting career of the astronomer Fred Hoyle. In 1953, Laslett was appointed a university lecturer in history at Cambridge, and was elected a fellow Trinity College in the same year. He continued work in the history of political theory, discovering Locke's library and demonstrating (against the accepted account) that John Locke's Two Treatises on Government had been written prior to the English "Glorious Revolution" of 1688–9, remarking that the "Two Treatises is an Exclusion Tract, not a Revolution Pamphlet." Laslett published an edition of the treatises in 1960, subsequently reprinted many times, which is now recognized as the definitive account of these pillars of modern liberal democracy. From 1957 he founded and co-edited Philosophy, Politics and Society, a series of collections on political philosophy. Laslett took up an entirely different line of historical research from the early 1960s. Trying to understand 17th-century listings of the inhabitants of Clayworth and Cogenhoe, Northamptonshire, he became persuaded of the need to pursue historical demography more systematically. In 1964, Laslett and Tony Wrigley co-founded the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure. With funding from the Social Science Research Council, the Cambridge Group worked alongside amateur volunteers on local records, and established the journal Local Population Studies. Laslett's practical reformism found an outlet from the 1960s in his efforts, together with Michael Young, to develop the Open University. When told of his family history of Kent yeomen back to 1600 he looked it over and said "Good. Not a gentleman in 400 years." Laslett was Reader in Politics and the History of Social Structure at Cambridge University (the title reflecting his own unusual mix of historical interests) from 1966 until retirement in 1983. At this point, his interests turned to the historical understanding and practical betterment of the elderly. Laslett played a pivotal role in founding the University of the Third Age in 1982. He died in 2001, aged 85, and was interred at Wolvercote Cemetery in Oxford, and was survived by his wife Janet, sons George and Robert, and grandchildren, Vivian, Alden and Claire. His fine library of early printed books by and about Filmer, Locke, and political thought (including political economy) was sold by Quaritch in 2006.   == Works == The World We Have Lost: England Before the Industrial Age (1965; New York, 1966; 2nd ed., 1971, 3rd ed., 1983; re-issued and updated 2000) Household and Family in Past Time (ed., 1972) Family Life and Illicit Love in Earlier Generations (1977) Statistical Studies in Historical Social Structure (1979) Bastardy and its Comparative History (1980) The World We Have Lost: Further Explored (London, 1983; New York, 1984) Family Forms in Historic Europe (1983) A Fresh Map of Life (1989) Justice Between Age Groups and Generations (co-edited with James Fishkin, 1992).   == References == Richard Smith, ‘Laslett, (Thomas) Peter Ruffell (1915–2001)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, online edition, Oxford University Press, January 2005; online edition, May 2006.

Phillip I. Good (born in 1937) is a Canadian-American mathematical statistician. He was educated at McGill University and the University of California at Berkeley. He was among the first to apply the bootstrap in his 1975 analyses of 2×2 designs with a missing cell. His chief contributions to statistics are in the area of small sample statistics, including a uniformly most powerful unbiased (UMPU) permutation test for Type I censored data, an exact test for comparing variances, and an exact test for cross-over designs.   == Selected publications ==  His published texts in statistics include the following: The A to Z of Error-Free Research,Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2012. A Practitioner's Guide to Resampling for Data Analysis, Data Mining, and Modeling,Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2011. Analyzing the Large Number of Variables in Biomedical and Satellite Imagery,Wiley, NY. 2011. Managers' Guide to the Design and Conduct of Clinical Trials, Wiley, NY, 2002 (2nd edition, 2006). Introduction to Statistics Using Resampling Methods and R/S-Plus. Wiley, 2005 (2nd edition, 2012). Introduction to Statistics Using Resampling Methods and Excel. Wiley, 2005. Common Errors in Statistics (and How to Avoid Them)(with J. Hardin), Wiley, 2003 (4th edition, 2012). Applying Statistics in the Courtroom: A New Approach for Attorneys and Expert Witnesses, Chapman Hall, London, 2001. ISBN 1-58488-271-9 Resampling Methods, Birkhauser, Boston, 1999 (3rd edition, 2005). Permutation, Parametric and Bootstrap Tests of Hypotheses, Springer-Verlag, NY, 1994 (3rd edition, 2005). He has published articles in Biology—Exp Geron 8(73)147; Mech Age Devel 4(75) 339. Biomathematics—J theoret Biol 34(72)99; Bull Math Biol 38(76)295. Biostatistics—Contemporary Clinical Trials 29(08)565. Computer Science—Computer Architecture News 16(88)3:40. Physics—Physics Essays 23(10)368. Probability—J Aust math soc 8(68)716. Statistics—J Nonpar Statist 1(92)253-262; J. Modern Appl. Statist. Meth. 1(02)243. He has published nine texts on the application of microcomputers in business as well as several hundred articles on microcomputers in over a dozen different computer magazines. He has published 34 novels using six nommes des plumes for the zanybooks imprint. Those using his own name include "I Love You Maggie,""In Search of Aimai Cristen,""Sad and Angry Man,""Marriage and Children," "Confessions of a Gentleman Host," "San Onofre,","Susan," and "Schoolcraft MI." He has published two collections of his short stories, "Pinkie: Stories of a Homeless Man," and "Relationships."

Phillip Longman (born April 21, 1956, Stuttgart, Baden-Württemberg, West Germany) is an American demographer. Presently he is a Schwartz Senior Fellow at the New America Foundation, and he formerly worked as a senior writer and deputy assistant managing editor at U.S. News & World Report.   == Personal life and education == The son of Kenneth and Mary Longman, who worked in Baden-Württemberg as a result of the postwar occupation of that state by the US military, Phillip Longman spent most of his childhood in Princeton, New Jersey. He studied at Oberlin College and later obtained a Knight-Baghot fellowship at Columbia University. Phillip Longman was originally married to Robin Longman, but after she died he married Sandy Garbrecht. They have one son, Sam, and reside in Washington, D.C.   == Career == Focusing his attention on how demographic and social change interact and affect government finance, the environment, foreign policy, and the development of society generally, Longman published his first book, Born to Pay: The New Politics of Aging in America in 1987. In the following decade wrote many articles about the impact of aging populations on society in the future. During this period, his name became much more widely known in the academic community: his articles became published by such journals as The Atlantic Monthly, Financial Times, Harvard Business Review, Foreign Affairs and The New Republic. In 1997 Longman published his second book The Return of Thrift: How the Collapse of the Middle Class Welfare State will Reawaken Values in America, which argued that people today are spending in an unsustainable manner with the accelerating decline in fertility rates threatening the financial collapse of the welfare state throughout the world. By 2000 he had linked with the New America Foundation and began work on his most widely read work, The Empty Cradle in March 2004. This book expressed his strongly held opinion that sub-replacement fertility and resultant population decline is likely to have catastrophic economic consequences for those nations suffering from it and is also likely to reduce societies' ability to adjust to newly emerging problems because of unwillingness to innovate or take risks. It also examines the present effect of the rapid fall in birth rates around the globe. His research into the history of demographic decline in ancient Greece and Rome led to an article titled The Return of Patriarchy in the March, 2006 issue of Foreign Policy, and in other journals in an edited form under the title The Liberal Baby Bust. On January 1, 2007, his fourth full-length book was published by PoliPointPress. Titled Best Care Anywhere: Why VA Healthcare is Better Than Yours, it reflects on Longman's loss of his first wife to cancer and aims to show that in fact private health insurance is not superior to public health care as is often presumed.   == Awards == Phillip Longman has won numerous awards for his business and financial writing, including UCLA's Gerald Loeb Award, and the top prize for investigative journalism from Investigative Reporters and Editors.   == Books == Born to Pay: The New Politics of Aging in America (1987) The Return of Thrift: How the Collapse of the Middle Class Welfare State will Reawaken Values in America (1997) The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten World Prosperity and What To Do About It (2004) Best Care Anywhere: Why VA Healthcare is Better Than Yours (2007)   == External links == Phillip Longman's page at the New America Foundation

Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis FRS (29 June 1893 – 28 June 1972) was an Indian scientist and applied statistician. He is best remembered for the Mahalanobis distance, a statistical measure. He made pioneering studies in anthropometry in India. He founded the Indian Statistical Institute, and contributed to the design of large-scale sample surveys.   == Early life == Mahalanobis belonged to a family of Bengali landed gentry who lived in Bikrampur (now in Bangladesh). His grandfather Gurucharan (1833–1916) moved to Calcutta in 1854 and built up a business, starting a chemist shop in 1860. Gurucharan was influenced by Debendranath Tagore (1817–1905), father of the Nobel Prize–winning poet, Rabindranath Tagore. Gurucharan was actively involved in social movements such as the Brahmo Samaj, acting as its Treasurer and President. His house on 210 Cornwallis Street was the center of the Brahmo Samaj. Gurucharan married a widow against social traditions. His elder son Subodhchandra (1867–1953) was a distinguished educationist who studied physiology at Edinburgh University. He was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.[1] He was the Head of the Dept. of Physiology, University of Cardiff (first Indian to occupy this post in a British university). In 1900, he founded Dept. of Physiology in the Presidency College, Calcutta. Subodhchandra also became a member of the Senate of the Calcutta University. Gurucharan's younger son, Prabodh Chandra (1869-1942) was the father of P. C. Mahalanobis. Born in the house at 210 Cornwallis Street, P. C. Mahalanobis, grew up in a socially active family surrounded by intellectuals and reformers. Mahalanobis received his early schooling at the Brahmo Boys School in Calcutta graduating in 1908. He then joined the Presidency College, Calcutta where he was taught by teachers who included Jagadish Chandra Bose, and Prafulla Chandra Ray. Meghnad Saha was a year junior and Subhas Chandra Bose was two years his junior at college. Mahalanobis received a Bachelor of Science degree with honours in physics in 1912. He left for England in 1913 to join the University of London. He however missed a train and stayed with a friend at King's College, Cambridge. He was impressed by King's College Chapel there and his host's friend M. A. Candeth suggested that he could try joining there, which he did. He did well in his studies at King's, but also took an interest in cross-country walking and punting on the river. He interacted with the mathematical genius Srinivasa Ramanujan during the latter's time at Cambridge. After his Tripos in physics, Mahalanobis worked with C. T. R. Wilson at the Cavendish Laboratory. He took a short break and went to India and here he was introduced to the Principal of Presidency College and was invited to take classes in physics. He went back to England and was introduced to the journal Biometrika. This interested him so much that he bought a complete set and took them to India. He discovered the utility of statistics to problems in meteorology, anthropology and began working on it on his journey back to India. In Calcutta, Mahalanobis met Nirmalkumari, daughter of Herambhachandra Maitra, a leading educationist and member of the Brahmo Samaj. They married on 27 February 1923 although her father did not completely approve of it. The contention was partly due to Mahalanobis's opposition to various clauses in the membership of the student wing of the Brahmo Samaj, including restraining members from drinking and smoking. Sir Nilratan Sircar, P. C. Mahalanobis's maternal uncle took part in the wedding ceremony in place of the father of the bride.   == Indian Statistical Institute ==  Many colleagues of Mahalanobis took an interest in statistics and the group grew in the Statistical Laboratory located in his room at the Presidency College, Calcutta. A meeting was called on 17 December 1931 with Pramatha Nath Banerji (Minto Professor of Economics), Nikhil Ranjan Sen (Khaira Professor of Applied Mathematics) and Sir R. N. Mukherji. The meeting led to the establishment of the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI), and formally registered on 28 April 1932 as a non-profit distributing learned society under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860. The Institute was initially in the Physics Department of the Presidency College and the expenditure in the first year was Rs. 238. It gradually grew with the pioneering work of a group of his colleagues including S. S. Bose, J. M. Sengupta, R. C. Bose, S. N. Roy, K. R. Nair, R. R. Bahadur, Gopinath Kallianpur, D. B. Lahiri and C. R. Rao. The institute also gained major assistance through Pitamber Pant, who was a secretary to the Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru. Pant was trained in statistics at the Institute and took a keen interest in the institute. In 1933, the journal Sankhya was founded along the lines of Karl Pearson's Biometrika. The institute started a training section in 1938. Many of the early workers left the ISI for careers in the United States and with the government of India. Mahalanobis invited J. B. S. Haldane to join him at the ISI and Haldane joined as a Research Professor from August 1957 and stayed on until February 1961. He resigned from the ISI due to frustrations with the administration and disagreements with Mahalanobis's policies. He was also very concerned with the frequent travels and absence of the director and complained that the ... journeyings of our Director define a novel random vector. Haldane however helped the ISI grow in biometrics. In 1959, the institute was declared as an institute of national importance and a deemed university.   == Contributions to statistics ==   === Mahalanobis distance ===  A chance meeting with Nelson Annandale, then the director of the Zoological Survey of India, at the 1920 Nagpur session of the Indian Science Congress led to Annandale asking him to analyse anthropometric measurements of Anglo-Indians in Calcutta. Mahalanobis had been influenced by the anthropometric studies published in the journal Biometrika and he chose to ask the questions on what factors influence the formation of European and Indian marriages. He wanted to examine if the Indian side came from any specific castes. He used the data collected by Annandale and the caste specific measurements made by Herbert Risley to come up with the conclusion that the sample represented a mix of Europeans mainly with people from Bengal and Punjab but not with those from the Northwest Frontier Provinces or from Chhota Nagpur. He also concluded that the intermixture more frequently involved the higher castes than the lower ones. This analysis was described by his first scientific paper in 1922. During the course of these studies he found a way of comparing and grouping populations using a multivariate distance measure. This measure, denoted "D2" and now eponymously named Mahalanobis distance, is independent of measurement scale.  Inspired by Biometrika and mentored by Acharya Brajendra Nath Seal he started his statistical work. Initially he worked on analysing university exam results, anthropometric measurements on Anglo-Indians of Calcutta and some meteorological problems. He also worked as a meteorologist for some time. In 1924, when he was working on the probable error of results of agricultural experiments, he met Ronald Fisher and Anil Kumar Gain, with whom he established a lifelong friendship. He also worked on schemes to prevent floods.   === Sample surveys === His most important contributions are related to large-scale sample surveys. He introduced the concept of pilot surveys and advocated the usefulness of sampling methods. Early surveys began between 1937 to 1944 and included topics such as consumer expenditure, tea-drinking habits, public opinion, crop acreage and plant disease. Harold Hotelling wrote: "No technique of random sample has, so far as I can find, been developed in the United States or elsewhere, which can compare in accuracy with that described by Professor Mahalanobis" and Sir R. A. Fisher commented that "The ISI has taken the lead in the original development of the technique of sample surveys, the most potent fact finding process available to the administration". He introduced a method for estimating crop yields which involved statisticians sampling in the fields by cutting crops in a circle of diameter 4 feet. Others such as P. V. Sukhatme and V. G. Panse who began to work on crop surveys with the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute suggested that a survey system should make use of the existing administrative framework. The differences in opinion led to acrimony and there was little interaction between Mahalanobis and agricultural research in later years.   === Linguistics === Mahalanobis also started research in the field of quantitative linguistics and language planning in the Linguistic Research Unit of the Indian Statistical Institute. He also worked on Speech Pathology in collaboration with Djordge Kostic, Rhea Das and Alakananda Mitter and made some contributions to the field of language correction.   == Later life == In later life, Mahalanobis was a member of the planning commission contributed prominently to newly independent India's five-year plans starting from the second. In the second five-year plan he emphasised industrialisation on the basis of a two-sector model. His variant of Wassily Leontief's Input-output model, the Mahalanobis model, was employed in the Second Five Year Plan, which worked towards the rapid industrialisation of India and with other colleagues at his institute, he played a key role in the development of a statistical infrastructure. He encouraged a project to assess deindustrialisation in India and correct some previous census methodology errors and entrusted this project to Daniel Thorner. Mahalanobis also had an abiding interest in cultural pursuits and served as secretary to Rabindranath Tagore, particularly during the latter's foreign travels, and also worked at his Visva-Bharati University, for some time. He received one of the highest civilian awards, the Padma Vibhushan from the Government of India for his contribution to science and services to the country. Mahalanobis died on 28 June 1972, a day before his seventy-ninth birthday. Even at this age, he was still active doing research work and discharging his duties as the Secretary and Director of the Indian Statistical Institute and as the Honorary Statistical Advisor to the Cabinet of the Government of India.   == Honours == Weldon Memorial Prize from the University of Oxford (1944) Fellow of the Royal Society, London (1945) President of Indian Science Congress (1950) Fellow of the Econometric Society, USA (1951) Fellow of the Pakistan Statistical Association (1952) Honorary Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, UK (1954) Sir Deviprasad Sarvadhikari Gold Medal (1957) Foreign member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR (1958) Honorary Fellow of King's College, Cambridge (1959) Fellow of the American Statistical Association (1961) Durgaprasad Khaitan Gold Medal (1961) Padma Vibhushan (1968) Srinivasa Ramanujam Gold Medal (1968) The government of India decided in 2006 to celebrate his birthday, 29 June, as National Statistical Day.   == See also == List of Indian mathematicians   == References ==   == Bibliography == Ashok Rudra (1996). Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis: A Biography. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-563679-6.  A. Mahalanobis (1983). Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis. National Book Trust, India.    == External links == Gallery Biography from ISI Bangalore Website Biography at Calcuttaweb.com Mahalonobis Centennial articles ISI publication archives

Ravindra Khattree (born 1959) is an Indian-born statistician and professor of statistics at Oakland University. His contribution to the Fountain–Khattree–Peddada Theorem in Pitman measure of closeness is one of the important results of his work. Khattree is the coauthor of two books and has coedited two volumes. He has served as an associate editor of the Communications in Statistics journal and the editor of the Interstat online journal. He is Chief editor of Journal of Statistics and Applications. He is an elected fellow of the American Statistical Association. Khattree was born in Uttar Pradesh, India. He attended the Ewing Christian College-Allahabad University and the Indian Statistical Institute. In 1985, he earned a doctorate from the University of Pittsburgh with Calyampudi Radhakrishna Rao as his advisor. He became a faculty member at Oakland University in 1991. He was the biostatistics group leader in the Biomedical Research and Informatics Center and a professor of biostatistics in the College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University during 2005–2006. He worked as a senior research scientist at US National Academy of Sciences with assignment at the Radiation Effects Research Foundation (formerly known as Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission), Hiroshima during 2010–2011. Prior to joining Oakland University, he had been a faculty member at the North Dakota State University, Case Western Reserve University and also worked at BFGoodrich Chemical Group. He is the paternal grandson of Binda Prasad Khattri.   == Recognition == In 2002, Khattree received the Young Researcher Award from the International Indian Statistical Association. Khattree was honored with fellowship in the American Statistical Association in 2003 and became an elected member of the International Statistical Institute in 2004. He is also a recipient of Oakland University Research Excellence Award (2008).   == Bibliography == Applied Multivariate Statistics with SAS Software (1995, 1999) with Dayanand N. Naik. Multivariate Data Reduction and Discrimination with SAS Software (2000) with Dayanand N. Naik. Handbook of Statistics Volume 22, Statistics in Industry (2002) with C.R. Rao. Computational Methods in Biomedical Research (2008) with Dayanand N. Naik.   == References ==   == External links == Mathematical Genealogy

Reginald Crundall Punnett FRS (/ˈpʌnɪt/; 20 June 1875 – 3 January 1967) was a British geneticist who co-founded, with William Bateson, the Journal of Genetics in 1910. Punnett is probably best remembered today as the creator of the Punnett square, a tool still used by biologists to predict the probability of possible genotypes of offspring. His Mendelism (1905) is sometimes said to have been the first textbook on genetics; it was probably the first popular science book to introduce genetics to the public.   == Life and work == Reginald Punnett was born in 1875 in the town of Tonbridge in Kent, England. While recovering from a childhood bout of appendicitis, Punnett became acquainted with Jardine's Naturalist's Library and developed an interest in natural history. Punnett was educated at Clifton College. Attending Gonville and Caius College at the University of Cambridge, Punnett earned a degree in zoology in 1898, and a masters in 1901. Between these degrees he worked as a demonstrator and part-time lecturer at the University of St. Andrew's Natural History Department. In October 1901, Punnett was back at Cambridge when he was elected to a Fellowship at Gonville and Caius College, working in zoology, primarily the study of worms, specifically nemerteans. It was during this time that he and William Bateson began a research collaboration, which lasted several years.  When Punnett was an undergraduate, Gregor Mendel's work on inheritance was largely unknown and unappreciated by scientists. However, in 1900, Mendel's work was rediscovered by Carl Correns, Erich Tschermak von Seysenegg and Hugo de Vries. William Bateson became a proponent of Mendelian genetics, and had Mendel's work translated into English. It was with Bateson that Reginald Punnett helped established the new science of genetics at Cambridge. He, Bateson and Saunders co-discovered genetic linkage through experiments with chickens and sweet peas. In 1908, unable to explain how a dominant gene would not become fixed and ubiquitous in a population, Punnett introduced one of his problems to the mathematician G. H. Hardy, with whom he played cricket. Hardy went on to formulate the Hardy-Weinberg principle, independently of the German Wilhelm Weinberg. He was Superintendent of the Cambridge University Museum of Zoology from 1908-1909. In 1909 he went to Sri Lanka to meet Arthur Willey, FRS, then Director of the Colombo Museum and R H Lock, then Scientific Assistant at the Peradeniya Botanical Gardens and to catch butterflies. The following year, he published a monograph, '"Mimicry" in Ceylon Butterflies, with a suggestion as to the nature of Polymorphism', in Spolia Zeylanica, the journal of the Colombo Museum, in which he voiced his opposition to gradualistic accounts of the evolution of mimicry which he later expanded on, in his 1915 book 'Mimicry in Butterflies'. In 1910 Punnett became professor of biology at Cambridge, and then the first Arthur Balfour Professor of Genetics when Bateson left in 1912. In the same year, Punnett was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society. He received the society's Darwin Medal in 1922. During World War I, Punnett successfully applied his expertise to the problem of the early determination of sex in chickens. Since only females were used for egg-production, early identification of male chicks, which were destroyed or separated for fattening, meant that limited animal-feed and other resources could be used more efficiently. Punnett's work in this area was summarized in Heredity in Poultry (1923). With Michael Pease as his assistant, he created the first auto-sexing chicken breed, the Cambar, by transferring the barring gene of the Barred Rock to the Golden Campine. Reginald Punnett retired in 1940, and died at the age of 91 in 1967 in Bilbrook, Somerset.   == Selected writings == Punnett, R. C. (1901). Lineus. London: Williams and Norgate. Retrieved 2008-05-11.  Punnett, R. C. (1905). Mendelism. Cambridge: Bowes and Bowes. - A scanned copy of the second edition is here. Punnett, R. C. (1915). Mimicry in Butterflies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 2008-05-11.    == References ==   == External links == A brief biographical sketch of Punnett A briefer biographical sketch of Punnett A brief history of the University of Cambridge's Department of Genetics Works by Reginald Punnett at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Reginald Punnett at Internet Archive

Rensis Likert (/ˈlɪkərt/ LIK-ərt; 5 August 1903–3 September 1981) was an American administrator and organizational psychologist based at the U.S. Department of Agriculture until 1946, then at the Institute for Social Research at the University of Michigan. He is best known for survey research methods and for the Likert Scale, a psychometric scale commonly involved in research using questionnaires. After retirement in 1970 he was an active researcher in management styles; he also developed the linking pin model. Likert was known for his support of interdisciplinary collaborations and emphasis on using social science research to effect positive change.   == Personal life == Rensis Likert was born to George Herbert Likert and Cornelia Adrianne (Cora) (née Zonne) Likert in Cheyenne, Wyoming, where his father was an engineer with the Union Pacific Railroad. After training to be an engineer, the younger Likert was working as an intern with Union Pacific Railroad during the watershed 1922 strike. The lack of communication between the two parties made a profound impression on him and caused him to study organizations and their behavior for the rest of his life. Likert received his B.A. in economics and sociology from the University of Michigan in 1926. The social sciences of the 1920s were highly experimental and incorporated many aspects of modern psychology. In 1932 Likert received a Ph.D. in psychology from Columbia University. Likert died, 3 September 1981 in Ann Arbor, Michigan, at the age of 78; leaving behind his wife of 53 years, Jane Gibson (3 June 1902 - 29 November 1997). Both are interred in the Forest Hill Cemetery in Ann Arbor.   == Professional achievements == President, American Statistical Association; Honorary Degree, Tilburg University, the Netherlands, 1967   == Likert Scale ==  Likert devised a survey scale Likert Scale for measuring attitudes and showed that it captured more information than competing methods. The 5-point Likert Scale became Likert's best-known work. He developed the Likert scale in 1932 in his PhD thesis, using it to identify the extent of a person’s beliefs, attitudes, and feelings towards international affairs. The traditional Likert scale asks people the extent to which they agree or disagree with a statement on a 5-point scale. The scale ranges from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree. Using a 5 point scale allowed him to rank people's attitudes with fewer questions and greater exactness. ”   === Department of Agriculture === During World War II, Likert, as the Director of the Division of Program Surveys in the United States Department of Agriculture's Bureau of Agricultural Economics (B.A.E.), ran surveys first for U.S.D.A. but as the war progressed the Division ran surveys for many different governmental agencies including the Office of War Information, the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Board and in 1944-45, the U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey. In 1943, he developed the first national geographic sampling frame. Likert, although not at a university at the time, was actively recruiting other social psychologists into his expanding government survey shop during the war.   === Institute for Social Research === At war's end the Department of Agriculture were forced by conservative Congressmen to stop its social survey work. Likert and his team (many of them academics on temporary wartime duty) decided to move together to a university. After scouting Cornell and Chicago, they accepted an offer in summer 1946 from the University of Michigan. They formed the Survey Research Center (SRC) at the University of Michigan. This became the Institute for Social Research (ISR) in 1949 when Dorwin Cartwright moved the Center for Group Dynamics from MIT to the Michigan. Likert was the director of ISR until 1970, when he retired.   === Rensis Likert Associates === Upon retirement he founded Rensis Likert Associates to consult for numerous corporations. He also helped start what is now known as the Institute for Corporate Productivity (i4cp). During his tenure, Rensis Likert devoted particular attention to research on organizations. During the 1960s and 1970s, his books on management theory were closely studied in Japan and their impact can be seen across modern Japanese organizations. He did research on major corporations around the world, and his studies have accurately predicted the subsequent performance of the corporations.   == Management systems ==  Likert's Management Systems are management styles developed by Rensis Likert in the 1950s. He outlined four systems of management to describe the relationship, involvement, and roles of managers and subordinates in industrial settings. The four management systems are: 1) Exploitative Authoritative 2) Benevolent Authoritative 3) Consultative System 4) Participative System.   == Books == The following are books that Rensis Likert authored, or contributed to: New Ways of Managing Conflict 1976 (with Jane Gibson Likert) Human Organization : Its Management and Value (1967) New Patterns of Management (1961) Developing patterns in management (American Management Association, 1955) Co-editor: Some applications of Behavioural Research (1957)   == References ==   == Further reading == Brewer, J. D. (1968). Review of The Human Organization. American Sociological Review, 33(5), 825-826 Converse, Jean M. (1987) Survey Research in the United States: Roots and Emergence 1890-1960 (U of California Press) Effrat, A. (1968). Review: Democratizing and Producing. Science, 162(3859), 1260-1261. Hall, J. W. (1972). A Comparison of Halpin and Croft's Organizational Climates and Likert and Likert's Organizational Systems. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(4), 586-590. Huczynski, A.A. and Buchanan, D.A. (2007). Organizational Behaviour. 6th Edition, Pearson Education.

Reuven Rubinstein (1938-2012)(Hebrew: ראובן רובינשטיין‎) was an Israeli scientist known for his contributions to Monte Carlo simulation, applied probability, stochastic modeling and stochastic optimization, having authored more than one hundred papers and six books. During his career, Rubinstein has made fundamental and important contributions in these fields and has advanced the theory and application of adaptive importance sampling, rare event simulation, stochastic optimization, sensitivity analysis of simulation-based models, the splitting method, and counting problems concerning NP-complete problems. He is well known as the founder of several breakthrough methods, such as the score function method, stochastic counterpart method and cross-entropy method, which have numerous applications in combinatorial optimization and simulation. His citation index is in the top 5% among his colleagues in operations research and management sciences. His 1981 book "Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method", Wiley (second edition 2007, with D.P. Kroese) alone has over 4,400 citations. He has held visiting positions in various research institutes, including Columbia University, Harvard University, Stanford University, IBM and Bell Laboratories. He has given invited and plenary lectures in many international conferences around the globe. In 2010 Prof. Rubinstein won the INFORMS Simulation Society highest prize - the Lifetime Professional Achievement Award (LPAA), which recognizes scholars who have made fundamental contributions to the field of simulation that persist over most of a professional career. In 2011 Reuven Rubinstein won the Operations Research Society of Israel (ORSIS) highest prize - the Lifetime Professional Award (LPA), which recognizes scholars who have made fundamental contributions to the field of operations research over most of a professional career.   == Publications == Rubinstein R.Y., "Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method", Wiley, 1981. Rubinstein, R.Y., "The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and continuous Optimization", Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 2, 127—190, 1999. Rubinstein R.Y., "Randomized algorithms with splitting: Why the classic randomized algorithms do not work and how to make them work", Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 2009. doi:10.1007/s11009-009-9126-6 Rubinstein R.Y. and D.P. Kroese, "The Cross-Entropy Method: a Unified Approach to Combinatorial Optimization, Monte-Carlo Simulation and Machine Learning", Springer, 2004. Rubinstein R.Y. and D.P. Kroese, "Simulation and the Monte Carlo Method", Second Edition, Wiley, 2007. Rubinstein, R.Y. and A. Shapiro, "Discrete Event Systems: Sensitivity Analysis and Stochastic Optimization", Wiley, 1993.   == External links == Reuven Rubinstein's home page   == References ==

Dr. Prof. Riaz Ahsan (25 December 1951 – 8 September 2008) was a Pakistani statistician and mathematician who has worked in applied statistics, applied analysis, applications of special functions. He was a noted professor of applied statistics in University of Karachi, Karachi. Previously, he has served as the president of Sindh Professors and Lecturers’ Association (SPLA). Prof. Riaz Ahsan was born on 25 December 1951 and he died on 8 September 2008.   == Education and career == Born in Karachi, Ahsan had his initial education at the BYJ School, Karachi, and completed his intermediate from Adamjee Government Science College, Karachi. He received his B.Sc. (Hons) in Statistics and Mathematics. He did his M.Sc with distinctions in Statistics and M.A. in Mathematics with honors from Karachi University. Later, he received his double Ph.D. in applied statistics and applied mathematics from the same alma mater in 1974.   == Academic career == In 1975, he started his career from DJ Science College, Karachi. He also served as the president of Sindh Professors and Lecturers Association (SPLA) that works for the betterment of professors and lecturers in the province of Sindh. In 1982, he went to Nigeria on deputation and taught statistics and mathematics at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka. Upon his return continued as a teacher at the Government Degree Science College, Karachi, from where he was later transferred to Saint Patrick's College, Karachi. In early 1990s, Ahsan joined Karachi University as a full professor of statistics and mathematics and continued his career till his death.   == Death == Dr. Ahsan was diagnosed with cancer in one of his legs in 2004 and was on medication since then. He recovered for a while and participated in many campaigns launched by the SPLA and fell ill again in 2008, never to recover. Registrar Prof. Raees Alvi paid him the following tribute: “He was a wise man who always guided teachers in the right direction. He always searched for development and never had any prejudice. He always worked for the promotion of merit. This great man always fought for the rights of teachers and I would call it an irreparable loss for all of us.” "The void he left behind can never be filled. It is a huge loss for SPLA and we would never get a personality like him in future". SPLA Senior Vice-President Manzoor Hussain Chishti said.   == Family == His father, Professor Syed Zaheer Ahsan, was a professor of Geography at Karachi University.   == References == ^ http://news.newsupdate.pk/?2008/9/9+396508 ^ Our Staff Reporter (September 12, 2008), "Prof. Ahsan Remembered", Dawn News  ^ The News, Karachi ^ Baloch, Farooq (September 9, 2008), "Prof. Riaz Ahsan passes away", The News International  ^ http://www.dinnews.tv/dinnews/national/prof_riaz_ahsan_passes_away-7348.aspx   == External links == http://news.newsupdate.pk/?2008/9/9+396508 http://www.dinnews.tv/dinnews/national/prof_riaz_ahsan_passes_away-7348.aspx   == External links == Prof. Riaz Ahsan

Richard David Gill (born 11 September 1951) is a mathematician born in the United Kingdom who has lived in the Netherlands since 1974. As a probability theorist and statistician, Gill is known for his research on counting processes and survival analysis, some of which has appeared in an advanced textbook. He is the chair of mathematical statistics at Leiden University. Gill is also known for his pro bono consulting and advocacy on behalf of victims of incompetent statistical testimony, including a Dutch nurse who was wrongfully convicted and jailed for six years.   == Biography == He studied mathematics at the University of Cambridge (1970–1973), and subsequently followed the Diploma of Statistics course there (1973–1974). Marrying a Dutch woman, he moved to the Netherlands where he worked from 1974 to 1988 at the Mathematical Centre (later renamed Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, or CWI) of Amsterdam. In 1979, Gill obtained his PhD with the thesis Censoring and Stochastic Integrals, which was supervised by Jacobus Oosterhoff of the Vrije Universiteit, which awarded the doctorate. Gill spent Autumn 1980 at the Statistical Research Unit at the University of Copenhagen. Gill continued to collaborate with Danish (and Norwegian) statisticians for ten years, helping to write the book Statistical models based on counting processes, which is often referred to as "ABGK" (for the authors Andersen, Borgan, Gill, and Keiding). In 1983 he became the head of the Department of Mathematical Statistics at CWI. In 1988 he moved to the Department of Mathematics of Utrecht University. Gill became the chair in mathematical stochastics—this chair represented the three mathematical sciences of mathematical statistics, probability theory, and operations research. His PhD students include Sara van de Geer and Mark van der Laan. In 2006, he moved to the Department of Mathematics at Leiden University, where he became the chair of mathematical statistics. Since then, he has conducted statistical research in the theory of quantum information and in biostatistics. He has also worked on survival analysis, semiparametric models, causality, missing data, machine learning, and statistics in image analysis. Gill also publishes on the foundations of several mathematical sciences: the foundations of statistics, of probability, of mathematics, and of quantum physics.   == Statistical advocacy against wrongful convictions == In recent years he has actively lobbied for retrials for Lucia de Berk and Kevin Sweeney. The nurse Lucia de Berk was sentenced to life imprisonment following testimony from a legal psychologist that de Berk with the fantastical likelihood committed a string of murders.  "The court was told by Dr Henk Elffers of the Netherlands Institute for the Study of Crime and Law Enforcement that more children had died on her shifts than appeared possible by chance. He put the odds of her presence being a mere coincidence at one in 342 million, a figure that seemed to have blinded the court to any alternative explanation of the deaths."  This statistical testimony was shown to be fallacious by professional statisticians, notably Gill. Continued scrutiny showed that the data had also been collected to support the prosecutor's conviction of Berk, which further invalidated the pseudo-statistical testimony.  "The conduct of the case, in Professor Gill's account, was extraordinary. Convinced she was guilty, the police and the managers of the Juliana Children's Hospital assembled a dossier in which it seemed every death became unnatural when it had occurred during, or after, a shift in which she had worked. For one of the alleged murders, it was established on appeal she had not even been in the hospital for three days around the time it occurred. Using more appropriate statistical methods reduced the odds from one in 342 million to one in 48. A further analysis by Professor Gill further reduces the odds to one in nine."  Professor Gill helped in the campaign to have a new trial. Consequently, a retrial was ordered, and de Berk was found not guilty, and received a public apology from the Dutch government, along with financial compensation (amount unknown) for her six years of incarceration.   == Honours == Richard Gill is a member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is a past president of The Netherlands Society for Statistics and Operations Research, which publishes the journal Statistica Neerlandica. Gill has been selected as the 2010–2011 Distinguished Lorentz Fellow by the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in Humanities and Social Sciences.   == References ==   == External links == Richard Gill's homepage at Leiden University. Mathematical Reviews. "Richard D. Gill". Retrieved 22 February 2011.

Sir Richard Peto FRS (born 14 May 1943) is Professor of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology at the University of Oxford, England. He attended Taunton's School in Southampton and subsequently studied Natural Sciences at Queens' College, Cambridge University. His career has included important collaborations with Richard Doll beginning at the Medical Research Council Statistical Research Unit in London. He set up the Clinical Trial Service Unit (CTSU) in Oxford in 1975 and is currently co-director. He was made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1989 for his contributions to the development of meta-analysis. He is a leading expert on deaths related to tobacco use. He was knighted for his services to epidemiology and to cancer prevention in 1999, and he received an honorary Doctor of Medical Sciences degree from Yale University in 2011.  His brother Julian Peto, with whom he has published work in mathematical statistics (e.g. on the logrank test), is also a distinguished epidemiologist. His family runs a Thai restaurant in Oxford's Covered Market, of whose parent company he is a director. Peto's paradox is named after him.   == References ==   == Selected publications == Gribbin B, Pickering TG, Sleight P, Peto R. Effect of age and high blood pressure on baroreflex sensitivity in man. Circ Res. 1971 Oct;29(4):424–31. PMID 5110922. Peto R, Peto J. Asymptotically efficient rank invariant test procedures. J R Stat Soc Ser A 1972;135(2):185–207. Doll R, Peto R. Mortality in relation to smoking: 20 years' observations on male British doctors. Br Med J. 1976 Dec 25;2(6051):1525–36. PMID 1009386. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, Breslow NE, Cox DR, Howard SV, Mantel N, McPherson K, Peto J, Smith PG. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient. I. Introduction and design. Br J Cancer. 1976 Dec;34(6):585–612. doi:10.1038/bjc.1976.220 PMID 795448. Peto R, Pike MC, Armitage P, Breslow NE, Cox DR, Howard SV, Mantel N, McPherson K, Peto J, Smith PG. Design and analysis of randomized clinical trials requiring prolonged observation of each patient. II. Analysis and examples. Br J Cancer. 1977 Jan;35(1):1–39. doi:10.1038/bjc.1977.1 PMID 831755. Peto R, Doll R, Buckley JD, Sporn MB. Can dietary beta-carotene materially reduce human cancer rates? Nature. 1981 Mar 19;290(5803):201–8. PMID 7010181. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer: quantitative estimates of avoidable risks of cancer in the United States today. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1981 Jun;66(6):1191–308. PMID 7017215. Peto R, Schneiderman M, eds. Quantification of occupational cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1981. ISBN 0-87969-208-1. Yusuf S, Peto R, Lewis J, Collins R, Sleight P. Beta blockade during and after myocardial infarction: an overview of the randomized trials. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 1985 Mar–Apr;27(5):335–71. doi:10.1016/S0033-0620(85)80003-7 PMID 2858114. Peto R, zur Hausen H, eds. Viral etiology of cervical cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1986. ISBN 0-87969-221-9. MacMahon S, Peto R, Cutler J, Collins R, Sorlie P, Neaton J, Abbott R, Godwin J, Dyer A, Stamler J. Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Part 1, Prolonged differences in blood pressure: prospective observational studies corrected for the regression dilution bias. Lancet. 1990 Mar 31;335(8692):765–74. PMID 1969518. Collins R, Peto R, MacMahon S, Hebert P, Fiebach NH, Eberlein KA, Godwin J, Qizilbash N, Taylor JO, Hennekens CH. Blood pressure, stroke, and coronary heart disease. Part 2, Short-term reductions in blood pressure: overview of randomised drug trials in their epidemiological context. Lancet. 1990 Apr 7;335(8693):827–38. PMID 1969567. Peto R, Imperial Cancer Research Fund (Great Britain), World Health Organization, et al. Mortality from smoking in developed countries, 1950–2000: indirect estimates from national vital statistics. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-19-262619-1. Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Manson JE, Stampfer M, Rosner B, Cook NR, Belanger C, LaMotte F, Gaziano JM, Ridker PM, Willett W, Peto R. Lack of effect of long-term supplementation with beta carotene on the incidence of malignant neoplasms and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 1996 May 2;334(18):1145–9. PMID 8602179. Thun MJ, Peto R, Lopez AD, Monaco JH, Henley SJ, Heath CW Jr, Doll R. Alcohol consumption and mortality among middle-aged and elderly U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 1997 Dec 11;337(24):1705–14. doi:10.1056/NEJM199712113372401 PMID 9392695. Danesh J, Collins R, Appleby P, Peto R. Association of fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, albumin, or leukocyte count with coronary heart disease: meta-analyses of prospective studies. JAMA. 1998 May 13;279(18):1477–82. PMID 9600484. Peto R, Darby S, Deo H, Silcocks P, Whitley E, Doll R. Smoking, smoking cessation, and lung cancer in the UK since 1950: combination of national statistics with two case-control studies. BMJ. 2000 Aug 5;321(7257):323–9. doi:10.1136/bmj.321.7257.323 PMID 10926586. Collins R, Armitage J, Parish S, Sleigh P, Peto R; Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart Protection Study of cholesterol-lowering with simvastatin in 5963 people with diabetes: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2003 Jun 14;361(9374):2005–16. PMID 12814710. Halliday A, Mansfield A, Marro J, Peto C, Peto R, Potter J, Thomas D; MRC Asymptomatic Carotid Surgery Trial (ACST) Collaborative Group. Prevention of disabling and fatal strokes by successful carotid endarterectomy in patients without recent neurological symptoms: randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2004 May 8;363(9420):1491–502. PMID 15135594. Doll R, Peto R, Boreham J, Sutherland I. Mortality in relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male British doctors. BMJ. 2004 Jun 26;328(7455):1519. doi:10.1136/bmj.38142.554479.AE PMID 15213107. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Buck G, Pollicino C, Kirby A, Sourjina T, Peto R, Collins R, Simes R; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' (CTT) Collaborators. Efficacy and safety of cholesterol-lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials of statins. Lancet. 2005 Oct 8;366(9493):1267–78. PMID 16214597. Clarke M, Collins R, Darby S, Davies C, Elphinstone P, Evans E, Godwin J, Gray R, Hicks C, James S, MacKinnon E, McGale P, McHugh T, Peto R, Taylor C, Wang Y; Early Breast Cancer Trialists' Collaborative Group (EBCTCG). Effects of radiotherapy and of differences in the extent of surgery for early breast cancer on local recurrence and 15-year survival: an overview of the randomised trials. Lancet. 2005 Dec 17;366(9503):2087–106. PMID 16360786.   == External links == Royal Society citation BBC interview Clinical Trial Services Unit

Robert Fry Engle III (born November 10, 1942) is an American economist and the winner of the 2003 Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, sharing the award with Clive Granger, "for methods of analyzing economic time series with time-varying volatility (ARCH)".   == Biography == Engle was born in Syracuse, New York into Quaker family and went on to graduate from Williams College with a B.S. in physics. He earned an M.S. in physics and a Ph.D. in economics, both from Cornell University in 1966 and 1969 respectively. After completing his Ph.D., Engle became Professor of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1969 to 1977. He joined the faculty of the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) in 1975, wherefrom he retired in 2003. He now holds positions of Professor Emeritus and Research Professor at UCSD. He currently teaches at New York University, Stern School of Business where he is the Michael Armellino professor in Management of Financial Services. At New York University, Engle teaches for the Master of Science in Risk Management Program for Executives, which is offered in partnership with the Amsterdam Institute of Finance. Engle’s most important contribution was his path-breaking discovery of a method for analyzing unpredictable movements in financial market prices and interest rates. Accurate characterization and prediction of these volatile movements are essential for quantifying and effectively managing risk. For example, risk measurement plays a key role in pricing options and financial derivatives. Previous researchers had either assumed constant volatility or had used simple devices to approximate it. Engle developed new statistical models of volatility that captured the tendency of stock prices and other financial variables to move between high volatility and low volatility periods (“Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity: ARCH”). These statistical models have become essential tools of modern arbitrage pricing theory and practice. More recently, Engle (and Eric Ghysels) co-founded the Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE).   === Personal life === Paternal Grandfather – Robert Fry Engle, Sr. (b. 1879 d. 1946) Father – Robert Fry Engle, Jr. (b. 1910 d. 1981, DuPont chemist) Mother – Mary Starr Engle ("Murry", French teacher, m. 1939) Sister – Patricia Lee Engle ("Patty", twin, UNICEF official) Sister – Sally Starr Engle Merry (anthropologist, twin) Wife – Marianne Eger Engle (psychologist, m. 10-Aug-1969, two children) Daughter – Lindsey Engle Richland (psychologist) Son – Jordan Engle] (actor, b. May-1980)   == Selected works == "Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation". Econometrica 50 (4): 987–1008. 1982. JSTOR 1912773.  . (with David F. Hendry and Jean-Francois Richard). "Exogeneity". Econometrica 51 (2): 277–304. 1983. JSTOR 1911990.  . (with C. Granger, J. Rice and A. Weiss). "Semi-parametric Estimates of the Relation between Weather and Electricity Demand". J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 81 (394): 310–320. 1986. doi:10.1080/01621459.1986.10478274.  . (with Clive Granger). "Co-Integration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing". Econometrica 55 (2): 251–276. 1987. JSTOR 1913236.  . (with David Lilien and Russell Robins). "Estimation of Time Varying Risk Premia in the Term Structure: the ARCH-M Model". Econometrica 55 (2): 391–407. 1987. JSTOR 1913242.  . (with V. Ng, and M. Rothschild). "Asset Pricing with a Factor ARCH Covariance Structure: Empirical Estimates for Treasury Bills". Journal of Econometrics 45 (1–2): 213–237. 1990. doi:10.1016/0304-4076(90)90099-F.  . (with J.R. Russell). "Autoregressive Conditional Duration: A New Model for Irregularly Spaced Transaction Data". Econometrica 66 (5): 1127–1162. 1998. JSTOR 2999632.  "Dynamic Conditional Correlation – A Simple Class of Multivariate GARCH Models". Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20 (3): 339–350. 2002. doi:10.1198/073500102288618487.  . (with Maureen O'Hara, David Easley and L. Wu). "Time-Varying Arrival Rates of Informed and Uninformed Traders". Journal of Financial Econometrics 6 (2): 171–207. 2008. doi:10.1093/jjfinec/nbn003.    == See also == Modeling and analysis of financial markets   == References ==   == External links == V-Lab: real time financial volatility and correlation measurements, modeling and forecasting The Society for Financial Econometrics (SoFiE) Robert F. Engle (1942– ). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  Robert F. Engle at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

For the U.S. Navy admiral, see Robert C. Giffen  Sir Robert Giffen KCB (22 July 1837 – 12 April 1910), was a Scottish statistician and economist. He was born at Strathaven, Lanarkshire. He entered a solicitor's office in Glasgow, and while in that city attended courses at the university. He drifted into journalism, and after working for the Stirling Journal he went to London in 1862 and joined the staff of the Globe. He also assisted John Morley, when the latter edited the Fortnightly Review. In 1868 he became Walter Bagehot's assistant-editor on The Economist; and his services were also secured in 1873 as city editor of the Daily News, and later of The Times. His high reputation as a financial journalist and statistician, gained in these years, led to his appointment in 1876 as head of the statistical department in the Board of Trade, and subsequently he became assistant secretary (1882) and finally controller-general (1892), retiring in 1897. In connection with his position as chief statistical adviser to the government, he was constantly employed in drawing up reports, giving evidence before commissions of inquiry, and acting as a government auditor, besides publishing a number of important essays on financial subjects. His principal publications were American Railways as Investments (1873), Essays on Finance (1879 and 1884), The Progress of the Working Classes (1884), The Growth of Capital (1890), The Case against Bimetallism (1892), and Economic Inquiries and Studies (1904). He was president of the Statistical Society (now called the Royal Statistical Society) (1882–1884); and after being made a Companion of the Order of the Bath, in 1891 was created Knight Commander in the Order of the Bath. In 1892 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1894 he received the Guy Medal (gold) from the RSS. He was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1897. Robert Giffen continued in later years to take a leading part in all public controversies connected with finance and taxation, and his high authority and practical experience were universally recognised. He was awarded a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in 1895. He died somewhat suddenly in Fort Augustus, Scotland on 12 April 1910. The concept of a Giffen good is named after him. Alfred Marshall wrote in the third (1895) edition of his Principles of Economics: As Mr. Giffen has pointed out, a rise in the price of bread makes so large a drain on the resources of the poorer labouring families and raises so much the marginal utility of money to them, that they are forced to curtail their consumption of meat and the more expensive farinaceous foods: and, bread being still the cheapest food which they can get and will take, they consume more, and not less of it. Scholars have not been able to identify any passage in Giffen's writings where he pointed this out. The main part of this entry is taken from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica.   == References == R. S. Mason Robert Giffen and the Giffen Paradox, Philip Allan (1989) A. E. Bateman, ‘Sir Robert Giffen’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 73, (1910) pp. 529–533. (includes photograph) F. Y. Edgeworth, ‘Sir Robert Giffen’, Economic Journal, 20, (1910) pp. 318–321. "Sir Robert Giffen - Dead" (PDF). New York Times. 13 April 1910  ^ "Sir Robert Giffen". The Times (London: The Times). Wednesday, Apr 13, 1910;. p. 13.     == External links ==  Works written by or about Robert Giffen at Wikisource Royal Society citation Giffen correspondence Alfred Marshall Principles of Economics Bk.III,Ch.VI in paragraph III.VI.17

Robert René ('René') Kuczynski (1876–1947) was a German-based, Jewish economist and demographer and is said to be one of the founders of modern vital statistics. Jürgen Kuczynski is his son. His father Wilhelm was a banker. René studied at the universities of Berlin, Munich, Freiburg and Strasburg and made his doctoral dissertation in 1897. Later, he worked for the United States Census Office. In 1904 he became director of the Staistical Office in Elberfeld and in 1906 took the same position in Berlin -Schoneberg. He studied rent and income in Berlin before the first World War and found that 600,000 people lived in flats which house five or more people per room. In 1926, Kuczynski chaired the Kuczynski Committee, working with the German League for Human Rights, which organized the petition for a referendum on the expropriation of the Princes. In 1928 he led the German delegation to the tenth anniversary of the Russian Revolution. In 1933, after Hitler had come to power, Kuczynski left Germany and went with around 20,000 books (half of the large family library) to Great Britain. There he lectured at the London School of Economics and became later adviser for the British Colonial Office. His most noted work was in the 1930s when he published figures on the extent of the slave trade between Africa and the Americas over the preceding three centuries. His figure of 15 million slaves became widely used by other researchers, but is no longer thought to be correct. An obituary of his son Jürgen [1] refers to Rene as a banker - and the family does seem to have been massively wealthy. Eric Hobsbawm ("Interesting Times", p.145) states that while Jürgen was a "charming and ever-hopeful economic historian", his family "owned the Grunewaldviertel" in Berlin and he was "probably the richest citizen of east Berlin". Kuczynski and wife Berta Gradenwitz had six children. Among them the GDR-economist Jürgen Kuczynski, Brigitte Kuczynski, and Ursula Kuczynski. All of them were Soviet spies.   == Works by Kuczynski == Kuczynski R., Munchner Volkswirtschaftliche Studien, Vierundzwanzigstes Stuck 1897 Kuczynski R., Der Zug Nach Der Stadt: Statistische Studien Uber Vorg Nge Der Bevolkerungsbewegung Im Deutschen Reiche, 1897 Lujo Brentano and Robert Kuczynski, Die heutige Grundlage der deutschen Wehrkraft. 1900 Kuczynski R., Das Existenzminimum und verwandte Fragen.1912 Kuczynski R., Arbeitslohn und Arbeitszeit in Europa und Amerika 1870–1909, Springer, 1913 Kuczynski R., Unsere Finanzen nach dem Kriege, Springer Verlag Gmbh, Jan 1917 Kuczynski R., Der Pflichtteil des Reiches, Springer, Berlin, 1917 Kuczynski R., Schulden, Steuern und Valuta, Verlag Hans Robert Engelmann, Berlin, 1920 Kuczynski R., Wiedergutmachung und deutsche Wirtschaft, Verlag Hans Robert Engelmann, Berlin, 1921 Kuczynski R., Ein Ausweg. Gesundung der Wirtschaft durch Gesundung der Reichsfinanzen, Verlag von Hans Robert Engelmann, Berlin 1921 Kuczynski R., Deutschlands Versorgung mit pflanzlichen Nahrungs- und Futtermitteln, J.F. Bergmann-Verlag, Jan 1926 Kuczynski R., Statistische Grundlagen zu Deutschlands Versorgung mit Nahrungs- und Futtermitteln, J.F. Bergmann-Verlag, Jan 1926 Kuczynski R., Deutschlands Versorgung mit tierischen Nahrungs- und Futtermitteln, J.F. Bergmann-Verlag Jan 1927 Kuczynski, Robert René; American Loans to Germany, With the Aid of the Council and Staff of the Institute of Economics in Washington, 378 pages, publisher: The Macmillan Company, New York, September 1927 Kuczynski, Robert René; Banker's Profits from German loans, publisher: The Brookings Institution, First Edition, Institute of Economics in Washington, Publication 41, 228 Seiten Washington,1932. Kuczynski R., The Measurement of Population Growth; Methods and Results, Sidgwick & Jackson, Ltd., London 1935 Kuczynski R., Colonial population, Oxford University Press London, 1937 Kuczynski R., Living-Space and Population Problems Clarendon Press, London. 1939 Kuczynski R., Demographic Survey of the British Colonial Empire: Vol III. West Indian and American Territories Oxford University Press, London, 1953 Kuczynski R., Fertility and reproduction : methods of measuring the balance of births and deaths., Kuczynski R., The Balance of Births and Deaths; Volume I (1): Western and Northern Europe & Volume II (2): Eastern and Southern Europe (The Brookings Institution Reprint Series) 1970   == References ==  Chapter 1 of The Final Victims : Foreign Slave Trade to North America, 1783–1810 by James A. McMillin, USC Press 2004, ISBN 1-57003-546-6 Excerpt from Demography as Policy Science in the British Empire, 1918-1969 Karl Ittmann in Journal of Policy History - Volume 15, Number 4, 2003, pp. 417–448 information about the R. Kuczynski Price Obituary in Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 110, No. 4. (1947), pp. 383–384 A radical democrat and a great demographer: for the 125th birthday of René Kuczynski, by Thomas Kuczynski, Radical Statistics #112, 2015:70-75.

Robert O. Schlaifer (13 September 1914 – 24 July 1994) was a pioneer of Bayesian decision theory. At the time of his death he was William Ziegler Professor of Business Administration Emeritus of the Harvard Business School. Robert Osher Schlaifer, a native of Vermillion, S.D. and a graduate of Amherst College, had a unique background for a statistical decision theorist. He was trained as a classical historian and classical Greek scholar: he attended the American School of Classical Studies in Athens and earned a Ph.D. in ancient history at Harvard in 1940. He taught history, economics and physics at the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard. During the Second World War he started writing technical reports and produced a major volume on the development of aircraft engines. He got an appointment at the Harvard Business School and when the statistics teacher retired he started to teach statistics—starting by teaching himself. He had very little mathematical background and Raiffa recalled how they worked together: "I would teach him something about linear algebra in the morning and he would show me how it could be applied in the afternoon." (from the interview with Fienberg) Schlaifer made an important contribution to Bayesian decision theory. His work and his character are described in the following appreciations. In 1992 the Decision Analysis Society awarded Schlaifer the Frank P. Ramsey Medal for distinguished contributions to the field of decision analysis. In making the award Bob Winkler noted Schlaifer's pioneering efforts in decision analysis. His 1959 book, Probability and Statistics for Business Decisions, was a landmark effort, coming only five years after L. J. Savage, in his classic Foundations of Statistics, presented a development of subjective probability and utility but then inexplicably reverted to minimax arguments in the latter part of the book. Schlaifer, with no formal training in statistics or mathematical modeling, got it right and took the first steps toward bridging the theory/practice gap. Winkler also quoted the following assessment from Howard Raiffa, who worked with Schlaifer and was the recipient of the first Ramsey Medal in 1984: “The basic ideas of statistical decision theory were conceived by (Schlaifer) independently of the work of L. J. Savage or de Finetti, and early on he saw that those ideas were broadly applicable to problems in decision making under uncertainty. He was a pioneer in the practical assessment of subjective probabilities and utilities… (Schlaifer) influenced my intellectual development more than any other individual — more than Abraham Wald or von Neumann or Savage or Arrow.” In the preface to the second 1971 edition of Foundations of Statistics Savage wrote This is a welcome opportunity to say that his [Schlaifer's] ideas were developed wholly independently of the present book, and indeed of other personalistic literature. They are in full harmony with the ideas of this book but are more down to earth and less spellbound by tradition. Schlaifer's book with John W. Pratt and Raiffa was published posthumously and his co-authors wrote this dedication: Robert O. Schlaifer (1915 – 1994): An original, deep, creative, indefatigable, persistent, versatile, demanding, sometimes irascible scholar, who was an inspiration to us both.   == Role in Development of Aircraft Engines & Fuels == Schlaifer was involved in the development of military aircraft engines and fuels prior to World War II. He found that the best way to get a good engine quickly was to bring to test as soon as possible a number of alternate designs, pick one that combined good characteristics with few development problems, and then work intensely to develop it.   == Some publications of Robert Schlaifer == Greek Theories of Slavery from Homer to Aristotle, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, Vol. 47 (1936), pp. 165–204. Demon of Paeania, Priest of Asclepius, Classical Philology, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Jan., 1943), pp. 39–43. Development of Aircraft Engines. Boston : Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University, 1950. Probability and statistics for business decisions. An introduction to managerial economics under uncertainty New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1959 Applied statistical decision theory (with Howard Raiffa) Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1961. Introduction to statistical decision theory John W. Pratt, Howard Raiffa, Robert Schlaifer preliminary edition, 1965. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995.   == References ==   == External links == The award of the Frank P. Ramsey Medal of the Decision Analysis Society is described in the newsletter August 1992 Newsletter New York Times obituary Stephen E. Fienberg "The Early Statistical Years: 1947–1967. A Conversation With Howard Raiffa" Statistical Science, 23, (2008), 136-149.

Roelof F. Botha (born 19 September 1973) is a venture capitalist and company director. By training, he is a qualified actuary. Botha is a partner at Sequoia Capital and currently sits on the boards of Jawbone, Eventbrite, Evernote, Mahalo, Natera, Nimbula, Square, Tokbox, Tumblr, Weebly, Unity, Whisper and Xoom. He also works with 10gen, AssureRX, FutureAdvisor, Instagram, MixPanel and MuSigma. He previously sat on the board of directors of Meebo and YouTube before they were each acquired by Google. On Forbes' Midas List, an annual ranking of venture capital professionals, he ranked 22nd in 2008 and 26th in 2009.   == Education and career == Botha was born in Pretoria, South Africa, and at the age of six he moved to Cape Town with his parents. He was raised in Hout Bay, a suburb of Cape Town, and attended Hoërskool Jan van Riebeeck. Botha earned a BSc in Actuarial Science, Economics, and Statistics from the University of Cape Town, graduating in 1996 with the highest GPA in the history of the program. A year and a half later he became the youngest actuary (Institute of Actuaries and Faculty of Actuaries) in South African history. Botha worked as a business analyst at McKinsey & Co., Johannesburg, from August 1996 through June 1998. He then moved to the United States, where he attended the Stanford University Graduate School of Business from 1998 through 2000 and received an MBA. In 2000, prior to his graduation from Stanford, Botha became director of corporate development for PayPal. He moved on to vice-president of finance and was named CFO in September 2001. Botha was 28 when PayPal went public in February 2002. The company was purchased by eBay in October 2002. Botha left to join Sequoia Capital in January 2003.   == Family == Botha's father, also named Roelof, is an economist. His grandfather is Roelof Frederik "Pik" Botha, a former South African politician who served as the country's foreign minister in the last years of the apartheid era. His uncle is the rock musician Piet Botha.   == References ==   == External links == Roelof Botha Bio

Stuart Jay Olshansky (born February 22, 1954) is a professor in the School of Public Health at the University of Illinois at Chicago concentrating on biodemography and gerontology. He is also a research associate at the Center on Aging (University of Chicago) and at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Olshansky is an associate editor of the Journal of Gerontology: Biological Sciences and Biogerontology and is a member of the editorial boards of several other scientific journals. Olshansky has been working with colleagues in the biological sciences to develop the modern "biodemographic paradigm" of mortality – an effort to understand the biological nature of the survival and dying out processes of living organisms. The focus of his research has been on estimates of the upper limits to human longevity, exploring the health and public policy implications associated with individual and population aging, forecasts of the size, survival, and age structure of the population, pursuit of the scientific means to slow aging in people (The Longevity Dividend), and global implications of the re-emergence of infectious and parasitic diseases, and insurance linked securities.   == Biography == Olshansky was born on February 22, 1954. He attended Michigan State University and was awarded a B.S. in 1975. He then attended the University of Chicago and was awarded a M.So. in 1982. He received his Ph.D. in sociology at the University of Chicago in 1984. His work on biodemography has been funded by a Special Emphasis Research Career Award and an Independent Scientist Award from the National Institute on Aging and a research grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration starting in 1991. In 2011 he published an article on the longevity of United States presidents in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Olshansky was the recipient of a 2005/2006 Senior Fulbright Award to lecture in France. In 2010 he was made fellow of the Gerontological Society of America. He is co-author with Bruce A Carnes of The Quest for Immortality: Science at the Frontiers of Aging (Norton, 2001); According to WorldCat, the book is held in 721 libraries. It has been translated into Spanish as En busca de la inmortalidad : la ciencia en las fronteras del envejecimiento, into German as Ewig jung? : Altersforschung und das Versprechen vom langen Leben; and into Japanese as 長生きするヒトはどこが違うか? : 不老と遺伝子のサイエンス / Nagaikisuru hito wa doko ga chigauka : Furō to idenshi no saiensu    == See also ==  Life extension Senescence   == References ==

Samuel Stanley Wilks (June 17, 1906 – March 7, 1964) was an American mathematician and academic who played an important role in the development of mathematical statistics, especially in regard to practical applications. Born in Little Elm, Texas and raised on a farm, Wilks was educated at the University of Iowa, where he acquired his Ph.D. under Everett F. Lindquist; his thesis dealt with a problem of statistical measurement in education, and was published in the Journal of Educational Psychology. Wilks became an instructor in mathematics at Princeton University in 1933; in 1938 he assumed the editorship of the journal Annals of Mathematical Statistics in place of Harry C. Carver. Wilks assembled an advisory board for the journal that included major figures in statistics and probability, among them Ronald Fisher, Jerzy Neyman, and Egon Pearson. Wilks was named professor of mathematics and director of the Section of Mathematical Statistics at Princeton in 1944, and became chairman of the Division of Mathematics at the university in 1958. He was noted for his work on multivariate statistics. He also conducted work on unit-weighted regression, proving the idea that under a wide variety of common conditions, almost all set of weights will yield composites that are very highly correlated (Wilks, 1938), a result that has been dubbed Wilks's theorem (Ree, Carretta, & Earles, 1998). From the start of his career, Wilks favored a strong focus on practical applications for the increasingly abstract field of mathematical statistics; he also influenced other researchers, notably John Tukey, in a similar direction. Drawing upon the background of his thesis, Wilks worked with the Educational Testing Service in developing the standardized tests like the SAT that have had a profound effect on American education. He also worked with Walter Shewhart on statistical applications in quality control in manufacturing. During World War II he was a consultant with the Office of Naval Research. Both during and after the War he had a profound impact on the application of statistical methods to all aspects of military planning. Wilks died in 1964 in Princeton. The American Statistical Association named its Wilks Memorial Award in his honor. Wilks's lambda distribution is a probability distribution related to two independent Wishart distributed variables. It is important in multivariate statistics and likelihood-ratio tests.   == References == Mosteller, Frederick. "Samuel S. Wilks: Statesman of Statistics." American Statistician, Vol. 18, No. 2 (April 1964), pp. 11–17. (Reprint on American Statistical Association's Statisticians in History website). Ree, M. J., Carretta, T. R., & Earles, J. A. (1998). "In top-down decisions, weighting variables does not matter: A consequence of Wilks's theorem. Organizational Research Methods, volume 1(4), pages 407–420. doi:10.1177/109442819814003 Salsburg, David. The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth Century. New York, W. H. Freeman, 2001. Stephan, Frederick F. et al. "Samuel S. Wilks." Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 60, No. 312 (Dec. 1965), pp. 939–66. Wilks, S. S. (1938). "Weighting systems for linear functions of correlated variables when there is no dependent variable". Psychometrika, volume 3, pages 23–40. doi:10.1007/BF02287917   == External links == Wilks at Princeton

Sewall Green Wright (December 16, 1889 – March 3, 1988) was an American geneticist known for his influential work on evolutionary theory and also for his work on path analysis. He was a founder of population genetics alongside Ronald Fisher and J.B.S. Haldane, which was a major step in the development of the modern evolutionary synthesis combining genetics with evolution. He discovered the inbreeding coefficient and methods of computing it in pedigree animals. He extended this work to populations, computing the amount of inbreeding between members of populations as a result of random genetic drift, and along with Fisher he pioneered methods for computing the distribution of gene frequencies among populations as a result of the interaction of natural selection, mutation, migration and genetic drift. Wright also made major contributions to mammalian and biochemical genetics.    == Biography == Sewall Wright was born in Melrose, Massachusetts to Philip Green Wright and Elizabeth Quincy Sewall Wright. His parents were first cousins, an interesting fact in light of Wright's later research on inbreeding. The family moved three years later after Philip accepted a teaching job at Lombard College, a Universalist college in Galesburg, Illinois. As a child, Wright helped his father and brother print and publish an early book of poems by his father's student Carl Sandburg. He was the oldest of three gifted brothers—the others being the aeronautical engineer Theodore Paul Wright and the political scientist Quincy Wright. From an early age Wright had a love and talent for mathematics and biology. Wright attended Galesburg High School and graduated in 1906. He then enrolled in Lombard College where his father taught, to study mathematics. He was influenced greatly by Professor Wilhelmine Entemann Key, one of the first women to receive a Ph.D. in biology. Wright received his Ph.D. from Harvard University, where he worked at the Bussey Institute with the pioneering mammalian geneticist William Ernest Castle investigating the inheritance of coat colors in mammals. He worked for the U.S. Department of Agriculture until 1925, when he joined the Department of Zoology at the University of Chicago. He remained there until his retirement in 1955, when he moved to the University of Wisconsin–Madison. He received many honors in his long career, including the National Medal of Science (1966), the Balzan Prize (1984), and the Darwin Medal of the Royal Society (1980). He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society. The American Mathematical Society selected him as the Josiah Willards Gibbs lecturer for 1941. For his work on genetics of evolutionary processes, Wright was awarded the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal from the National Academy of Sciences in 1945. Wright married Louise Lane Williams (1895–1975) in 1921. They had three children: Richard, Robert, and Elizabeth.   == Scientific achievements and credits ==   === Population genetics ===  His papers on inbreeding, mating systems, and genetic drift make him a principal founder of theoretical population genetics, along with R. A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane. Their theoretical work is the origin of the modern evolutionary synthesis or neodarwinian synthesis. Wright was the inventor/discoverer of the inbreeding coefficient and F-statistics, standard tools in population genetics. He was the chief developer of the mathematical theory of genetic drift, which is sometimes known as the Sewall Wright effect, cumulative stochastic changes in gene frequencies that arise from random births, deaths, and Mendelian segregations in reproduction. In this work he also introduced the concept of effective population size. Wright was convinced that the interaction of genetic drift and the other evolutionary forces was important in the process of adaptation. He described the relationship between genotype or phenotype and fitness as fitness surfaces or evolutionary landscapes. On these landscapes mean population fitness was the height, plotted against horizontal axes representing the allele frequencies or the average phenotypes of the population. Natural selection would lead to a population climbing the nearest peak, while genetic drift would cause random wandering.   === Evolutionary theory === Wright's explanation for stasis was that organisms come to occupy adaptive peaks. In order to evolve to another, higher peak, the species would first have to pass through a valley of maladaptive intermediate stages. This could happen by genetic drift if the population is small enough. If a species was divided into small populations, some could find higher peaks. If there was some gene flow between the populations, these adaptations could spread to the rest of the species. This was Wright's shifting balance theory of evolution. There has been much skepticism among evolutionary biologists as to whether these rather delicate conditions hold often in natural populations. Wright had a long standing and bitter debate about this with R. A. Fisher, who felt that most populations in nature were too large for these effects of genetic drift to be important.   === Path analysis === Wright's statistical method of path analysis, which he invented in 1921 and which was one of the first methods using a graphical model, is still widely used in social science. He was a hugely influential reviewer of manuscripts, as one of the most frequent reviewers for Genetics. Such was his reputation that he was often credited with reviews that he did not write.   === Plant and animal breeding === Wright strongly influenced Jay Lush, who was the most influential figure in introducing quantitative genetics into animal and plant breeding. From 1915 to 1925 Wright was employed by the Animal Husbandry Division of the U.S. Bureau of Animal Husbandry. His main project was to investigate the inbreeding that had occurred in the artificial selection that resulted in the leading breeds of livestock used in American beef production. He also performed experiments with 80,000 guinea pigs in the study of physiological genetics. Further more he analyzed characters of some 40,000 guinea pigs in 23 strains of brother-sister matings against a random-bred stock. (Wright 1922a-c). The concentrated study of these two groups of mammals eventually led to the Shifting Balance Theory and the concept of "surfaces of selective value" in 1932. (Wright 1988 Pg 122 American Naturalist) He did major work on the genetics of guinea pigs, and many of his students became influential in the development of mammalian genetics. He appreciated as early as 1917 that genes acted by controlling enzymes. An anecdote about Wright, disclaimed by Wright himself, describes a lecture during which Wright tucked an unruly guinea pig under his armpit, where he usually held a chalkboard eraser: according to the anecdote, at the conclusion of the lecture, Wright absent-mindedly began to erase the blackboard using the guinea pig.   === Wright and philosophy === Wright was one of the few geneticists of his time to venture into philosophy. He found a union of concept in Charles Hartshorne, who became a lifelong friend and philosophical collaborator. Wright endorsed a form of panpsychism. He believed that the birth of the consciousness was not due to a mysterious property of increasing complexity, but rather an inherent property, therefore implying these properties were in the most elementary particles.   == Legacy == Wright and Fisher, along with J.B.S. Haldane, were the key figures in the modern synthesis that brought genetics and evolution together. Their work was essential to the contributions of Dobzhansky, Mayr, Simpson, Julian Huxley, and Stebbins. The modern synthesis was the most important development in evolutionary biology after Darwin. Wright also had a major effect on the development of mammalian genetics and biochemical genetics. An interesting anecdote about Sewall Wright and Barbara McClintock is linked here: OpenMx has as its icon a representation of Wright's Piebald Guinea Pig   == Bibliography == Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 1 (Genetic & Biometric Foundations); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91038-5.  Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 2 (Theory of Gene Frequencies); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91039-3.  Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 3 (Experimental Results and Evolutionary Deductions); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91040-7.  Wright, Sewall (1984). Evolution and the Genetics of Populations: Genetics and Biometric Foundations v. 4 (Variability within and Among Natural Populations); New Edition. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91041-5.    == References ==   == Further reading == Ghiselin, Michael T. (1997) Metaphysics and the Origin of Species. NY: SUNY Press. Provine, William (1986). Sewall Wright and Evolutionary Biology. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-68473-3.  Wright, Sewall (1932). "The roles of mutation, inbreeding, crossbreeding and selection in evolution". Proc. 6th Int. Cong. Genet 1: 356–366.  Wright, Sewall (1986). Evolution: Selected papers. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-91053-9.    == External links == Sewall Wright: Darwin's Successor—Evolutionary Theorist by Edric Lescouflair and James F. Crow Sewall Wright Papers at the American Philosophical Society O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Sewall Wright", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Shyamaprasad Mukherjee, FNASc, known as S. P. Mukherjee, (born 16 June 1939) is an Indian statistician and the Centenary Professor of Statistics at the University of Calcutta. He is currently visiting professor at University of Calcutta after retiring formally as the Centenary Professor of Statistics in 2004.   == Early life and education == He was born in Kidderpore, Kolkata, India. In 1954 he appeared in his school final (10th grade) examination and was ranked second in the state of West Bengal. He received an M.Sc. in Statistics in 1960 and Ph.D. in Statistics in 1967 from University of Calcutta. After a short stint of teaching in the Presidency College, Calcutta he joined the University of Calcutta, as a lecturer in Statistics in 1964.   == Academic career == He has done research in Applied Probability, Parametric & Bayesian Estimation, Reliability Analysis, Quality Management, and Operations Research; published more than sixty research papers and review & expository articles; and supervised twenty one Ph. D. students. He was the President of the Operational Research Society of India as well as of the Association of Asian-Pacific Operational Research Societies (APORS). He was also a Vice-President of the International Federation of Operational Research Societies (IFORS). He has been the President  of the Calcutta Statistical Association. He has served as the Chairman of the Committee on Statistical Methods for Quality and Reliability of the Bureau of Indian Standards. He is currently the President of the Indian Association for Productivity, Quality and Reliability (IAPQR)  as well as the Editor of IAPQR Transactions and is associated with the editorial work of several other journals.   === Areas of research contributions === Applied Probability Parametric and Bayesian Estimation Reliability Quality Management Operations Research   === Books authored === Graduate Employment and Higher Education in West Bengal Frontiers in Probability and Statistics   === Awards and medals === Prof P V Sukhatme Award for Senior Statisticians June 2012 P C Mahalanobis Birth Centenary Award Jan 2000   == References ==   == External links == List of Prestigious Chairs, University of Calcutta News on National Statistics Day 2012

Simon Smith Kuznets (/kʊzˈnɛts/, /ˈkʌznɛts/; Russian: Семён Абра́мович Кузне́ц; IPA: [sʲɪˈmʲɵn ɐˈbraməvʲɪtɕ kʊzʲˈnʲɛts]; April 30, 1901 – July 8, 1985) was an American economist, statistician, demographer, and economic historian who won the 1971 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences "for his empirically founded interpretation of economic growth which has led to new and deepened insight into the economic and social structure and process of development". Kuznets made a decisive contribution to the transformation of economics into empirical science and to the formation of quantitative economic history.   == Biography == He was born of a Jewish family in Pinsk, located in Belarus since the country's independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kuznets studied in the Second public school taking primary and secondary classes in 1915–1917. After the graduation he enrolled at the University of Kharkiv. There he began to study economics and became exposed to Joseph Schumpeter's theory of innovation and the business cycle. In 1918, Kuznets entered the Kharkiv Institute of Commerce where he studied economic sciences, statistics, history and mathematics under the guidance of professors P. Fomin (political economy), A. Antsiferov (statistics), V. Levitsky (economic history and economic thought), S. Bernstein (probability theory), V. Davats (mathematics), and others. Basic academic courses at the Institute helped him to acquire “exceptional” erudition in economics, as well as in history, demography, statistics and natural sciences. According to the Institute’s curriculum, development of the national economies had to be analyzed in the wider context of changes in connected spheres and with involvement of proper methods and empirical data. At the turn of 1920–1921 years, the normal course in the Institute was interrupted by the events of the Civil War and reorganizations undertaken by the Soviet authorities in the sphere of the higher education. There is no precise information whether Kuznets continued his studies at the Institute, but it is known that he joined the Department of Labor of UZHBURO (South Bureau) of the Central Council of Trade Unions. There he published his first scientific paper, "Monetary wages and salaries of factory workers in Kharkiv in 1920"; he explored the dynamics of different types of wages by industries in Kharkiv and income differentiation, depending on the wage system. In 1922, the Kuznets family emigrated to the United States. Kuznets then studied at Columbia University under the guidance of Wesley Clair Mitchell. He graduated with a B.Sc. in 1923, M.A. in 1924, and Ph.D. in 1926. As his magister thesis, he defended the essay “Economic system of Dr. Schumpeter, presented and analyzed”, written in Kharkiv. From 1925 to 1926, Kuznets spent time studying economic patterns in prices as the Research Fellow at the Social Science Research Council. It was this work that led to his book "Secular Movements in Production and Prices", defended as a doctoral thesis and published in 1930. In 1927, he became a member of the research staff of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), where he worked until 1961. From 1931 until 1936, Kuznets was a part-time professor at the University of Pennsylvania, he was elected to the Pi Gamma Mu social science honor society chapter at the University of Pennsylvania and actively served as a chapter officer in the 1940s; becoming a full-time professor 1936 until 1954. In 1954, Kuznets moved to Johns Hopkins University, where he was Professor of Political Economy until 1960. From 1961 until his retirement in 1970, Kuznets taught at Harvard. Apart from that, Kuznets collaborated with a number of research organizations and government agencies. In 1931–1934, at Mitchell’s behest, Kuznets took charge of the NBER’s work on U.S. national income accounts, given the first official estimation of the US national income. In 1936, Kuznets took the lead in establishing the Conference on Research Income and Wealth, which brought together government officials and academic economists, engaged in the development of the U.S. national income and product accounts, and in 1947 helped to establish its international counterpart, the International Association for Research in Income and Wealth. During the World War II, in 1942–1944 Kuznets became the associate director of the Bureau of Planning and Statistics, War Production Board. He took part in works aimed to assess the capacity to expand military production. Researchers used national income accounting together with a rough form of linear programming to measure the potential for increased production and the sources from which it would come and to identify the materials that were binding constraints on expansion. After the War, he worked as an advisor for the governments of China, Japan, India, Korea, Taiwan, and Israel in the establishment of their national systems of economic information. Kuznets cooperated with the Growth Center of Yale University, the Social Science Research Council (SSRC). He guided extensive research holding a number of positions in research institutions,such as the Chairman of the Falk Project for Economic Research in Israel, 1953–1963; member of the Board of Trustees and honorary chairman, Maurice Falk Institute for Economic Research in Israel, from 1963; and Chairman, Social Science Research Council Committee on the Economy of China, 1961–1970. Kuznets was elected as the President of the American Economic Association (1954), President of the American Statistical Association (1949), an honorable member of the Association of Economic History, the Royal Statistical Society of England and a member of the Econometric Society, the International Statistical Institute, the American Philosophical Society, the Royal Swedish Academy, a corresponding member of the British Academy. He was awarded the Medal of Francis Walker (1977). Simon Kuznets died on July 8, 1985, at the age of 84. In 2013 The Kharkiv National University of Economics where he studied in 1918–1921 was named after him (Semen Kuznets Kharkiv National University of Economics).   == His work and its impact on economics == His name is associated with the formation of the modern economic science such as an empirical discipline, the development of statistical methods of research and the emergence of quantitative economic history. Kuznets is credited with revolutionising econometrics, and this work is credited with fueling the so-called Keynesian revolution". The views and the scientific methodology of Kuznets were influenced by methodological settings received by him in Kharkov and fully shared by Mitchell for the statistical, inductive construction of hypotheses in economics and its empirical testing. Kuznets treated a priori and speculative conceptions with deep skepticism. At the same time, Kuznets tended to analyze economy in connection and with the wider context of historical situation, demographic, social processes that was peculiar for the Kharkov academics at the beginning of the 20th century. Kuznets was influenced by the work of such leading theorists as Joseph A. Schumpeter (who probed the relationship between technological change and business cycles), A. C. Pigou (who identified circumstances under which markets failed to maximize economic welfare), and Vilfredo Pareto (who propounded a law governing the distribution of income among households). Kuznets was closely familiar with the economics of Russia and Ukraine of the early 20th century. In the 1920s, he reviewed and translated the little known in the West papers of Kondratiev, Slutsky, Pervushin, Weinstein.   === Historical series of economic dynamics and Kuznets Cycles, or "long swings" === The first major research project in which Kuznets was involved was the study of long series of economic dynamics in the USA undertaken in the mid-1920s. The collected data covered the period from 1865 to 1925, and for some indices achieved 1770. Applying for the analysis of time series approximating Gompertz and logistic curves, Kuznets found that the characteristics of the curves with reasonable accuracy described the majority of economic processes. Fitting trend curves to data and analysis of the time series, comparison of theoretical and empirical levels, allowed him to identify medium-term extended cycles of economic activity, which lasted 15–25 years and had an intermediate position between the Kondratyev “long waves" and short business cycles. Aspiring to determine the nature of these cycles, Kuznets analyzed the dynamics of population, the construction industry performance, capital, national income data and other variables. These movements became known among economists and economic historians as "Kuznets Cycles", and alternatively as "long swings" in the economy's growth rate (following the work of Moses Abramovitz [1912-1999]. ```   === National income accounts === In 1931, at Mitchell’s behest, Kuznets took charge of the NBER’s work on U.S. national income accounts. In 1934, an assessment of the national income of the United States for the period 1929–1932 was given; further, it was extended to 1919–1938, and then, until 1869. Although Kuznets was not the first economist to try this, his work was so comprehensive and meticulous that it set the standard in the field. Kuznets had success to solve numerous problems ranging from lack of sources of information and bias assessments, to the development of the theoretical concept of national income. Kuznets achieved a high precision in calculations. His works allowed us to analyze the structure of the national income, and expose to detailed study a number of specific problems of the national economy. Improved methods for calculating the national income and related indicators have become classics and formed the basis of the modern system of national accounts. Having analyzed the distribution of income among different social groups, Kuznets put forward the hypothesis that in countries, which wereon the early stages of economic development, income inequality increased first, but as far as national economy was growing, it tended to decrease. This assumption formed the basis of so-called "Kuznets curve" empirical conception. Kuznets helped the U.S. Department of Commerce to standardize the measurement of GNP. He disapproved, however, of its use as a general indication of welfare, writing that "the welfare of a nation can scarcely be inferred from a measure of national income." Exploring the formation of the national income, Kuznets studied proportions between output and income, consumption and savings, etc. After analyzing the long-term data sets of economic conditions for 20 countries, Kuznets revealed long-term trends in capital / output ratios, shares of net capital formation, net investment, and so on. Collected and systematized data allowed exposing to empirical testing a number of existing hypotheses. In particular, this concerned premises of the Keynes theory – Keynes' 1936 Absolute Income Hypothesis. The hypothesis gave birth to what would become the first formal consumption function. However Kuznets shook the economic world by finding that Keynes' predictions, while seemingly accurate in short-run cross-sections, broke down under more rigorous examination. In his 1942 tome Uses of National Income in Peace and War, published by the National Bureau of Economic Research, Kuznets became the first economist to show that the Absolute Income Hypothesis gives inaccurate predictions in the long run (by using time-series data). Keynes had predicted that as aggregate income increases, so will marginal savings. Kuznets used new data to show that, over a longer span of time (1870's – 1940's) the savings ratio remained constant, despite large changes in income. This paved the way for Milton Friedman's Permanent Income Hypothesis, and several more modern alternatives such as the Life cycle hypothesis and the Relative Income Hypothesis.   === Economic growth === By the end of the Second World War Kuznets moved into a new research area, related to the tie between changes in income and growth. He proposed research program that involved extensive empirical studies on the four key elements of economic growth. In fact, the demographic growth, the growth of knowledge, in-country adaptation to growth factors and external economic relations between the countries. The general theory of economic growth should explain the development of advanced industrial countries, and the reasons that prevent the development of backward countries, include both market and planned economies, large and small, developed and developing countries, consider the impact on growth of foreign economic relations. He collected and analyzed statistical indicators of economic performance of 14 countries in Europe, the U.S. and Japan for 60 years. Analysis of the materials led to the advancement of a number of hypotheses relating to various aspects of the mechanism of economic growth, concerning the level and variability of growth, structure of the GNP and distribution of labor, the distribution of income between households, the structure of foreign trade. Kuznets founded the historically grounded theory of economic growth. The central theme of these empirical studies is that the growth of the aggregated product of the country necessarily implies a profound transformation of the whole of its economic structure. This transformation affects many aspects of economic life – the structure of production, sectoral and occupational structure of employment, the division of occupations among family and market activities, the income structure, size, age structure and spatial distribution of the population, cross-country flows of goods, capital, labor and knowledge, the organization of industry and governmental regulation. Such changes, in his opinion, are essential for overall growth and, once started, shape, constrain or support the subsequent economic development of the country. Kuznets made a profound analysis of the impact on economic growth by demographic processes and characteristics. His major thesis, which argued that underdeveloped countries of today possess characteristics different from those that industrialized countries faced before they developed, helped put an end to the simplistic view that all countries went through the same "linear stages" in their history and launched the separate field of development economics – which now focused on the analysis of modern underdeveloped countries' distinct experiences.   === Kuznets curve === Among his several discoveries which sparked important theoretical research programs was his discovery of the inverted U-shaped relation between income inequality and economic growth (1955, 1963). In poor countries, economic growth increased the income disparity between rich and poor people. In wealthier countries, economic growth narrowed the difference. By noting patterns of income inequality in developed and underdeveloped countries, he proposed that as countries experienced economic growth, the income inequality first increases and then decreases. The reasoning was that in order to experience growth, countries had to shift from agricultural to industrial sectors. While there was little variation in the agricultural income, industrialization led to large differences in income. Additionally, as economies experienced growth, mass education provided greater opportunities which decreased the inequality and the lower income portion of the population gained political power to change governmental policies. He also discovered the patterns in savings-income behavior which launched the Life-Cycle-Permanent-Income Hypothesis of Modigliani and Friedman.   === Historical and economic works of the 1970s === In his historical and economic studies of the 1970s., Kuznets expressed the idea of interaction of science and technology (innovations), and institutional shifts, as well as a role of external to the economy factors, such as those caused by the moral and political climate in society, and their impact on the progress and results of economic growth. Kuznets was awarded by the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel in 1971 “for his empirically founded interpretation of economic growth which has led to new and deepened insight into the economic and social structure and process of development”.   == Selected publications == "Secular Movements in Production and Prices: Their Nature and Their Bearing upon Cyclical Fluctuations". (1930) "National Income and Capital Formation, 1919–1935". (1937) "National Income and Its Composition, 1919–1938". (1941) "Economic Growth and Income Inequality". American Economic Review 45 (March): 1–28. (1955) "Quantitative aspects of the economic growth of nations, VIII: The distribution of income by size", Economic Development and Cultural Change, 11, pp. 1–92. (1963) "Modern Economic Growth: Rate, Structure, and Spread". (1966) "Toward a Theory of Economic Growth, with Reflections on the Economic Growth of Modern Nations". (1968) "Economic Growth of Nations: Total Output and Production Structure". (1971) "Population, Capital and Growth". (1973)   == See also == Capital formation Gross domestic product Information Revolution List of economists List of Jewish Nobel laureates Simon Kuznets Kharkiv National University of Economics   == References ==   == Further reading == Abramovitz M. Simon Kuznets (1901–1985) // The Journal of Economic History, March 1986, v. 46, no. 1, p. 241–246. Ben-Porath Y. Simon Kuznets in Person and in Writing // Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 36, No. 3 (Apr., 1988), pp. 435–447. Fogel, Robert W. (2000). "Simon S. Kuznets: April 30, 1901 – July 9, 1985". NBER Working Paper No. W7787.  Fogel, Robert William; Fogel, Enid M.; Guglielmo, Mark; Grotte, Nathaniel (2013). Political Arithmetic: Simon Kuznets and the Empirical Tradition in Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-25661-8.  Hoselitz B. F. Bibliography of Simon Kuznets // Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 31, No. 2 (Jan., 1983), pp. 433–454. Kapuria-Foreman V., Perlman M. An Economic Historian's Economist: Remembering Simon Kuznets // The Economic Journal, 105 (November), 1995, p. 1524–1547. Syed, Munir Khasru; Mohammad, Muaz Jalil (2004). "Revisiting Kuznets Hypothesis: An Analysis with Time Series and Panel Data". Bangladesh Development Studies 30 (3–4): 89–112.  Lundberg, Erik (1971). "Simon Kuznets contributions to Economics". The Swedish Journal of Economics 73 (4): 444–459. doi:10.2307/3439225. JSTOR 3439225.  Street J. H. The Contribution of Simon S. Kuznets to Institutionalist Development Theory // Journal of Economic Issues, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Jun., 1988), pp. 499–509.   == External links == Simon Kuznets (1901–1985). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  New School for Social Research. With partial bibliography and web links. Kuznets's Nobel Prize lecture. Fogel, Robert, 2000, "Simon S. Kuznets: 1901–1985," NBER Working Paper No. 7787. National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir

Sir John Sinclair of Ulbster, 1st Baronet (10 May 1754 – 21 December 1835) was a Scottish politician, writer on finance and agriculture and the first person to use the word statistics in the English language, in his vast, pioneering work, Statistical Account of Scotland, in 21 volumes. Sinclair was the eldest son of George Sinclair of Ulbster, a member of the family of the Earls of Caithness, and was born at Thurso Castle, Caithness. After studying at the universities of Edinburgh and Glasgow and at Trinity College, Oxford, he was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland, and called to the English bar, though he never practised. In 1780, he was returned to the House of Commons for the Caithness constituency, and subsequently represented several English constituencies, his parliamentary career extending, with few interruptions, until 1811. Sinclair established at Edinburgh a society for the improvement of British wool, and was mainly instrumental in the creation of the Board of Agriculture, of which he was the first president. His reputation as a financier and economist had been established by the publication, in 1784, of his History of the Public Revenue of the British Empire; in 1793 widespread ruin was prevented by the adoption of his plan for the issue of Exchequer Bills; and it was on his advice that, in 1797, Pitt issued the "loyalty loan" of eighteen millions for the prosecution of the war.   == Family and private life == Sir John Sinclair, who was created a baronet in 1786, was twice married. He had two daughters by his first wife. One source gives his wife's name as Lady Catherine Camilla Tollemache, daughter of William Talmash, Lord Huntingtower. whilst a later source says her name was Sarah Maitland who died in 1785. The two daughters were Hannah and Janet, who became a religious writer. Sinclair was married, secondly, to Diana, daughter of Alexander Lord Macdonald, by whom he had thirteen children. His eldest son, Sir George Sinclair, 2nd Baronet (1790–1868) was a writer and a Member of Parliament, representing Caithness at intervals from 1811 until 1841. His son, Sir John George Tollemache Sinclair, 3rd Baronet, was member for the same constituency from 1869 to 1885. The first Baronet's third son, also John (1797–1875), became Archdeacon of Middlesex; the fourth son was Captain Archibald Sinclair RN; the fifth son, William (1804–1878), was Prebendary of Chichester and was the father of William Macdonald Sinclair (b. 1850), who in 1889 became Archdeacon of London; the fourth daughter, Catherine Sinclair was an author. In the 1830s he is listed as living at 133 George Street, in the centre of Edinburgh's New Town.   == Scientific agriculture == Sinclair's services to scientific agriculture were conspicuous. He supervised the compilation of the Statistical Account of Scotland (21 vols., 1791–1799) which was drawn up from the communications of the Ministers of the different parishes'. This became known as the "Old Statistical Account." In volume XX (p. xiii) Sinclair explained the choice of name and the purpose of the inquiry:  "Many people were at first surprised at my using the words "statistical" and "statistics", as it was supposed that some term in our own language might have expressed the same meaning. But in the course of a very extensive tour through the northern parts of Europe, which I happened to take in 1786, I found that in Germany they were engaged in a species of political enquiry to which they had given the name "statistics," and though I apply a different meaning to that word—for by "statistical" is meant in Germany an inquiry for the purposes of ascertaining the political strength of a country or questions respecting matters of state—whereas the idea I annex to the term is an inquiry into the state of a country, for the purpose of ascertaining the quantum of happiness enjoyed by its inhabitants, and the means of its future improvement; but as I thought that a new word might attract more public attention, I resolved on adopting it, and I hope it is now completely naturalised and incorporated with our language."  For Sinclair, statistics involved collecting facts, but these were not necessarily, or even typically, numerical. Sinclair was a proponent of new agricultural methods, and large tracts of land on his Caithness estate were let out to tenants who kept new breeds of livestock such as Cheviot sheep. This plan meant evicting the sitting tenants and giving them smaller plots of land to work, often in harsh coastal areas such as Badbea. Eventually many of the displaced tenants emigrated. Sinclair was a member of most of the continental agricultural societies, a fellow of the Royal Society of London and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, as well as of the Antiquarian Society of London, a member and sometimes president of the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, and sat as president of the Highland Society of London in 1796. Also, in 1796, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1797. Originally a supporter of Pitt's war policy, Sinclair later joined the party of "armed neutrality." In 1805 he was appointed by Pitt a commissioner for the construction of roads and bridges in the north of Scotland, in 1810 he was made a member of the privy council and, next year, received the lucrative sinecure office of Commissioner of excise. When the Statistical Society of London (now the Royal Statistical Society) was founded in 1834, Sinclair at 80 was the oldest original member. In the same year he presented a paper on agriculture to the British Association for the Advancement of Science, but this was found to lack "facts which can be stated numerically."   == Archaeological recording == Sinclair's works sometimes were the first recording of details of archaeological monuments of Scotland. For example, the first recorded mention of the Catto Long Barrow in Aberdeenshire was made by Sinclair in 1795.   == Writings == He was the author of the books Statistical Accounts of Scotland; History of the Public Revenue of the British Empire 1784; The Code of Health and Longevity 1807; Code of Agriculture 1819. After a tour of agricultural inquiry in Flanders in 1815 he wrote a pamphlet: "Hints Regarding the Agriculture State of the Netherlands, Compared with that of Great Britain", Mc Millan, Londen, 1815   == Line notes ==   == References == Calder, John Traill (1887), Sketch of the Civil and Traditional History of Caithness, Rae  John Sinclair. The Correspondence of the Right Honourable Sir John Sinclair, Bart. With Reminiscences of the Most Distinguished Characters Who Have Appeared in Great Britain, and in Foreign Countries, During the Last Fifty Years. 2 Vols. London: H. Colburn & R. Bentley, 1831. googlebbooks.com Accessed 12 November 2007 Sinclair, Rev. John (Sir John's Sinclair's son). Memoirs of the Life and Works of the Late Right Honourable Sir John Sinclair, Bart. 2 Vols, Edinburgh: W. Blackwood and Sons, 1837. googlebooks.com Accessed 12 November 2007 C. Michael Hogan. 2008 Catto Long Barrow fieldnotes, The Modern Antiquarian R. Mitchison, Agricultural Sir John: The life of Sir John Sinclair of Ulbster, London: Geoffrey Bles (1962). Rosalind Mitchison, "Sinclair, Sir John, first baronet (1754–1835)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004, accessed 16 July 2005. "Sinclair, John", pp. 70–72 in Leading Personalities in Statistical Sciences from the Seventeenth Century to the Present, (ed. N. L. Johnson and S. Kotz) 1997. New York: Wiley. Originally published in Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. R. L. Plackett (1986) The Old Statistical Account, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, A, (149), 247–251. Urban, Sylvanus. "Obituary" The Gentleman's Magazine. London: 1836. (pp. 431–433) googlebooks.com Accessed 12 November 2007 Leigh Rayment's Historical List of MPs   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Royal Society citation Portraits of Sir John Sinclair, 1st Bt at the National Portrait Gallery, London Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Sir John Sinclair For a biography published in 1856 see "Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen" For a description of the "Old Statistical Account" (and the "New") see Statistical Accounts of Scotland. For more on the history of the term "statistics", see the entry in Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics: S.  Works written by or about John Sinclair (1754-1835) at Wikisource


Stefano Franscini (23 October 1796 – 19 July 1857) was a Swiss politician and statistician. He was one of the initial members of the Swiss Federal Council elected in 1848 and Switzerland's first native Italian speaking federal councillor. Franscini was affiliated to the Liberal Radical Party of Switzerland. During his office tenure he held the Department of Home Affairs. Important elements of his political legacy include political reforms in the Ticino during the 1830s and 1840s, Switzerland's first federal population census in 1850, and the creation of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in 1854/1855.   == Early life and education (1796–1824) == Franscini was born in the village of Bodio, to a farmer's family with humble backgrounds. Until the age of eleven, he visited a winter school run by a priest in the neighbouring village Personico. From 1808 to 1814, he attended the priests' seminary in Pollegio, from where he was sent to continue his education and training at the archiepiscopal seminary for priests in Milan. In 1819, he abandoned his religious classes for the sake of studying history, law, political economics, and pedagogy, financing his studies by working as a teacher and author of textbooks. He became friends with Carlo Cattaneo, who was a member of the liberal Carboneria at the time, and who introduced Franscini to Milan's liberal political circles as well as to the works of political economist Melchiorre Gioia, sparking Franscini's lifelong interest in economical statistics. In 1823, he married Teresa Massari, with whom he had two children before she died in 1831.   == Political career (1824–1848) == Franscini returned to Bodio in 1824, where he continued his work as a teacher and author, also writing articles on history, economics, and statistics for the Gazzetta Ticinese. He and his wife founded a girls' school in Lugano based on the popular but controversial Bell-Lancaster method of mutual instruction. In 1827, Franscini published Switzerland's first comparative statistical analysis ever in Statistica della Svizzera ("Statistics of Switzerland"). The explicitly liberal text and interpretation were also translated to German, and helped build Franscini's reputation in the political scene. One year later, he wrote Della pubblica istruzione nel Cantone Ticino ("On public education in the canton of Ticino"), in which he strongly criticized the backwardness of the cantonal government's education policy. Another political text of his was published in Zurich in 1829, this time anonymously: Della riforma della Costituzione ticinese ("On the reform of the Ticino's constitution"), a call for reform, including an outline of how a liberal constitution should be drafted, and a strong criticism of the canton's restaurative and conservative institutions. Franscini continued to write for liberal journals such as L'Osservatore del Ceresio and Il Repubblicano della Svizzera italiana and between 1837 and 1840 published La Svizzera italiana, a reform program for the canton of Ticino, based on a comprehensive statistical analysis of its political and economic condition. His writings were not well received by the authoritarian cantonal government under Landamano Giovanni Battista Quadri , but his ideas were shared by a majority of the Ticino's legislative body, and they helped effectuate a constitutional reform and change of government. In the following years of reform, Franscini held several cantonal political offices: As a state secretary, from 1830 to 1837 and from 1845 to 1847, he prepared resolutions and laws for the cantonal government. He himself was an elected member of this government between 1837 and 1845, and again between 1847 and 1848. Franscini also represented the canton of Ticino at the Tagsatzung in 1841, 1843, 1845, and 1846. During his various tenures of office, Franscini was frequently sent on extraordinary missions, such as relief and calming missions in the Mendrisiotto during a cholera epidemic in 1836, and again during the famine of 1847. That same year he helped establish the armed defense in the Ticino to meet an unruly retreat of the Sonderbund's troops who were losing the War of the Sonderbund. On a national level, he attended intercantonal conferences on trade, customs, and postal services, and, in 1847, received a mandate to mitigate a peaceful change to liberal order in the Valais after its defeat in the War of the Sonderbund. The Tagsatzung also sent him on a fact-finding mission to Naples, where Swiss mercenaries had been accused of atrocious behavior while suppressing uprisings preceding the revolutions of 1848.   == Federal council and death (1848–1857) ==  Franscini was the fifth candidate proposed during the Swiss Federal Council's first election which was held by the newborn Federal Assembly on 16 November 1848. He was elected in the first round, receiving 68 out of 135 valid votes – only one vote above the required absolute majority and the weakest result among the first seven members of the Federal Council. For his entire tenure of eight years, Franscini supervised the Federal Department of Home Affairs. The constitution of 1848 granted the cantons far more autonomy than later revisions after 1874 would ever allow again, and the department's defined scope of responsibility was very small in comparison to what it would become later. Its primary focus was to organize the federal chancellory and federal archive. Other official duties included the collection of statistical data, supervision of religious rights and peace between confessions, sanitary measures in case of epidemic disease, and the standardization of weights and measurement. One of the department's most important accomplishments under Franscini's supervision was the realization of a federal polytechnical institute. Franscini originally wished to create a national university, built on ideals of patriotic identity, but rivalries among cantons forced him to abandon this plan for the sake of a school of technology. The Eidgenössische Polytechnische Schule in Zurich held its first lectures in the autumn of 1855. Franscini's was able to apply his interest in statistics to his work in 1850, when the distribution of seats in the National Council by canton needed to be calculated, and he was commissioned to organize Switzerland's first federal population census. Despite his strong belief in the value of collecting and evaluating statistical data – he saw it as one of a "socially progressive nation"'s duties – he wasn't able to convince federal or cantonal politicians of its importance. With the aid of a private secretary, he was forced to evaluate the data of the census all by himself after Parliament failed to provide the necessary funds. His evaluations were published in a series of five volumes between 1851 and 1858, titled Beiträge zur Statistik der schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft ("Contributions to the Statistics of the Swiss Confederation"). The Federal Statistical Office was not introduced until 1860, after Franscini's death, along with a law on federal population censuses, which were to be held every ten years henceforth. Though the federal council was always only elected by the Federal Assembly, there was an unwritten rule at the time, relinquished since the 1870s, that federal councillors should be confirmed in their home canton's election for the National Council as well. Franscini passed the test in 1851, but failed three years later, during the national elections of 1854, due to rivalries between the fractions of the Ticino's liberals. He was obliged to run in delayed elections held in the canton of Schaffhausen where he finally managed to obtain the desired percentage of votes. The official election for Federal Council held by the Federal Assembly in 1854 proved to be a struggle as well; Franscini did not receive the absolute majority of votes until the third round, and many members of the assembly had given their vote to his Ticinese friend Giovanni Battista Pioda. Fatigued by the lack of appreciation for his hard work, and apprehensive of another political embarrassment during the upcoming national elections, Franscini decided to resign from office in 1857. He planned on working in the Ticino's cantonal archive, but died unexpectedly in Bern, while still in office, on 19 July 1857. Eleven days later, Pioda was elected as his successor.   == References ==   == External links == Profile of Stefano Franscini with election results on the website of the Swiss Federal Council. Andrea Ghiringhelli: Stefano Franscini in German, French and Italian in the online Historical Dictionary of Switzerland.

Stephen Mack Stigler (born August 10, 1941) is Ernest DeWitt Burton Distinguished Service Professor at the Department of Statistics of the University of Chicago. He was born in Minneapolis. His research has focused on statistical theory of robust estimators and the history of statistics. He is also known for Stigler's law of eponymy. His father was the economist George Stigler, and he has recently written on Milton Friedman, who was a friend of his father. Stigler received his Ph.D. in 1967 from the University of California, Berkeley. His dissertation was on linear functions of order statistics, and his advisor was Lucien Le Cam. Stigler taught at University of Wisconsin–Madison until 1979 when he joined the University of Chicago. In 2006 he was elected to membership of the American Philosophical Society, and is a past president (1994) of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.   == Books == Stephen M. Stigler, ed. (1980). American Contributions to Mathematical Statistics in the Nineteenth Century, Volumes I & II. New York: Arno Press.  The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900. ISBN 0-674-40340-1 Statistics on the Table: The History of Statistical Concepts and Methods. ISBN 0-674-83601-4   == Selected articles == Gergonne, J. D. (1974) [1815]. Ralph St. John and S. M. Stigler, ed. "The application of the method of least squares to the interpolation of sequences (translated by Ralph St. John and S. M. Stigler)". Historia Mathematica (translated by Ralph St. John and S. M. Stigler from the 1815 French ed.) 1 (4): 439–447. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(74)90034-2.  Stigler, Stephen M. (1974). "Gergonne's 1815 paper on the design and analysis of polynomial regression experiments". Historia Mathematica 1 (4): 431–439. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(74)90033-0.  Stigler, Stephen M. (March 1978). "Mathematical statistics in the early States". Annals of Statistics 6 (2): 239–265. doi:10.1214/aos/1176344123. JSTOR 2958876. MR 483118.  Stigler, Stephen M. (1980). "Mathematical Statistics in the Early States". In Stephen M. Stigler. American Contributions to Mathematical Statistics in the Nineteenth Century, Volumes I & II I. New York: Arno Press.  Stigler, Stephen M. (1989). "Mathematical Statistics in the Early States". In Peter Duren. A Century of Mathematics in America III. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society. pp. 537–564.   Stigler, Stephen M. (1978). "Francis Ysidro Edgeworth, statistician". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A 141 (3): 287–322. doi:10.2307/2344804. JSTOR 2344804.  Stigler, S. M. (1980). Stigler's law of eponymy. Transactions of the New York Academy of Sciences, 39: 147-58 (Merton Frestschrift Volume, F. Gieryn (ed)). Stigler, Stephen M. (November 1983). "Who discovered Bayes's theorem?". The American Statistician 37 (4): 290–6. doi:10.2307/2682766. JSTOR 2682766. MR 1712969. Republished in Statistics on the table ().  Stephen M. Stigler (November 1992). "A Historical View of Statistical Concepts in Psychology and Educational Research". American Journal of Education 101 (1): 60–70. doi:10.1086/444032.    == See also == Stigler's law of eponymy   == References == ^ Catherine Behan (May 28, 1998) 1998 Quantrell Award: Stephen Stigler University of Chicago Chronicle. 17(17). ^ [1] ^ http://www.stat.uchicago.edu/~stigler/2014websscv.pdf   == External links == Homepage at the University of Chicago Mathematics Genealogy Project: Stephen Mack Stigler

Stuart A. Robertson (1918–2005) was co-founder, with Wendell Milliman, of Milliman, Inc., formerly Milliman & Robertson, which would grow to become one of the largest actuarial and business consulting firms in the world, encompassing more than 30 locations throughout the United States with offices in 16 other countries. Robertson, who attended the University of Washington before becoming an actuary, joined Milliman in the first consulting actuarial practice in the Pacific Northwest in 1950. Following Milliman’s retirement in 1971, Robertson served as CEO and chairman until his retirement in 1983.   == Early life and career == Stuart Robertson was born on February 28, 1918, in Montesano, Wash., in Gray’s Harbor County about 95 miles southwest of Seattle. The family was shaken when the father, a civil engineer, died just three months after Stuart’s birth. Eventually, because of their mother’s efforts and working outside of school, all five children went to college. In 1934, Robertson at first entered the University of Idaho in Moscow, Idaho, because of the low tuition. But when he was told he must pay a higher out-of-state rate, he transferred to the University of Washington where he helped meet the costs of board and tuition by working part-time as a houseboy in a campus sorority and with a second job at the federally funded National Youth Administration. During summer breaks, he worked at a pea cannery, earning 37 cents an hour. In his junior year at college, Robertson was reconsidering his future course when he saw a recruiting notice for actuaries on a bulletin board in the math department. After some research to find what an actuary actually did, he became intrigued. Milliman principal Stan Roberts once described actuaries as “doctors of probability,” in that their occupation involves calculating the likelihood of such things as how long an individual will live after retirement or how likely someone is to come down with a specific disease. These calculations are used by companies like insurance firms and financial institutions to calculate rates and decide what services to provide. From his research, Robertson learned that he could earn the status of Fellow in the Actuarial Institute by passing tests and decided this might better serve his goal than a bachelor’s degree. A day after his 19th birthday, he began a job as a clerk for the actuary at the Great Northwest Life Insurance Company in Spokane, Wash. He also began studying for his first actuarial exam. From 1937 to 1947, he rose through the ranks at Great Northwest to become a vice president in the firm. He dealt with multiple aspects of insurance, including actuarial work, accounting, underwriting, and stockholder and policyholder relations. In 1939, he married childhood acquaintance Marjory Moch, whom he’d been dating since high school. In 1947, he accepted his first actuary-only position at Northwestern Life and returned to Seattle. At this point, anticipating his final actuarial exam, he began to consider a move to the East Coast to expand his prospects. But then he met Wendell Milliman, who made the case for the potential of actuarial consulting. Milliman had established the first consulting actuarial practice in the Pacific Northwest in 1947. He worked for state government and firms that were too small to have their own actuarial departments.   == Partnership with Milliman == Robertson joined Milliman in his two-room office at 914 Second Avenue in Seattle, bringing Northwestern Life along as a client. In one room, the two shared a phone and an enormous desk, with a top consisting of a five-foot-by-five-foot oak slab. The desk had “a full complement of drawers on either side,” Robertson later recalled. Milliman and Robertson were so busy that they “spent little time conversing other than to say ‘pass the telephone.’” In addition to Northwestern Life, Robertson, who by this time had experience working for small insurance firms, was assigned to work for eight or nine such clients. However, just six months after coming to work with Milliman, Robertson found himself in a novel situation. Wendell Milliman had been offered a job with a large Eastern firm, New York Life Insurance Company, to become a vice president in charge of organizing and administrating the firm’s new group insurance department. While the pay—$25,000 per year—was good for 1950, it was the challenge that attracted him and he decided to go. Milliman offered to sell Robertson the firm and, though Robertson had concerns that he had no backup capital of his own, he finally accepted. The terms included $1,000 up front and five yearly payments, which eventually amounted to $9,630. Five years later, however, Milliman made a surprise visit to Robertson, at which point he asked if he would like a partner—namely one Wendell Milliman. Robertson readily agreed and soon they formed Milliman & Robertson; they were joined by new partner Tom Bleakney, whom Robertson had hired in Milliman’s absence. In 1957, the firm incorporated. By 1965, it had opened new offices in Los Angeles; Portland, Ore.;Honolulu; Salt Lake City; Chicago; and New York City. At that point, Milliman & Robertson was the second largest actuarial firm in the country.   == Evolution of the firm == Over the years, Milliman and Robertson built on the firm’s fundamentals. An entrepreneurial model gave principals the opportunity to invest in new expansion, either geographically or into new practice areas, and enabled them to benefit from successes while taking on some of the risks. When Milliman retired in 1971, Robertson was named CEO and chairman of the firm. James Curtis became president. At the time, Robertson had been in the actuarial field for 30 years. In 1974, under his leadership, a peer-review process was adopted to check on the quality of work in real time. In 1976, the firm reorganized so that four national directors oversaw four practice areas. Colleagues praised Robertson for his contribution to the firm’s professionalism and for a slight streak of conservatism that kept the firm on course. He also proved his skill as a writer when, in 1988, he published his book, Milliman and Robertson: Reflections on the First Forty Years.   == Personal life == Robertson enjoyed the outdoor life and could frequently be found shucking oysters or fishing for crab near his home in Bainbridge Island, Wash. During retirement, he remained active at hobbies like woodworking and piano playing and took up bicycling. Stuart Robertson died on November 4, 2005, at the age of 87. He was survived by his wife Marjory, his son Dick, and numerous grandchildren. As a tribute to Robertson soon after his death, Milliman, Inc. announced the Stuart Robertson Scholarship Fund, to be used to help undergraduates who demonstrate talent in the actuarial field.   == References ==  Stuart A. Robertson, Milliman and Robertson: Reflections on the First Forty Years, Milliman and Robertson, Inc., 1988 “The Life of Stuart A. Robertson,” Milliman Newsbreak, 2005 “Wendell Milliman Opens Seattle Actuarial Office,” Pacific Northwest Underwriter, December 1947 “Milliman to Retire,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, June 23, 1971 “Wendell A. Milliman,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer, February 4, 1976 “Robertson Joins Staff of Milliman Actuarial Firm,” Pacific Northwest Underwriter, May 1950 “History of the Firm,” Milliman video bNet, International Directory of Company Histories, Volume 66 (1995) by Carrie Rothburd, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_gx5202/is_1995/ai_n19122490

Takeshi Amemiya (雨宮 健, Amemiya Takeshi, born 29 March 1935, Tokyo, Japan) is an economist specializing in econometrics and the economy of ancient Greece. Amemiya is the Edward Ames Edmonds Professor of Economics (emeritus) and a Professor of Classics at Stanford University. He is a Fellow of the Econometric Society, the American Statistical Association and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1985).   == Education == B.A., 1958, Social Science, International Christian University, Tokyo, Japan M.A., 1961, Economics, American University, Washington, DC Ph.D., 1964, Economics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland   == Honors and awards == U.S. Scientist Award, Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, 1988 Fellowship, Japan Society for Promotion of Science, 1989 Fellowship, John Simon Guggenheim Foundation, 1975–1976 Ford Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship in Economics, Johns Hopkins University, 1963–1965   == Publications ==   === Books === Advanced Econometrics, Basil Blackwell, 1985 Introduction To Statistics And Econometrics, Harvard University Press, 1994. Nonlinear Statistical Modeling: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics : Essays in Honor of Takeshi Amemiya, ed. Takeshi Amemiya, Kimio Morimune, James L. Powell and Cheng Hsiao. Cambridge University Press, 2000.   == Selected writings == "A Comparative Study of Alternative Estimators in a Distributed Lag Model," Econometrica, Vol. 35, No. 3/4 (Jul. - Oct., 1967), pp. 509-529, (with Wayne A. Fuller) "The Effect of Aggregation on Prediction in the Autoregressive Model," Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 67, No. 339 (Sep., 1972), pp. 628-632, (with Roland Y. Wu) "Generalized Least Squares with an Estimated Autocovariance Matrix," Econometrica, Vol. 41, No. 4 (Jul., 1973), pp. 723-732 "Regression Analysis when the Dependent Variable Is Truncated Normal," Econometrica, Vol. 41, No. 6 (Nov., 1973), pp. 997-1016 "Multivariate Regression and Simultaneous Equation Models when the Dependent Variables Are Truncated Normal," Econometrica, Vol. 42, No. 6 (Nov., 1974), pp. 999-1012 "The Maximum Likelihood and the Nonlinear Three-Stage Least Squares Estimator in the General Nonlinear Simultaneous Equation Model," Econometrica, Vol. 45, No. 4 (May, 1977), pp. 955-968 "The Estimation of a Simultaneous Equation Generalized Probit Model," Econometrica, Vol. 46, No. 5 (Sep., 1978), pp. 1193-1205 "The Estimation of a Simultaneous-Equation Tobit Model," International Economic Review, Vol. 20, No. 1 (Feb., 1979), pp. 169-181 "Selection of Regressors," International Economic Review, Vol. 21, No. 2 (Jun., 1980), pp. 331-354 "Nonlinear Regression Models," Handbook of Econometrics, vol.1, ed. by Z. Griliches and M. Intrilligator, North Holland (1983), ch.6, pp. 334-389 "Instrumental-Variable Estimation of an Error-Components Model," Econometrica, Vol. 54, No. 4, (Jul., 1986), pp. 869-880, (with Thomas E. MaCurdy)   == References ==   == External links == Amemiya's faculty home page Google Scholar

Terence Paul "Terry" Speed (born 14 March 1943), FAA FRS is an Australian statistician. A Senior Principal Research Scientist at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, he is known for his contributions to the analysis of variance and bioinformatics, and in particular to the analysis of microarrays.   == Early life and education == Speed obtained a Ph.D. from Monash University in 1968 with thesis titled Some topics in the theory of distributive lattices under the supervision of Peter D. Finch.   == Career == Speed is currently laboratory head in the Bioinformatics division at the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, in Melbourne, and was head of the division until 31 August 2014. Previously, he was sharing his time between this position and the department of statistics of the University of California, Berkeley. Speed was an expert witness at the trial for the O. J. Simpson murder case, as well as an expert witness in the Imanishi-Kari case an affair of alleged scientific misconduct which involved biologist David Baltimore. Speed has supervised at least 67 research students.   == Awards and honours == Speed was president of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in 2004. In 2002, he received the Pitman medal. In 2009 he was awarded a NHMRC Australia Fellowship. On 30 October 2013, he received the Australian Prime Minister's Prize for Science. Speed was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) of London in 2013. His nomination reads:   == Personal life == Speed married Freda Elizabeth Pollard in 1964.   == References == ^ a b c d e SPEED, Prof. Terence Paul. Who's Who 2015 (online Oxford University Press ed.). A & C Black, an imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing plc.  (subscription required) ^ a b c d Terry Speed at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ a b "Professor Terry Speed FRS". London: The Royal Society. Archived from the original on 2015-02-03.  ^ Gilad, Y.; Oshlack, A.; Smyth, G. K.; Speed, T. P.; White, K. P. (2006). "Expression profiling in primates reveals a rapid evolution of human transcription factors". Nature 440 (7081): 242–245. doi:10.1038/nature04559. PMID 16525476.  ^ Smyth, G. K.; Speed, T (2003). "Normalization of cDNA microarray data". Methods (San Diego, Calif.) 31 (4): 265–73. PMID 14597310.  ^ Neve, R. M.; Chin, K; Fridlyand, J; Yeh, J; Baehner, F. L.; Fevr, T; Clark, L; Bayani, N; Coppe, J. P.; Tong, F; Speed, T; Spellman, P. T.; Devries, S; Lapuk, A; Wang, N. J.; Kuo, W. L.; Stilwell, J. L.; Pinkel, D; Albertson, D. G.; Waldman, F. M.; McCormick, F; Dickson, R. B.; Johnson, M. D.; Lippman, M; Ethier, S; Gazdar, A; Gray, J. W. (2006). "A collection of breast cancer cell lines for the study of functionally distinct cancer subtypes". Cancer Cell 10 (6): 515–27. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2006.10.008. PMC 2730521. PMID 17157791.  ^ Dudoit, Sandrine, ed. (2012). "Selected Works of Terry Speed". doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-1347-9. ISBN 978-1-4614-1346-2.  ^ Defense witness list for the O.J. Simpson civil trial, published by USA Today. ^ Daniel Kevles (1998), The Baltimore Case: A Trial of Politics, Science, and Character. New York: W.W. Norton & Co., Inc. 345–348. ^ List of Past Executive Committee Members, on the Web site of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. ^ "Pitman Medal for 2002 awarded to Terry Speed". Australian <html_ent glyph="@amp;" ascii="&"/> New Zealand Journal of Statistics 45: 1. 2003. doi:10.1111/1467-842X.00255.  ^ Australia Fellowship for WEHI’s Professor Terry Speed, press release by WEHI on 29 Jan 2009. ^ http://www.innovation.gov.au/science/InspiringAustralia/PrimeMinistersPrizesforScience/Recipients/2013PrizeRecipients/Pages/2013PrimeMinistersPrizeforScience.aspx

Theodore Wilbur Anderson (born June 5, 1918) is an American mathematician and statistician who has specialized in the analysis of multivariate data. Born in Minneapolis, Minnesota, he was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1946. He was on the faculty of Columbia University from 1946 until moving to Stanford University in 1967, becoming Emeritus Professor in 1988. He served as Editor of Annals of Mathematical Statistics from 1950 to 1952. He was elected President of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in 1962. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1974. Anderson's 1958 textbook, An Introduction to Multivariate Analysis, educated a generation of theorists and applied statisticians; Anderson's book emphasizes hypothesis testing via likelihood ratio tests and the properties of power functions: Admissibility, unbiasedness and monotonicity. Anderson is also known for Anderson–Darling test of whether there is evidence that a given sample of data did not arise from a given probability distribution. He also framed the Anderson–Bahadur algorithm along with Raghu Raj Bahadur which is used in statistics and engineering for solving binary classification problems when the underlying data have multivariate normal distributions with different covariance matrices. He is a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters.   == Selected bibliography ==   === Books === Anderson, T.W. (2004). An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis (3rd ed.). New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 9789812530967.    === Chapters in books === Anderson, T.W. (1960), "Some Stochastic process models for intelligence test scores", in Arrow, Kenneth J.; Karlin, Samuel; Suppes, Patrick, Mathematical models in the social sciences, 1959: Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium, Stanford mathematical studies in the social sciences, IV, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press, pp. 205–220, ISBN 9780804700214.    == References ==   == External links == Theodore Wilbur Anderson at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Thomas Bayes (/ˈbeɪz/; c. 1701 –  7 April 1761) was an English statistician, philosopher and Presbyterian minister who is known for having formulated a specific case of the theorem that bears his name: Bayes' theorem. Bayes never published what would eventually become his most famous accomplishment; his notes were edited and published after his death by Richard Price.   == BiographyEdit == Thomas Bayes was the son of London Presbyterian minister Joshua Bayes, and was possibly born in Hertfordshire. He came from a prominent nonconformist family from Sheffield. In 1719, he enrolled at the University of Edinburgh to study logic and theology. On his return around 1722, he assisted his father at the latter's chapel in London before moving to Tunbridge Wells, Kent, around 1734. There he was minister of the Mount Sion chapel, until 1752. He is known to have published two works in his lifetime, one theological and one mathematical: Divine Benevolence, or an Attempt to Prove That the Principal End of the Divine Providence and Government is the Happiness of His Creatures (1731) An Introduction to the Doctrine of Fluxions, and a Defence of the Mathematicians Against the Objections of the Author of The Analyst (published anonymously in 1736), in which he defended the logical foundation of Isaac Newton's calculus ("fluxions") against the criticism of George Berkeley, author of The Analyst It is speculated that Bayes was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1742 on the strength of the Introduction to the Doctrine of Fluxions, as he is not known to have published any other mathematical works during his lifetime. In his later years he took a deep interest in probability. Professor Stephen Stigler, historian of statistical science, thinks that Bayes became interested in the subject while reviewing a work written in 1755 by Thomas Simpson, but George Alfred Barnard thinks he learned mathematics and probability from a book by Abraham de Moivre. His work and findings on probability theory were passed in manuscript form to his friend Richard Price after his death.  By 1755 he was ill and by 1761 had died in Tunbridge Wells. He was buried in Bunhill Fields burial ground in Moorgate, London, where many nonconformists lie.   == Bayes's theoremEdit ==  Bayes's solution to a problem of inverse probability was presented in "An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances" which was read to the Royal Society in 1763 after Bayes' death. Richard Price shepherded the work through this presentation and its publication in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London the following year. This was an argument for using a uniform prior distribution for a binomial parameter and not merely a general postulate. This essay contains a statement of a special case of Bayes's theorem. In the first decades of the eighteenth century, many problems concerning the probability of certain events, given specified conditions, were solved. For example: given a specified number of white and black balls in an urn, what is the probability of drawing a black ball? Or the converse: given that one or more balls has been drawn, what can be said about the number of white and black balls in the urn? These are sometimes called "inverse probability" problems. Bayes's "Essay" contains his solution to a similar problem posed by Abraham de Moivre, author of The Doctrine of Chances (1718). In addition, a paper by Bayes on asymptotic series was published posthumously.   == BayesianismEdit == Bayesian probability is the name given to several related interpretations of probability, which have in common the notion of probability as something like a partial belief, rather than a frequency. This allows the application of probability to all sorts of propositions rather than just ones that come with a reference class. "Bayesian" has been used in this sense since about 1950. Since its rebirth in the 1950s, advancements in computing technology have allowed scientists from many disciplines to pair traditional Bayesian statistics with random walk techniques. The use of the Bayes theorem has been extended in science and in other fields. Bayes himself might not have embraced the broad interpretation now called Bayesian. Mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace pioneered and popularised what is now called Bayesian probability. It is difficult to assess Bayes's philosophical views on probability, since his essay does not go into questions of interpretation. There Bayes defines probability as follows (Definition 5).  The probability of any event is the ratio between the value at which an expectation depending on the happening of the event ought to be computed, and the value of the thing expected upon its happening  In modern utility theory, expected utility can (with qualifications, because buying risk for small amounts or buying security for big amounts also happen) be taken as the probability of an event times the payoff received in case of that event. Rearranging that to solve for the probability, Bayes's definition results. As Stigler points out, this is a subjective definition, and does not require repeated events; however, it does require that the event in question be observable, for otherwise it could never be said to have "happened". Stigler argues that Bayes intended his results in a more limited way than modern Bayesians. Given Bayes's definition of probability, his result concerning the parameter of a binomial distribution makes sense only to the extent that one can bet on its observable consequences.   == See alsoEdit == List of things named after Thomas Bayes Bayesian inference Laplace Royal Society – Bayes was elected to membership in the Society in 1742; and his nomination letter has been posted with other membership records at the Royal Society website here. Those signing that nomination letter were: Philip Stanhope; Martin Folkes; James Burrow; Cromwell Mortimer; John Eames.   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==  Thomas Bayes, "An essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances." Bayes's essay in the original notation. Thomas Bayes, 1763, "An essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances." Bayes's essay as published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 53, p. 370, on Google Books. Thomas Bayes, 1763, "A letter to John Canton," Phil. Trans. Royal Society London 53: 269–71. D. R. Bellhouse, "On Some Recently Discovered Manuscripts of Thomas Bayes" at the Wayback Machine (archived 6 November 2004). D. R. Bellhouse, 2004, "The Reverend Thomas Bayes, FRS: A Biography to Celebrate the Tercentenary of His Birth," Statistical Science 19 (1): 3–43. F. Thomas Bruss (2013), "250 years of 'An Essay towards solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chance. By the late Rev. Mr. Bayes, communicated by Mr. Price, in a letter to John Canton, A. M. F. R. S.' ", DOI 10.1365/s13291-013-0077-z, Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, Springer Verlag, Vol. 115, Issue 3–4 (2013), 129–133. Dale, Andrew I. (2003.) "Most Honourable Remembrance: The Life and Work of Thomas Bayes". ISBN 0-387-00499-8. Springer, 2003. ____________. "An essay towards solving a problem in the doctrine of chances" in Grattan-Guinness, I., ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 199–207. (2005). Michael Kanellos. "18th-century theory is new force in computing" CNET News, 18 February 2003. McGrayne, Sharon Bertsch. (2011). The Theory That Would Not Die: How Bayes's Rule Cracked The Enigma Code, Hunted Down Russian Submarines, & Emerged Triumphant from Two Centuries of Controversy. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 9780300169690 OCLC 670481486 Stigler, Stephen M. "Thomas Bayes's Bayesian Inference," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 145:250–258, 1982. ____________. "Who Discovered Bayes's Theorem?" The American Statistician, 37(4):290–296, 1983.   == External linksEdit == Biographical sketch of Thomas Bayes An Intuitive Explanation of Bayesian Reasoning (includes biography) The will of Thomas Bayes 1761 Discussion of the veracity of Bayes's portrait and other personal details Author profile in the database zbMATH

Thomas Henry Farrer, 1st Baron Farrer (24 June 1819 – 11 October 1899) was an English civil servant and statistician.   == Biography == Farrer was the son of Thomas Farrer, a solicitor in Lincoln's Inn Fields. Born in London, he was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1840. He was called to the bar at Lincolns Inn in 1844, but retired from practice in the course of a few years. He entered the public service in 1850 as secretary to the naval department (renamed the marine department in 1853) of the Board of Trade. In 1865 he was-promoted to be one of the joint secretaries of the Board of Trade, and in 1867 became permanent secretary. His tenure of this office, which he held for upwards of twenty years, was marked by many reforms and an energetic administration. Not only was he an advanced Liberal in politics, but an uncompromising Free-trader of the strictest school. He was created a baronet for his services at the Board of Trade in 1883, and in 1886 he retired from office. During the same year he published a work entitled Free Trade versus Fair Trade, in which he dealt with an economic controversy then greatly agitating the public mind. He had already, in 1883, written a volume on The State in its Relation to Trade. In 1889 he was co-opted by the Progressives as an alderman of the London County Council, of which he became vice-chairman in 1890. His efficiency and ability in this capacity were warmly recognized; but in the course of time divergencies arose between his personal views and those of many of his colleagues.The tendency towards socialistic legislation which became apparent was quite at variance with his principles of individual enterprise and responsibility. He consequently resigned his position. In 1893 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Farrer. From this time forward he devoted much of his energy and leisure to advocating his views at the Cobden Club, the Political Economy Club, on the platform, and in the press. His efforts were especially directed against the opinions of the Fair Trade League, and upon this and other economic controversies he wrote able, clear, and uncompromising letters, which left no doubt that he still adhered to the doctrines of free trade as advocated by its earliest exponents. In 1898 he published his Studies in Currency. He was President of the Royal Statistical Society from 1894 to 1896.   == Marriage and issue == Farrer married twice, first in 1854 to Frances Erskine (1825–1870), daughter of the historian and orientalist William Erskine (1773–1852) and his wife Maitland Mackintosh daughter of Sir James Mackintosh by his first wife. They bore the following children: Hon. Emma Cecilia "Ida" Farrer (1854–1946), married Horace Darwin, son of Charles Darwin Hon. Thomas Cecil Farrer (1859–1940), married Evelyn Spring Rice, daughter of Hon. Charles Spring Rice Claude Erskine Farrer (1862–1890) Hon. Noel Maitland Farrer (1867–1929) Frances died on 15 May 1870. Farrer remarried in 1873 to his former wife's half-cousin Katherine Euphemia Wedgwood (1839–1931), daughter of Hensleigh Wedgwood of the Wedgwood pottery family and his wife Fanny Mackintosh, who was the daughter of Sir James Mackintosh by his second wife. He died at Abinger Hall, Dorking in 1899. He was succeeded in the title by his eldest son Thomas Cecil (1859–1940).   == References ==   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links ==

Thomas John Bisika is a social demographer and public health specialist, diplomat, and health systems specialist at World Health Organization in Nigeria.   == Academic career == He is the former Chief of Division responsible for Health, HIV/AIDS, Nutrition, other related infectious diseases and Population at the African Union Commission in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. He was born on April 6, 1967 in Malawi. He is originally from Makanjira Village, TA Chikowi, Zomba District. He worked as a Programme Specialist for the United Nations Population Fund in the sub-regional office for Southern Africa in Johannesburg, South Africa as part of his career as a United Nations diplomat. Before this he was a Senior Lecturer in health policy and management at the University of Pretoria School of Health Systems. From 1993 to 2005 he was a Research Fellow at the Centre for Social Research of the University of Malawi. During this period he also taught demography and sociology at Chancellor College, a constituent College of the University of Malawi. He studied at Chancellor College of the University of Malawi, Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., United States of America, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, University of Hawaii, University of the Witwatersrand, Galillee College (Israel), Atlantic International University and University of South Africa. He holds a B.Sc. in Demography and Computer Science, a M.A. in Reproductive Health Demography and Statistics, a postgraduate certificate in Health Systems Management and Doctorate of Science in Medical Anthropology. While a student at Chancellor College, he formed the Demography Student Association which he went on to become the founding President and was also the interim President of the Student Union of Chancellor College between 1992 and 1993. He is a member of the Population Association of America.   == Charity work == With respect to charity work, Thomas Bisika was one of the youngest Malawians ever to have been inducted as a Member of the Lions Club International. From 1994 to 2001 Dr. Thomas Bisika was the chairperson of the National Health Sciences Research Committee which is the National Health Research Ethics Review Board for the Malawi Government and is housed in the Ministry of Health headquarters. In this capacity he approved a number of clinical trials and health related studies including the ones involving antiretroviral therapy. From 1998-2000 he was part of the Essential National Health Research network created under the auspices of Council for Health Research and Development (COHRED). In 2008 Dr Bisika was a member of the Positive Synergies between Global Health Initiatives and Health systems and is privileged to be a member of the Global Health Workforce Alliance (GHWA) and the Africa Platform on Human Resources for Health.   == Awards == In 1999 Dr. Thomas John Bisika received The Gender Matters Award of the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) in Ottawa, Canada. The money from this award was shared with the Centre for Social Research where he conducted the research on traditional eye medicine which earned him this award. Dr Bisika's name appeared in “Marquis Who's Who in the World 2010” and is a nominee for “2000 Outstanding Intellectuals of the 21st Century 2010”. At the African Union Dr Bisika wrote speeches for H.E. Alpha Konare, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and Advocate Bience Gawanas, Commissioner for Social Affairs. He was also instrumental in the elaboration of a number of African Union policy documents including the African Common Position on Migration and Development, Africa Health Strategy, Plan of Action on Violence Prevention, Policy Framework on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights, Maputo Plan of Action and the Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Plan for Africa. He was also a member of the drafting team which elaborated the Africa-EU Strategy that was adopted in Lisbon, Portugal during the second EU-Africa Summit in December 2007. In 2006 he led a team that produced the second State of the African Population Report which was adopted by the African Population Commission in June 2006 in Johannesburg, South Africa. Dr Thomas Bisika is now the director of the National AIDS Commission of Malawi.Dr Thomas Bisika has also previously worked as a consultant for the World Food Programme, World Health Organization, United Nations Population Fund, Danish Red Cross, Danish International Development Agency, Population Services International, International Eye Foundation, Catholic Relief Services, National AIDS Commission (Malawi), Ministry of Health, Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Gender of the Malawi Government and several NGOs including Project Hope, Banja La Mtsogolo and Emmanuel International.   == Publications == Dr Bisika's has presented a number of papers at the Population Association of America (PAA). His scientific journal publications include: 1. Bisika, Thomas, Ntata, P. and Konyani, S. 2009. Gender-violence and education in Malawi: a study of violence against girls as an obstruction to universal primary school education. Journal of Gender Studies. 18 (3): 299-306 2. Bisika T, Konyani S, Chamangwana I, Khanyizira G. 2009. The Epidemiology of HIV among Drug Abusers in Malawi. African Journal of Drug and Alcohol Studies. 8(2):126-131. 3. Bisika, Thomas. 2009. A pilot study to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of local terminology for malaria screening among children in rural Malawi. Malawi Medical Journal; 21(2):56 -58. 4. Bisika, Thomas. 2008. Sexual and Reproductive Health and HIV/AIDS Risk Perception in the Tourism Industry: The Case of Malawi. Malawi Medical Journal; 21(2):75 -80. 5. Bisika, Thomas. 2009. The potential acceptability of Microbicides in HIV prevention in Stable marital relationships in Malawi. Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health Care, 35(2): 115-117. 6. Bisika, T., Courtright, P., Geneua, R., Kasote, A., Chimombo, L and Chirambo, M. 2009. Self treatment for eye diseases in Malawi. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines. 6(1): 23-29. 7. Bisika, Thomas. 2008. Do Social and Cultural Factors perpetuate Gender Based Violence in Malawi? Gender & Behaviour Vol. 6 (2) 2008: 1884-1896. 8. Bisika, T and G. Mandere. 2008. Integration of Nutritional in the Antiretroviral Therapy Scale up Plan for Malawi. September 2008; Malawi Medical Journal. 20(3): 93-98. 9. Bisika, Thomas. 2008. The Effectiveness of the TBA Programme in Reducing Maternal Mortality and Morbidity in Malawi. East African Journal of Public Health Vol. 5 (2) August 2008: 103-110 10. Bisika, Thomas. 2008. Cultural Factors that Affect Sexual and Reproductive Health in Malawi. Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health Care. 34 (2): 79-80, April 2008. 11. Bisika, Thomas, Madeleine Short, Gold-Marie Wontumi, Jenny Truong, Amy Tsui. 2007. "Repositioning Family Planning To Reduce Unmet Need". African Renaissance Vol. 4 (3&4): 83-101. 12. Valerie A. Paz Soldan, Thomas Bisika, Aimee Benson, Janine Barden-Ofallon, Joseph deGraft-Johnson. 2007. Social, Economic and Demographic Determinants of Sexual Risk Behaviors among Men in Rural Malawi. African Journal of Reproductive Health. 11(2): 33-46. August 2007. 13. Janine Barden-Ofallon, Joseph deGraft-Johnson, Thomas Bisika, Aimee Benson and Amy Tsui. 2004. Factors associated with HIV/AIDS Knowledge and Risk Perception in Rural Malawi. AIDS and Behavior. 8(2): 131-140. June 2004.   == References == IUSSP.org http://www.pop.psu.edu/general/pubs/PAA_Affairs/97_Spring/new_members.html http://www.ossrea.net/publications/newsletter/oct04/article8.htm Alumni list - Galillee College http://www.eastwestcenter.org/research/popcomm/Participants.htm http://www.africa-union.org http://www.kaisernetwork.org/daily_reports/rep_index.cfm?DR_ID=40540 http://www.news-medical.net/?id=20628 http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/medicalnews.php?newsid=54599&nfid=rssfeeds http://www.medilexicon.com/medicalnews.php?newsid=54599 http://quickstart.clari.net/voa/art/ez/2005-11-16-voa48.html http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/klu/aibe/2004/00000008/00000002

Thomas M. Cover [ˈkoʊvər] (August 7, 1938 – March 26, 2012) was an information theorist and professor jointly in the Departments of Electrical Engineering and Statistics at Stanford University. He devoted almost his entire career to developing the relationship between information theory and statistics.   == Early life and education == He received his B.S. in Physics from MIT in 1960 and Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford University in 1964.   == Career == Cover was past President of the IEEE Information Theory Society and was a Fellow of the Institute for Mathematical Statistics and of the IEEE. He received the Outstanding Paper Award in Information Theory for his 1972 paper Broadcast Channels; he was selected in 1990 as the Shannon Lecturer, regarded as the highest honor in information theory; in 1997 he received the IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal; and in 2003 he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. During his 48 year career as a professor of Electrical Engineering and Statistics at Stanford University, he graduated 64 PhD students, authored over 120 journal papers in learning, information theory, statistical complexity, and portfolio theory; and he coauthored the book Elements of Information Theory, which has become the most widely used textbook as an introduction to the topic since the publication of its first edition in 1991. He was also coeditor of the book Open Problems in Communication and Computation.   == Selected works == Cover, T. M.; Thomas, J. A. (2006). "Chapter 12, Maximum Entropy". Elements of Information Theory (PDF) (2 ed.). Wiley. ISBN 0471241954.  Cover, T. and Thomas, J. (1991). Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley. ISBN 0-471-06259-6 Van Campenhout, Jan. and Cover, T. (1981). Maximum entropy and conditional probability. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on Cover, T. (1974). The Best Two Independent Measurements Are Not the Two Best. Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on Cover, T. and Hart, P. (1967). Nearest neighbor pattern classification. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on. Cover, T. (1965). Geometrical and Statistical Properties of Systems of Linear Inequalities with Applications in Pattern Recognition. Electronic Computers, IEEE Transactions on   == See also == k-nearest neighbors algorithm   == References ==   == External links == Thomas M. Cover Stanford University homepage Thomas M. Cover at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

For his grandson, see: Thomas Spring Rice, 2nd Baron Monteagle of Brandon Thomas Spring Rice, 1st Baron Monteagle of Brandon, PC, FRS, FGS (8 February 1790 – 7 February 1866) was a British Whig politician, who served as Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1835 to 1839.   == Background == Spring Rice was born into a notable Anglo-Irish family, which owned large estates in Munster. He was one of the three children of Stephen Edward Rice (d.1831), of Mount Trenchard House, and Catherine Spring, daughter and heiress of Thomas Spring of Ballycrispin and Castlemaine, County Kerry, a descendant of the Suffolk Spring family. He was a great grandson of Sir Stephen Rice (1637–1715), Chief Baron of the Irish Exchequer and a leading Jacobite, Sir Maurice FitzGerald, 14th Knight of Kerry and Walter Spring. His only married sister, Mary, was the mother of the Catholic converts Aubrey Thomas de Vere, poet, and the Liberal Member of Parliament, Sir Stephen de Vere, 4th Baronet. Spring Rice's grandfather, Edward, had converted the family from Roman Catholicism to the Anglican Church of Ireland, to save his estate from passing in gavelkind. Spring Rice was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, and later studied law at Lincoln's Inn, but was not called to the Bar. His family was politically well-connected, both in Ireland and Great Britain, and he was encouraged to stand for Parliament by his father-in-law, Lord Limerick.   == Political career == Spring Rice first stood for election in Limerick City in 1818 but was defeated by the Tory incumbent, John Vereker, by 300 votes. He won the seat in 1820 and entered the House of Commons. He positioned himself as a moderate unionist reformer who opposed the radical nationalist politics of Daniel O'Connell, and became known for his expertise on Irish and economic affairs. In 1824 he led the committee which established the Ordnance Survey in Ireland. Spring Rice's fluent debating style in the Commons brought him to the attention of leading Whigs and he came under the patronage of the Marquess of Lansdowne. As a result, Spring Rice was made Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department under George Canning and Lord Goderich in 1827, with responsibility for Irish affairs. This required Spring Rice to accept deferral of Catholic emancipation, a policy which he strongly supported. Spring Rice then served as joint Secretary to the Treasury from 1830 to 1834 under Lord Grey. Following the Reform Act 1832, he was elected to represent Cambridge from 1832 to 1839. In June 1834, Grey appointed Spring Rice Secretary of State for War and the Colonies, with a seat in the cabinet, a post he retained when Lord Melbourne became Prime Minister in July. A strong and vocal unionist throughout his life, Spring Rice suggested in a speech in 1834 that Ireland should be renamed 'West Britain.' In the Commons, Spring Rice also championed causes such as the worldwide abolition of slavery and the introduction of state-supported education. The Whig government fell in November 1834, after which Spring Rice attempted to be elected Speaker of the House of Commons in early 1835. When the Whigs returned to power under Melbourne in April 1835, Spring Rice was made Chancellor of the Exchequer. As Chancellor, Spring Rice had to deal with crop failures, a depression and rebellion in North America, all of which created large deficits and put considerable strain on the government. His Church Rate Bill of 1837 was quickly abandoned and his attempt to revise the charter of the Bank of Ireland ended in humiliation. Spring Rice, unhappy as Chancellor, again tried to be elected as Speaker, but failed. He was a dogmatic figure, described by Lord Melbourne as "too much given to details and possessed of no broad views". Upon his departure from office in 1839, Spring Rice had become a scapegoat for the government's many problems. That same year he was raised to the peerage as Baron Monteagle of Brandon, in the County of Kerry, a title intended earlier for his ancestor Sir Stephen Rice. Lord Monteagle of Brandon was also Comptroller General of the Exchequer from 1835 to 1865, despite Lord Howick's initial opposition to the maintenance of the office. Monteagle differed from the government regarding the exchequer control over the treasury, and the abolition of the old exchequer was already determined upon when he died. From 1839 he largely retired from public life, although he occasionally spoke in the House of Lords on matters generally relating to government finance and Ireland. He vehemently opposed John Russell, 1st Earl Russell's policy regarding the Irish famine, giving a speech in the Lords in which he said the government had "degraded our people, and you, English, now shrink from your responsibilities."   == Outside Parliament == In addition to his political career, Spring Rice was a commissioner of the state paper office, a trustee of the National Gallery and a member of the senate of the University of London and of the Queen's University of Ireland. Between 1845 and 1847, he was President of the Royal Statistical Society. In addition, he was a Fellow of the Royal Society and a Fellow of the Geological Society. In May 1832 he became a member of James Mill's Political Economy Club. Spring Rice was well regarded in Limerick, where he was seen as a compassionate landlord and a good politician. An advocate of traditional Whiggism, he strongly believed in ensuring society was protected from conflict between the upper and lower classes. Although a pious Anglican, his support for Catholic emancipation won him the favour of many Irishmen, most of whom were Roman Catholic. He led the campaign for better county government in Ireland at a time when many Irish nationalists were indifferent to the cause. During the Great Famine of the 1840s, Spring Rice responded to the plight of his tenants with benevolence. The ameliorative measures he implemented on his estates almost bankrupted the family and only the dowry from his second marriage saved his financial situation. A monument in honour of him still stands in the People's Park in Limerick. Even so, Spring Rice's reputation in Ireland is not entirely favourable. In a book regarding assisted emigration from Ireland (a process in which a landlord paid for their tenants' passage to the United States or Australia), Moran has suggested that Spring Rice was engaged in the practice. In 1838, he is recorded as having 'helped' a boat load of his tenants depart for North America, thereby allowing himself the use of their land. However, Spring Rice is also recorded as having been in support of state-assisted emigration across the British Isles, suggesting that his motivation was not necessarily selfish. Mount Monteagle in Antarctica and Monteagle County in New South Wales were named in honour of Spring Rice.   == Family == Lord Monteagle of Brandon was married twice. He married firstly Lady Theodosia Pery, daughter of Edmund Pery, 1st Earl of Limerick, in 1811. Being only twenty-one at the time, this marriage prematurely terminated his university career. The marriage produced five sons and three daughters: Hon. Theodosia Alicia Ellen Frances Charlotte Spring Rice (died 2 January 1891), married Sir Henry Taylor in 1839. Hon. Mary Alicia Pery Spring Rice (died 11 May 1875), served as a Maid of Honour to Queen Victoria between 1837 and 1841. Married James Marshall in 1841. Hon. Catherine Anne Lucy Spring Rice (died 23 July 1853), married Henry Marshall in 1837. Hon. Stephen Edmund Spring Rice (31 Aug 1814 – 9 May 1865), married Ellen Frere in 1839. He was High Sheriff of County Limerick in 1837. Hon. Charles William Thomas Spring Rice (10 Jan 1819 – 13 July 1870), married Elizabeth Marshall in 1855. He was Assistant Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs. Hon. Edmund Henry Francis Louis Spring Rice (31 Mar 1821 – 16 January 1887), married Margaret Little in 1870. Hon. Aubrey Richard Spring Rice (15 Aug 1822 – 29 November 1897), married Anne John-Mildmay in 1852. Hon. William Cecil Spring Rice (1 Nov 1823 – 11 August 1880), died unmarried. After his first wife's death in 1839, Monteagle married secondly Marianne, daughter of the Leeds industrialist John Marshall, in 1841. This union brought much needed money into the family, allowing Spring Rice to maintain his Mount Trenchard estate in Ireland and a London house. Upon Lord Monteagle of Brandon's death in February 1866, aged 75, he was succeeded in the barony by his grandson Thomas Spring Rice, the son of his eldest son Hon. Stephen Edmund Spring Rice. Lord Monteagle of Brandon's great-granddaughter was the Irish nationalist, Mary Spring Rice. His second son, Hon. Charles William Thomas Rice, was the father of the diplomat Sir Cecil Spring Rice, British Ambassador to the United States from 1912 to 1918.   == Ancestry ==   == References ==   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.  Leigh Rayment's Historical List of MPs    == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Thomas Spring Rice

David Tim Holt CB (born 29 October 1943) is a British statistician who is Professor Emeritus of Social Statistics at the University of Southampton. He was formerly the president of the Royal Statistical Society (2005–07), the last director of the Central Statistical Office of the United Kingdom, and the first director of the Office for National Statistics (and ex-officio Registrar General).   == Background == Tim Holt took a maths degree and a PhD in statistics at Exeter with thesis titled Some contributions to the statistical analysis of single and mixed exponential distributions in 1970. Throughout his career, his main interests have been survey methods, sampling theory and official statistics. He took a particular interest, through his membership of the Royal Statistical Society, in the independence of national statistics from government. He was awarded the CB in 2000.   == Career == His first job was with Statistics Canada, the national statistics office of Canada, where he spent four years before joining the Department of Social Statistics at the University of Southampton in 1980. He was Leverhulme Professor of Social Statistics from 1980 to 1995 and Deputy Vice-Chancellor from 1990-1995. From 1989 to 1991, he was also vice-president of the International Association of Survey Statisticians (IASS). He became the Director of the Central Statistical Office and Head of the Government Statistical Service in 1995 and, subsequently, the first Director of the Office for National Statistics when it was formed on 1 April 1996 from the merger of the Central Statistical Office (CSO) and the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS). He was President of the Labour Statistics Congress (ILO) in 1997 and vice-chair of the United Nations Statistical Commission from 1998 to 1999. He returned to the Department of Social Statistics at Southampton in 2000, working part-time as Professor of Social Statistics. He carried out consultancy work for the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank and was elected president of the Royal Statistical Society in 2005. He was the 2003 recipient of the Waksberg Prize in survey methodology.   == References == "Professor Tim Holt: Career", Museum of Learning. Retrieved 20 May 2010. Tim Holt, Julian Champkin (2007). "Tim Holt", Significance, vol 4 issue 2, pp 75–76.

Sir Timothy Augustine Coghlan KCMG (9 June 1856 – 30 April 1926) was an Australian statistician, holding the post of New South Wales government statistician for 19 years.   == Early life == Coghlan was born in Sydney, the second son of Thomas Coghlan of Irish Roman Catholic extraction. He was educated at Sydney Grammar School and in 1873 joined the public works department, becoming assistant-engineer of harbours and rivers in 1884.   == Statistical career == When the New South Wales department of statistics was created, Coghlan was appointed government statistician and began his duties early in 1886. The appointment was much criticized, but Coghlan held the position for 19 years and showed great industry and ability. He published in 1887 the first issue of The Wealth and Progress of New South Wales which continued to appear almost at yearly intervals. The thirteenth issue covered the years 1900-1. In 1895 appeared Statistics of the Seven Colonies of Australasia 1861 to 1894, called in later issues A Statistical Account of the Seven Colonies of Australasia. These books vied in interest and value with the admirable works that Henry Heylyn Hayter of Victoria had begun issuing at earlier dates. Other volumes issued by Coghlan included Handbook to the Statistical Register of the Colony of New South Wales, first issue 1886, and various pamphlets on statistical subjects. He was also the author of Picturesque New South Wales, a popular illustrated guide-book, and he collaborated with T. T. Ewing in The Progress of Australasia in the Nineteenth Century, published in 1903.   == Other work == Coghlan was also registrar of Friendly Societies from 1892 to 1905, a member of the public service board from 1896 to 1900, chairman of board of old age pensions 1901-5, and was president of the economics and statistics section at the 1902 meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1905 Coghlan was appointed Agent-General for the state of New South Wales at London and held the position until his death apart from three short breaks. Coghlan was well qualified for this role and to deal with the many loans floated in London. Coghlan also promoted emigration to Australia. He published in 1918 in four volumes his most important book, Labour and Industry in Australia from the first Settlement in 1788 to the Establishment of the Commonwealth in 1901. It is a history of labour, not a history of the labour movement, nor a history of Australia, but it should prove a mine of information for the future historian of Australia. It is especially valuable for its information about the prices of commodities and the consequent effect on the social life of the people. Coghlan was still carrying out his duties, and apparently in good health, when he died suddenly at London on 30 April 1926. His funeral was held at St Mary's, Cadogan Street; his remains are in a mausoleum at Kensal Green Cemetery. In 1897 he married Helen, daughter of D. C. Donnelly, M.L.A., who survived him with a son and a daughter. Coghlan was awarded the Imperial Service Order in 1903, was knighted in 1914 and created K.C.M.G. in 1918.   == References == Neville Hicks, 'Coghlan, Sir Timothy Augustine (1855 - 1926)', Australian Dictionary of Biography, Volume 8, MUP, 1981, pp 48-51. Serle, Percival (1949). ["Coghlan, Timothy Augustine" . Dictionary of Australian Biography. Sydney: Angus and Robertson.  Dictionary of Australian Biography Cl-Cu] at gutenberg.net.au   == External links ==  Works written by or about Timothy Augustine Coghlan at Wikisource

U. Narayan Bhat (born 1934) is an Indian born Mathematician, known for his contributions to queueing theory and reliability theory.   == Academic career == He received a B.A. in mathematics (1953) and B.T. in education (1954) from the University of Madras, an M.A. in statistics (1958) from Karnatak University in Dharwar and Ph.D. in Mathematical statistics from the University of Western Australia on the dissertation Some Simple and Bulk Queueing Systems: A Study of Their Transient Behavior (1965). He worked at Michigan State University (1965–66), Case Western Reserve University (1966–69), and Southern Methodist University (1969–2005). Bhat is a fellow of the American Statistical Association and elected member of the International Statistical Institute. U. Narayan Bhat was a dean of research and graduate studies at Southern Methodist University and then was named interim dean for the university's Dedman College .   == Books == A Study of the Queueing Systems M/G/1 and GI/M/1, (Springer Verlag, 1968) Elements of Applied Stochastic Processes (Wiley, 1972) Introduction to Operations Research Models (W. B. Saunders & Co., 1977). With L. Cooper and L. J. LeBlanc Queueing and Related Models (Oxford University Press, 1992). Editor with I. V. Basawa Elements of Applied Stochastic Processes (Wiley, 2002). With Gregory K. Miller Introduction to queueing theory (Birkhauser, 2008)   == Publications == Further Results for the Queue with Poisson Arrivals, Operations Research, Vol. 11(3), (1963), 380-386 (with Narahari Umanath Prabhu). Imbedded Markov Chain Analysis of Single-Server Bulk Queues, Journal of the Australian Math, Soc., Vol. 4(2), (1964), 244-263. On Single-Server Bulk Queueing Processes with Binomial Input, Operations Research, Vol. 12(4), (1964), 527-533. On a Stochastic Process Occurring in Queueing Systems, Journal of Applied Probability, Vol. 2(2), (1965), 467-469. Statistical Analysis of Queueing Systems in Frontiers in Queuing by Dshalalow etc. (1997). (with G.K. Miller and S. Subba Rao). Estimation of Renewal Processes with Unobservable Gamma or Erlang Interarrival Times, J. Stat. Plan. and Inf., 61 (1997), 355-372 (with G. K. Miller). Maximum Likelihood Estimation for Single Server Queues from Waiting Time Data, Queueing Systems (journal), 24, (1997), 155-167 (with I. V. Basawa and R. Lund). Estimation of the Coefficient of Variation for Unobservable Service Times in the M/G/1 Queue, Journal of Mathematical Sciences, Vol. 1, 2002 (with G. K. Miller).   == References ==  On Google scholar

Victor Zarnowitz (born 1919 in Oświęcim Poland, d. 21 February 2009 in New York City) was a leading scholar on business cycles, indicators, and forecast evaluation. Zarnowitz was Senior Fellow and Economic Counselor to The Conference Board. He was Professor Emeritus of Economics and Finance, Graduate School of Business, The University of Chicago, and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). In 1939, he fled Poland to escape the Nazi invasion, but was imprisoned by the Soviet Russians and worked at a labor camp in Siberia. Zarnowitz earned his Ph.D. in economics (summa cum laude) at the University of Heidelberg in Germany in 1951. He came to the United States in 1952. In 1959 he moved to Chicago and became a professor at the University of Chicago. He was a Fellow of the National Association of Business Economists, Fellow of the American Statistical Association, Honorary Fellow of the International Institute of Forecasters, and Honorary Member of the Center for International Research on Economic Tendency Surveys (CIRET). In 2001, he received the William F. Butler Memorial Award from the New York Association for Business Economists. His numerous papers and books include An Appraisal of Short-Term Economic Forecasts (1967), The Business Cycle Today (1972), Orders, Production, and Investment (1973), and Business Cycles: Theory, History, Indicators, and Forecasting (1992). His most recent papers are "Has the Business Cycle Been Abolished?" (1998), "Theory and History Behind Business Cycles" (1999), and "The Old and the New in U.S. Economic Expansion" (2000). He was notable as a researcher on the performance of economic forecasting, and he concluded that economic forecasters have little success in predicting business cycle turning points. He established that planners are better off using the average of forecasts, rather than relying on any individual forecast. This has become a common practice on the part of governments in the setting of their budgets. Zarnowitz remained an active economist throughout his life. In 1999 he joined The Conference Board, the organization which publishes the Index of Leading Indicators and the Consumer Confidence Index. He continued working five-day weeks until the day before he died, according to The Conference Board, and he was also an active member of the Business Cycle Dating Committee at the National Bureau of Economic Research. His final decision with the committee was the determination that the Late-2000s recession had begun in December 2007. The historical pattern in which deep recessions are usually followed by steep recoveries is known by economists as "the Zarnowitz rule".   == Publications == Zarnowitz, Victor (1985), 'Recent work on business cycles in historical perspective: a review of theories and evidence'. Journal of Economic Literature 23 (2), pp. 523–80. Zarnowitz, Victor (1992), Business cycles: theory, history, indicators and forecasting. The university of Chicago press. In Studies in business cycles. vol 27. ISBN 0-226-97890-7 Zarnowitz, Victor (2008), 'Fleeing the Nazis, Surviving the Gulag, and Arriving in the Free World: My Life and Times,' Praeger, ISBN 978-0-313-35778-7   == References ==

Vladimir Naumovich Vapnik (Russian: Владимир Наумович Вапник; born 6 December 1936) is one of the main developers of the Vapnik–Chervonenkis theory of statistical learning, and the co-inventor of the Support Vector Machine method.   == Early life and education == Vladimir Vapnik was born in the Soviet Union. He received his master's degree in mathematics at the Uzbek State University, Samarkand, Uzbek SSR in 1958 and Ph.D in statistics at the Institute of Control Sciences, Moscow in 1964. He worked at this institute from 1961 to 1990 and became Head of the Computer Science Research Department.   == Academic career == At the end of 1990, Vladimir Vapnik moved to the USA and joined the Adaptive Systems Research Department at AT&T Bell Labs in Holmdel, New Jersey. While at AT&T, Vapnik and his colleagues developed the theory of the support vector machine. They demonstrated its performance on a number of problems of interest to the machine learning community, including handwriting recognition. The group later became the Image Processing Research Department of AT&T Laboratories when AT&T spun off Lucent Technologies in 1996. Vapnik left AT&T in 2002 and joined NEC Laboratories in Princeton, New Jersey, where he worked in the Machine Learning group. He also holds a Professor of Computer Science and Statistics position at Royal Holloway, University of London since 1995, as well as a position as Professor of Computer Science at Columbia University, New York City since 2003. As of November 2015, he has an h-index of 105 and, overall, his publications have been cited close to 157,000 times. His book on "Statistical Learning Theory" alone has been cited close to 60,000 times. On November 25, 2014, Vapnik joined Facebook AI Research, where he is working alongside his longtime collaborators Jason Weston, Ronan Collobert, and Yann LeCun.   == Honors and Awards == Vladimir Vapnik was inducted into the U.S. National Academy of Engineering in 2006. He received the 2005 Gabor Award, the 2008 Paris Kanellakis Award, the 2010 Neural Networks Pioneer Award, the 2012 IEEE Frank Rosenblatt Award, the 2012 Benjamin Franklin Medal in Computer and Cognitive Science from the Franklin Institute, the 2013 C&C Prize from the NEC C&C Foundation, and the 2014 Kampé de Fériet Award.   == Selected publications == On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events to their probabilities, co-author A. Y. Chervonenkis, 1971 Necessary and sufficient conditions for the uniform convergence of means to their expectations, co-author A. Y. Chervonenkis, 1981 Estimation of Dependences Based on Empirical Data, 1982 The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory, 1995 Statistical Learning Theory, 1998 Estimation of Dependences Based on Empirical Data, Reprint 2006 (Springer), also contains a philosophical essay on Empirical Inference Science, 2006   == See also == Alexey Chervonenkis   == Notes ==   == External links == Photograph of Professor Vapnik Vapnik's brief biography from the Computer Learning Research Centre, Royal Holloway.

Ernst Hjalmar Waloddi Weibull (18 June 1887 – 12 October 1979 in Annecy, France) was a Swedish engineer, scientist, and mathematician. Weibull came from a family that had strong ties to Scania. He was a cousin of the historian brothers Lauritz, Carl Gustaf and Curt Weibull, of whom especially the first is noteworthy for introducing a stricter criticism in the interpretation of medieval Scandinavian sources. He joined the Swedish Coast Guard in 1904 as a midshipman. Weibull moved up the ranks with promotion to sublieutenant in 1907, Captain in 1916 and Major in 1940. While in the coast guard he took courses at the Royal Institute of Technology. In 1924 he graduated and became a full professor. Weibull obtained his doctorate from the University of Uppsala in 1932. He was employed in Swedish and German industry as a consulting engineer. In 1914, while on expeditions to the Mediterranean, the Caribbean and the Pacific Ocean on the research ship Albatross, Weibull wrote his first paper on the propagation of explosive waves. He developed the technique of using explosive charges to determine the type of ocean bottom sediments and their thickness. The same technique is still used today in offshore oil exploration. In 1939 he published his paper on Weibull distribution in probability theory and statistics. In 1941 he received a personal research professorship in Technical Physics at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm from the arms producer Bofors. Weibull published many papers on strength of materials, fatigue, rupture in solids, bearings, and of course, the Weibull distribution, as well as one book on fatigue analysis in 1961. Twenty seven of these papers were reports to the US Air Force at Wright Field on Weibull analysis. In 1951 he presented his most famous paper to the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) on Weibull distribution, using seven case studies. The American Society of Mechanical Engineers awarded Weibull their gold medal in 1972. The Great Gold Medal from the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences was personally presented to him by King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden in 1978. Weibull died on October 12, 1979 in Annecy, France.   == References ==   == External links == Weibull Distribution barringer1.com - A reliability web site with lots of information and all of Weibull's papers A photograph of Weibull on the Portraits of Statisticians page.

Sir Walter Fred Bodmer FRS (born 10 January 1936 in Frankfurt am Main, Germany) is a German-born British human geneticist.   == Education == Bodmer was educated at Manchester Grammar School and went on to study the Mathematical Tripos at the University of Cambridge as a student of Clare College, Cambridge. He was awarded his PhD in 1959 from Cambridge for research on population genetics in the house mouse and Primula vulgaris (primrose) supervised by Ronald Fisher.   == Career and research == In 1961 Bodmer joined Joshua Lederberg's laboratory in the Genetics Department of Stanford University as a postdoctoral researcher, continuing his work on population genetics. In 1962 Walter Bodmer was appointed to the faculty at Stanford. He left Stanford University in 1970 to become the first Professor of Genetics at the University of Oxford [1]. Bodmer developed models for population genetics and worked on the human leukocyte antigen system and the use of somatic cell hybrids for human linkage studies. In 1985 he chaired a Royal Society committee which wrote The Bodmer Report; this has been credited with starting the movement for the public understanding of science. Bodmer was one of the first to suggest the idea of the Human Genome Project. In 1987 he received the Ellison-Cliffe Medal from the Royal Society of Medicine. He was the director of research (1979–1991) and then Director General (1991–1996) of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund. He was also Chancellor of the University of Salford, England (1995–2005; succeeded by Sir Martin Harris) and Principal of Hertford College, Oxford (1996–2005; succeeded by Dr. John Landers). In 2005, Bodmer was appointed to lead a £2.3 million project (roughly 4.5 million USD) by the Wellcome Trust at University of Oxford to examine the genetic makeup of the United Kingdom - the People of the British Isles project. He was joined by Oxford Professor Peter Donnelly (a population genetics and statistics expert) and the Wellcome Trust Principal Research Fellow Lon Cardon. Bodmer said "Our aim is to characterise the genetic make-up of the British population and relate this to the historical and archaeological evidence." The researchers presented some of their findings to the public via the Channel 4 television series "Faces of Britain." On 14 April 2007, Channel 4 in Britain aired a program that highlighted the study’s then-current findings. The project took DNA samples from hundreds of volunteers throughout Britain, seeking tell-tale fragments of DNA that would reveal the biological traces of successive waves of colonisers — Celts, Saxons, Vikings, etc. — in various parts of Britain. The findings showed that the Viking invasion of Britain was predominantly from Danish Vikings while the Orkney Islands were settled by Norwegian Vikings. He is currently Head of the Cancer and Immunogenetics Laboratory in the Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine at the University of Oxford. Research interests of the laboratory include the fundamental genetics and biology of colorectal cancer.   == Honours and awards == Bodmer has won numerous awards including:  His certifcate of election to the Royal Society reads:   == Personal life == Bodmer's father was Jewish so the family were obliged to leave Germany in 1938 and settled in Manchester. In 1956 Bodmer married Julia Bodmer (née Pilkington) 1934 – 2001 a British geneticist. They had three children.   == References ==   == External links == Channel 4s "Faces of Britain" Colorectal cancer research at the IMM Catalogue of the archive of Sir Walter Bodmer and Lady Julia Bodmer held at the Bodleian Library, University of Oxford Portraits of Statisticians: Walter Bodmer Radio National Australia interview with Sir Walter

Warren J. Mitofsky (September 17, 1934 – September 1, 2006) was an American political pollster. Mitofsky graduated in 1957 from Guilford College and was executive director of the CBS News election and survey unit from 1967 to 1990. He also previously served as an executive producer of CBS election night broadcasts. Prior to CBS, Mitofsky worked with the Census Bureau where he designed a number of surveys. Along with Joseph Waksberg, Mitofsky is credited with developing an efficient method of sampling telephone numbers using random digit dialing, which has since been widely adopted as a sampling method. In 1999, the American Association for Public Opinion Research presented him with its lifetime achievement award for his "continuing concern for survey quality". Mitofsky is credited with having invented the exit poll. Warren Mitofsky is listed among the United States Census Bureau's Notable Alumni In November 2004, Mitofsky was interviewed by PBS NewsHour regarding what went wrong with the accuracy of his exit polls for the 2004 U.S. presidential election. Early poll results were leaked which showed John Kerry leading George W. Bush, conflicting with the final official outcome. Mitofsky said he suspected that the difference arose because "the Kerry voters were more anxious to participate in our exit polls than the Bush voters." He refused, consistently, to release precinct-level polling data from Ohio to researchers who maintained that the election results were fraudulent, and his own exit polls were a more accurate picture of the vote. He died on September 1, 2006 in New York City of an aortic aneurysm, aged 71.   == Mitofsky International == In 1993 Mitofsky founded Mitofsky International, a survey research company. Its primary business is conducting exit polls for major elections around the world. It does this work exclusively for news organizations. Mitofsky has directed exit polls and quick counts since 1967 for almost 3,000 electoral contests. He has the distinction of conducting the first national presidential exit polls in the United States, Russia, Mexico and the Philippines. Along with CESSI, Ltd., Mitofsky International were the only exit polls for the Russian presidential elections in 1996 and 2000 as well as all other Russian elections since 1993. It was the only provider of exit polling and quick counts reported by the Mexican broadcast industry for its 1994 presidential election.   == References ==   == External links == Mitofsky International at the Wayback Machine (archived April 26, 2006) "WHAT WENT WRONG?" (with 2004 polling), PBS Newshour, November 5, 2004 "Mitofsky,'father of exit polling', dies at 72" [sic], CNN, September 3, 2006 Mitofsky Remembered As Exit Poll Pioneer, by Mike Mokrzycki, Associated Press, September 4, 2006

Wassily Wassilyevich Leontief (Russian: Васи́лий Васи́льевич Лео́нтьев; August 5, 1906 – February 5, 1999), was an American economist notable for his research on how changes in one economic sector may have an effect on other sectors. Leontief won the Nobel Committee's Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1973, and three of his doctoral students have also been awarded the prize (Paul Samuelson 1970, Robert Solow 1987, Vernon L. Smith 2002).   == Biography ==   === Early life === Wassily Leontief was born on August 5, 1906, in Munich, Germany, the son of Wassily W. Leontief (professor of Economics) and Slata (later Evgenia, called Genya) Leontief (née Becker). W. Leontief, Sr., belonged to a family of old-believer merchants living in St. Petersburg since 1741. Genya Becker belonged to a wealthy Jewish family from Odessa. At 15 in 1921, Wassily, Jr., entered University of Leningrad in present day St. Petersburg. He earned his Learned Economist degree (equivalent to Master of Arts) in 1924 at the age of 19.   === Opposition in USSR === Leontief sided with campaigners for academic autonomy, freedom of speech and in support of Pitirim Sorokin. As a consequence, he was detained several times by the Cheka. In 1925, he was allowed to leave the USSR, mostly because the Cheka believed that he was mortally ill with a sarcoma, a diagnosis that later proved false. He continued his studies at the University of Berlin and, in 1928 earned a Ph.D. degree in economics under the direction of Werner Sombart, writing his dissertation on Circular Flows in Economics.   === Early professional life === From 1927 to 1930, he worked at the Institute for the World Economy of the University of Kiel. There he researched the derivation of statistical demand and supply curves. In 1929, he traveled to China to assist its ministry of railroads as an advisor.. In 1931, he went to the United States and was employed by the National Bureau of Economic Research. During World War II, Leontief served as consultant at the U. S. Office of Strategic Services.   === Affiliation with Harvard === Leontief joined Harvard University's department of economics in 1932 and in 1946 became professor of economics there. In 1949, Leontief used an early computer at Harvard to model data provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics to divide the U.S. economy into 500 sectors. Leontief modeled each sector with a linear equation based on the data and used the computer, the Harvard Mark II, to solve the system, one of the first significant uses of computers for mathematical modeling. Leontief set up the Harvard Economic Research Project in 1948 and remained its director until 1973. Starting in 1965, he chaired the Harvard Society of Fellows.   === Affiliation with New York University === In 1975, Leontief joined New York University and founded and directed the Institute for Economic Analysis.   == Personal == In 1932, Leontief married poet Estelle Marks. Their only child, Svetlana Leontief Alpers, was born in 1936. As hobbies Leontief enjoyed fly fishing, ballet, and fine wines. He vacationed for years at his farm in West Burke, Vermont, but after moving to New York in the 1970s moved his summer residence to Lakeville, Connecticut. Leontief died in New York City on Friday, February 5, 1999 at the age of 93. His wife died in 2005.   == Major contributions == Leontief is primarily associated with the development of the linear activity model of General equilibrium and the use of input-output analysis that results from it. He has also made contributions in other areas of economics, such as international trade where he documented the Leontief paradox. He was also one of the first to establish the composite commodity theorem. Leontief earned the Nobel Prize in economics for his work on input-output tables. Input-output tables analyze the process by which inputs from one industry produce outputs for consumption or for inputs for another industry. With the input-output table, one can estimate the change in demand for inputs resulting from a change in production of the final good. The analysis assumes that input proportions are fixed; thus the use of input-output analysis is limited to rough approximations rather than prediction. Input-output was novel and inspired large-scale empirical work; in 2010 its iterative method was recognized as an early intellectual precursor to Google's PageRank. Leontief used input-output analysis to study the characteristics of trade flow between the U.S. and other countries, and found what has been named Leontief's paradox; "this country resorts to foreign trade in order to economize its capital and dispose of its surplus labor, rather than vice versa", i.e., U.S. exports were relatively labor-intensive when compared to U.S. imports. This is the opposite of what one would expect, considering the fact that the U.S.'s comparative advantage was in capital-intensive goods. According to some economists, this paradox has since been explained as due to the fact that when a country produces "more than two goods, the abundance of capital relative to labor does not imply that the capital intensity of its exports should exceed that of imports." Leontief was also a very strong proponent of the use of quantitative data in the study of economics. Throughout his life Leontief campaigned against "theoretical assumptions and non-observed facts". According to Leontief, too many economists were reluctant to "get their hands dirty" by working with raw empirical facts. To that end, Wassily Leontief did much to make quantitative data more accessible, and more indispensable, to the study of economics.   == Publications == 1925: “Balans Narodnogo Chozjajstva SSR” in Planovoe Chozjajstvo translated into Italian in Spulber N.(Ed.) as “Il Bilancio dell’economia nazionale dell’URSS.“ in La Strategia Sovietica per Sviluppo Economico 1924–1930, Giulio Einaudi editore, Torino [discussing the Soviet “Balance of the National Economy”, 1923–4] 1928: Die Wirtschaft als Kreislauf, Tübingen: Mohr: re-published as The economy as a circular flow, pp. 181–212 in: Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, Volume 2, Issue 1, June 1991; this translation is abridged to avoid controversial statements. 1941: Structure of the American Economy, 1919–1929 1953: Studies in the Structure of the American Economy 1966: Input-Output Economics 1966: Essays in Economics 1977: Essays in Economics, II 1977: The Future of the World Economy 1983: Military Spending: Facts and Figures, Worldwide Implications and Future Outlook co-authed with F. Duchin. 1983: The Future of Non-Fuel Minerals in the U. S. And World Economy co-authed with J. Koo, S. Nasar and I. Sohn 1986: The Future Impact of Automation on Workers co-authored with F. Duchin   == Awards == 1953: Order of the Cherubim, University of Pisa 1962: Dr honoris causa, University of Brussels 1967: Dr of the University, University of York 1968: Officer of the French Légion d'honneur 1970: Bernhard-Harms Prize Economics, West Germany 1971: Dr honoris causa, University of Louvain 1972: Dr honoris causa, University of Paris (Sorbonne) 1973: Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, a.k.a. Nobel Prize in Economics 1976: Dr honoris causa, University of Pennsylvania 1980: Dr honoris causa, University of Toulouse, France 1980: Dr honoris causa, University of Louisville, Kentucky 1980: Doctor of Social Sciences, University of Vermont 1980: Doctor of Laws, C. W. Post Center, Long Island University 1980: Russian-American Hall of Fame 1981: Karl Marx University, Budapest, Hungary 1984: Order of the Rising Sun, Japan 1985: Commandeur, French Order of Arts and Letters 1988: Dr honoris causa, Adelphi College 1988: Foreign member, USSR Academy of Sciences 1989: Society of the Optimate, Italian Cultural Institute, New York 1990: Dr honoris causa, University of Córdoba, Spain 1991: Takemi Memorial Award, Institute of Seizon & Life Sciences, Japan 1995: Harry Edmonds Award for Life Achievement, International House, New York 1995: Dr honoris causa, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany Award of Excellence, The International Center in New York   == In honor == The Global Development and Environment Institute at Tufts University awards the Leontief Prize in Economics each year in his honor.   == Memberships == 1954: President of the Econometric Society 1968: Corresponding Member of the Institut de France 1970: President of the American Economic Association 1970: Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy 1974: US-USSR Commission on the Social Sciences and Humanities of the International Research and Exchanges Board 1975: American Committee on East-West Accord 1975: Accademia Nazionale dei Lincie, Italy 1976: President and Section F. of the British Association for the Advancement of Science 1976: Honorary Member of the Royal Irish Academy 1977: Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science 1978: Commission to Study the Organization of Peace 1978–1986: Board of Trustees of North Carolina School of Science and Mathematics 1979: Century Club 1979: Issues Committee of the Progressive Alliance 1980: Committee for National Security 1981: Board of Visitors, College of Liberal Arts, Boston University 1981: Board of Editors, Journal of Business Strategy 1982: International Advisory Council of the Delian Institute of International Relations 1982: Accademia Mediterranea Delle Scienze, Italy 1983: Board of Advisors, Environmental Fund 1983: Board of Directors, Tolstoy Foundation 1985: International Committee, Carnegie Mellon University 1990: Academy of Creative Endeavors, USSR 1992: International Charitable Foundation, Russia 1993: Academie Europeenne 1993: Honorary President of the World Academy for the Progress of Planning Science, Italy 1993: Member of the Academie Universelle des Cultures, France 1994: Fellow of the New York Academy of Sciences 1995: Member of the International Leadership Center on Longevity & Society, Mt. Sinai Hospital American Philosophical Society American Academy of Arts and Sciences International Statistical Institute Honorary Member of the Japan Economic Research Center, Tokyo Honorary Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society, London Trustee of Economists for Peace and Security   == Quotes ==  Much of current academic teaching and research has been critizied for its lack of relevance, that is, of immediate practical impact. ... The trouble is caused, however, not by an inadequate selection of targets, but rather by our inability to hit squarely on them, ... by the palpable inadequacy of the scientific means with which they try to solve them. ... The weak and all too slowly growing empirical foundations clearly cannot support the proliferating superstructure of pure, or should I say, speculative economic theory.... By the time it comes to interpretations of the substantive conclusions, the assumptions on which the model has been based are easily forgotten. But it is precisely the empirical validity of these assumptions on which the usefulness of the entire exercise depends. ... A natural Darwinian feedback operating through selection of academic personnel contributes greatly to the perpetuation of this state of affairs. We move from more or less plausible but really arbitrary assumptions, to elegantly demonstrated but irrelevant conclusions.  The role of humans as the most important factor of production is bound to diminish in the same way that the role of horses in agricultural production was first diminished and then eliminated by the introduction of tractors.   == See also == List of economists List of Jewish Nobel laureates Input-output model   == References and sources == References  Sources Lay, David C. (2003). Linear Algebra and Its Applications, Third Edition. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-201-70970-8.    == External links == Autobiography Wassily Leontief (1906–1999). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  Information from www.iioa.org Article by James K. Galbraith Interview with W.Leontief by S.A.Kalyadina (Russian) IDEAS/RePEc

Wesley Clair Mitchell (August 5, 1874 – October 29, 1948) was an American economist known for his empirical work on business cycles and for guiding the National Bureau of Economic Research in its first decades.   == Biography == Mitchell was born in Rushville, Illinois, the second child and oldest son of a Civil War army doctor turned farmer. In a family with seven children and a disabled father with an appetite for business ventures "verging on rashness" a lot of responsibility fell on the oldest son. Despite these challenges, Wesley Clair went to study at the University of Chicago and was awarded a PhD in 1899. Mitchell's career as a researcher and teacher took the following course: instructor in economics at Chicago (1899–1903), assistant professor (1903–08) and professor (1909–12) of economics at the University of California, Berkeley, visiting lecturer at Harvard University (1908–09), lecturer (1913) and full professor (1914–44) at Columbia University. He was one of the founders of the New School for Social Research, where he taught for a time between 1919 and 1922, and of the National Bureau of Economic Research (1920), where he was director of research until 1945. There were interruptions for government service during the First World War and Mitchell served on many government committees; he was chairman of the President's Committee on Social Trends (1929–33). In 1923–4 he was president of the American Economic Association. From 1941 he was on the original standing committee of the Foundation for the Study of Cycles. The National Bureau was the institution through which Mitchell had greatest influence. There his important associates included Arthur Burns and Simon Kuznets. In his autobiography Kuznets acknowledges his "great intellectual debt to Mitchell." Mitchell has also made valuable contributions to the history of economic thought. Mitchell was married to Lucy Sprague Mitchell, a pioneering educator and the founder of Bank Street College of Education. He assisted his wife with the founding of the school.   == Work ==   === University of Chicago === Mitchell’s teachers included economists Thorstein Veblen and J. L. Laughlin and philosopher John Dewey. Although Veblen and Dewey did more to shape Mitchell’s outlook, Laughlin supervised his dissertation. Laughlin's main interest was in currency questions; he was a strong opponent of the quantity theory of money. The currency question facing the US in the 1890s was the choice between alternative monetary standards: inconvertible paper, gold monometallism and gold/silver bimetallism. Mitchell’s thesis, published as A History of the Greenbacks, considered the consequences of the inconvertible paper regime established by the Union in the Civil War. However this, and the follow-up study Gold Prices and Wages Under the Greenback Standard, transcended conventional monetary history of the kind Laughlin did and provided a comprehensive quantitative account of the behavior of the US economy in the recent past.   === Business Cycles, 1913 === Mitchell's next project, which would occupy him for the rest of his life, was the business cycle, then emerging as the big problem in economics. His magnum opus, Business Cycles appeared in 1913. The Preface begins  This book offers an analytic description of the complicated processes by which seasons of business prosperity, crisis, depression, and revival come about in the modern world. The materials used consist chiefly of market reports and statistics concerning the business cycles which have run their course since 1890 in the United States, England, Germany and France.  In chapter I Mitchell reviews 13 theories of the business cycle and admits that "All are plausible." He then puts them aside, arguing,  To observe, analyse, and systematise the phenomena of prosperity, crisis, and depression is the chief task. And there is better prospect of rendering service if we attack this task directly, than if we take the round about way of considering the phenomena with reference to the theory.  Mitchell's research strategy was thus quite different from that adopted by H. L. Moore or Irving Fisher who started from a hypothesis and went looking for evidence to support it. Moore and Mitchell offer another contrast in that, while Moore embraced the new statistical methods of correlation and regression, Mitchell found little use for them.   === Measuring Business Cycles === Thirty years later Mitchell was still working on business cycles and he published another large work, Measuring Business Cycles with A.F. Burns. This book presented the characteristic "National Bureau" methods of analyzing business cycles. While Mitchell was still following the 1913 agenda, other economists had taken to studying the economy using models and even to constructing macroeconometric models. Against this background of Keynesian economics and the new econometric methods Mitchell and his project looked dated. Milton Friedman believed that, "Mitchell is generally considered primarily an empirical scientist rather than a theorist". However, Mitchell's main creative efforts went into his empirical work on business cycles. Mitchell stated an endogenous theory, based on the internal dynamics of capitalism. Whereas neoclassical theories are deduced from unproven psychological axioms, he builds his theory from inductive generalities gained from empirical research. Also, he was considered a critic of conventional economic theory. As influenced greatly by Veblen, Mitchell is usually categorized with him as an American institutionalist.   == Bibliography == A History of the Greenbacks, University of Chicago Press, 1903. ISBN 978-0-548-15056-6 Gold Prices and Wages Under the Greenback Standard, University of California Press, 1908. ISBN 978-0-678-00200-1 Business Cycles, University of California Press, 1913. ISBN 978-0-8337-2407-6 Human Behavior and Economics, in Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 29, 1914, p. 1 ff. The Making and Using of Index Numbers, Bulletin of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1915. ISBN 978-0-678-00098-4 Business Cycles: The Problem and its Setting, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1927. ISBN 978-0-405-07608-4 The Backward Art of Spending Money: and other essays, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1937. ISBN 978-0-7658-0611-6 Measuring Business Cycles (with A.F. Burns), New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1946. ISBN 978-0-87014-085-3 What Happens During Business Cycles, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1951. ISBN 978-0-87014-088-4 Types of Economic Theory from Mercantilism to Institutionalism, ed. Joseph Dorfman, 2 vols. New York: Augustus M. Kelley, 1967. (Reconstructed from Mitchell's lecture notes). ISBN 978-0-678-00234-6 There is a bibliography in the volume edited by Burns (below). Lucy Sprague Mitchell, Wesley Mitchell's wife, wrote the book Two lives; the story of Wesley Clair Mitchell and myself (New York, Simon and Schuster, 1953).   == References ==   == Further reading == Arthur F.Burns (ed.) Wesley Clair Mitchell: the Economic Scientist New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1952. Simon Kuznets (1949) Wesley Clair Mitchell, 1874-1948: An Appreciation, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 44, 126–131. Joseph A. Schumpeter (1950) Wesley Clair Mitchell (1874–1948), Quarterly Journal of Economics, 64, 139–155. M. S. Morgan A History of Econometric Ideas, Cambridge 1990. Morgan compares Mitchell's approach to business cycles with both earlier and later approaches.   == External links == New School: Wesley Clair Mitchell National Bureau of Economic Research S. Fabricant: The Founding of the NBER

Wilhelm Lexis (17 July 1837, Eschweiler, Germany – 24 August 1914, Göttingen, Germany), full name Wilhelm Hector Richard Albrecht Lexis, was a German statistician, economist, and social scientist. The Oxford Dictionary of Statistics cites him as a "pioneer of the analysis of demographic time series". Lexis is largely remembered for two items that bear his name—the Lexis ratio and the Lexis diagram.   == Life == Lexis graduated in 1859 from the University of Bonn, where he studied science and mathematics. He spent some time afterwards in various occupations and, in 1861, went to Paris to study social science. It was there that Lexis became acquainted with the work of Adolphe Quetelet, whose quantitative approach to the social sciences was to guide much of Lexis' work. He spent about ten years in Paris, after which he took a teaching position in Strasbourg (France). At some point during this period, Lexis wrote his first book (Introduction to the Theory of Population Statistics) and had it published in 1875, by which time he was teaching in the Estonian city of Tartu (then called Dorpat). Starting in 1876, Lexis was the chair of the Economics Department at the University of Freiburg. The various papers written by him during his eight-year tenure at Freiburg were, in the eyes of statistics historian Stephen Stigler, "his most important statistical work". Foremost among them was the 1879 paper "On the Theory of the Stability of Statistical Series", which introduced the quantity now often called the Lexis ratio. Lexis moved on from Freiburg to the University of Breslau but stayed there only a few years (from 1884 to 1887). He then settled in Göttingen, taking a position at that city's University. In 1895, he established a course in actuarial science at the university, the first ever in Germany. In 1901, Lexis became a member of the Insurance Advisory Council for Germany's Federal Insurance Supervisory Office. He remained a member of the Council until his death in 1914. During this final period of his life, Lexis published two more books: Treatises on Population and Social Statistics (Jena: Gustav Fischer, 1903) and General Economics (Leipzig: Teubner, 1910). He was also the editor of a book on the German education system.   == Work == Throughout his professional career, Lexis published books and articles on a wide variety of topics, including demography, economics and mathematical statistics. However, little of that work proved to have lasting significance. Today, Lexis is largely remembered for two items that bear his name—the Lexis ratio and the Lexis diagram. His theory of mortality has also enjoyed a recent revival of interest.   === Lexis ratio ===  To Lexis, a time series was "stable" if the underlying probability giving rise to the observed rates remained constant from year to year (or, more generally, from one measurement period to the next). Using modern terminology, such a time series would be called a zero-order moving-average series (also known as a white noise process). Lexis was aware that many series were not stable. For non-stable series, he imagined that the underlying probabilities varied over time, being affected by what he called "physical" forces (as opposed to the random "non-essential" forces that would cause an observed rate to be different than the underlying probability). In his 1879 paper "On the Theory of the Stability of Statistical Series", Lexis set himself the task of devising a method for distinguishing between stable and non-stable time series. To this end, Lexis created a test statistic equal to the ratio between (i) the probable error of the observed rates and (ii) the probable error that would be expected if the underlying probabilities for each of the observed rates were all equal to the average rate observed across all of the observations. He called this ratio Q. Lexis then reasoned that if Q was sufficiently close to 1, then the time series was exhibiting what he called "normal dispersion" and one could assume that it was stable. If Q was substantially greater than 1, then the series was exhibiting "supernomal dispersion" and one must conclude that physical forces were having a discernible effect on the variability of the observations. Lexis used a Q value of 1.41 (i.e., the square root of 2) as the dividing line between "normal" and "supernormal" dispersion. "Stability of Statistical Series" is the only one of Lexis' works cited in his entry in the Oxford Dictionary of Statistics. It is also the only one that receives an extended discussion in Stigler's A History of Statistics. And yet, Stigler ends his discussion by labeling the work a failure. To Stigler, its chief value was the discussion that it generated from other researchers in the field. It was those other researchers, and not Lexis, who created the modern science of time-series analysis.   === Lexis diagram ===  Although it can take various forms, the typical Lexis diagram is a graphical illustration of the lifetime of either an individual or a cohort of same-aged individuals. On the diagram, each such lifetime appears as a straight line in a two-dimensional plane, with one dimension representing time and the other representing age. The use of Lexis diagrams is very common amongst demographers, so much so that they often are used without being identified as Lexis diagrams. Lexis introduced his diagram in his first book, Introduction to the Theory of Population Statistics (Strasbourg: Trubner, 1875). However, the notion of using a time vs. age diagram appears to have been developed more or less simultaneously by other authors. See the paper by Vandeschrick (2001) for more detail.   === Theory of mortality ===  In his 1877 book On the Theory of Mass Phenomena in Human Society (Freiburg: Wagnersche Buchhandlung), Lexis proposed that all human deaths could be classified into one of three types: (i) normal deaths, (ii) infant deaths and (iii) premature adult deaths. He also proposed that the normal deaths were subject to random forces such that, if all infant and other premature deaths were eliminated, the ages at which people died would exhibit a normal (i.e., Gaussian) distribution. Furthermore, the average of those ages would be equal to the age at which most adults are actually observed to die (i.e., the modal age at death), even though the actual observations are taking place in the presence of infant and other premature deaths. In the diagram to the right, the normal deaths are represented by the vertically-shaded bell-shaped area centered slightly above age 70; the infant deaths are represented by the unshaded area starting at age 0; the premature deaths are represented by the horizontally-shaded area bridging the infant and normal deaths. Although Lexis' theory did generate some contemporaneous discussion, it never supplanted the traditional demographic measures of life expectancy and age-adjusted mortality rates. However, recent research suggests that the modal age at death might be a useful statistic for tracking changes in the lifespans of the elderly. For a survey of the contemporaneous response to Lexis' theory, see section IV ("Reception of Lexis' hypothesis in the late 19th century") of Véron and Rohrbasser (2003). For a discussion of the modern-day use of the modal age at death, see Horiuchi et al. (2013).   == Further reading == Horiuchi, Shiro; Ouelette, Nadine; Cheung, Siu Lan Karen and Robine, Jean-Marie (2013) "Modal Age at Death: Lifespan Indicator in the Era of Longevity Extension", Vienna Yearbook of Population Research, Volume 11, pages 37–69 Vandeschrick, Christophe (2001) "The Lexis Diagram, a Misnomer", Demographic Research, Volume 4, pages 97–124 Véron, Jacques and Jean-Marc Rohrbasser (2003) "Wilhelm Lexis: The Normal Length of Life as an Expression of the 'Nature of Things'", Population, Volume 53(3), pages 303-322 Two biographies of Lexis are: Heiss, Klaus-Peter (1978) "Wilhelm Lexis", in Kruskal, William H. and Tanur, Judith M. (eds.) International Encyclopedia of Statistics (New York: Free Press), Volume 1, pages 507-512 Klein, Felix (1914) "Wilhelm Lexis" in Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung, Volume 23, pages 314-317 (obituary, in German)   == References == Koch, Peter (1985) "Wilhem Lexis" in Neue Deutsche Biographie (Berlin: Duncker & Humblot) Volume 14, pages 421-422 (in German) Stigler, Stephen M. (1986) The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty before 1900 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press, ISBN 0-674-40340-1), chapter 6 ("Attempts to Revive the Binomial"), pages 221-238 Upton, Graham and Cook, Ian (2006) A Dictionary of Statistics, Second edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-861431-4), pages 237-238   == External links ==   === Works by Lexis === Lexis' Ph.D. dissertation (in German) Introduction to the Theory of Population Statistics (1875) (in German) On the Theory of Mass Phenomena in Human Society (1877) (in German) On the Theory of the Stability of Statistical Series (1879) (in German) Treatises on Population and Social Statistics (1903) (in German) 1904 text on the German education system (in English translation)   === Biographies of Lexis === Entry in the Neue Deutsche Biographie (in German) Entry in the Oxford Dictionary of Statistics Obituary by Felix Klein (in German) MacTutor biography   === Other links === Horiuchi et al. (2013) Vandeschrick (2001) Véron and Rohrbasser (2003)

William Arnold Barnett (born October 30, 1941) is an American economist, whose current work is in the fields of chaos, bifurcation, and nonlinear dynamics in socioeconomic contexts, econometric modeling of consumption and production, and the study of the aggregation problem and the challenges of measurement in economics.   == Education == Barnett received his B.S. degree from M.I.T., his M.B.A. from the University of California, Berkeley, and his M.A. and Ph.D. from Carnegie Mellon University.   == Positions == Barnett is currently the Oswald Distinguished Professor of Macroeconomics at the University of Kansas and Director of the Center for Financial Stability, in New York City. He is also a Senior Research Fellow of the IC2 Institute at the University of Texas at Austin and a Fellow of the Johns Hopkins Institute for Applied Economics, Global Health, and the Study of Business Enterprise. He is the founder and President of the Society for Economic Measurement. He was previously Research Economist at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C.; Stuart Centennial Professor of Economics at the University of Texas at Austin; and Professor of Economics at Washington University in St. Louis. Prior to becoming an economist, he worked as an engineer at Rocketdyne on development of the Rocketdyne F-1 rocket engine.   == Research == His research is in macroeconomics and econometrics. He is Founding President of the Society for Economic Measurement, Founding Editor of the Cambridge University Press journal, Macroeconomic Dynamics and of the Emerald Group Publishing monograph series, International Symposia in Economic Theory and Econometrics, and originator of the Divisia monetary aggregates and the "Barnett critique". In consumer demand and production modelling, he originated the Laurent series approach to specification design and the seminonparametric approach using the Müntz–Szász theorem. His publications on bifurcation analysis and nonlinear dynamics have shown that robustness of dynamical inferences is compromised, when policy simulations are run only at point estimates of parameters, since confidence regions about those estimates are often crossed by bifurcation boundaries. He is a Fellow of the American Statistical Association, a Charter Fellow of the Journal of Econometrics, a Charter Fellow of the Society for Economic Measurement, a Fellow of the World Innovation Foundation, a Fellow of the IC2 Institute, and a Fellow of the Johns Hopkins Institute for Applied Economics, Global Health, and the Study of Business Enterprise, and Honorary Professor at Henan University in Kaifeng, China. He is ranked among the top 2% of the world's economists in RePEc. His book with Nobel Laureate, Paul A. Samuelson, Inside the Economist's Mind: Conversations with Eminent Economists, Wiley-Blackwell Publishing (2007), ISBN 1-4051-5917-0, has been translated into seven languages. His MIT Press book, Getting It Wrong: How Faulty Monetary Statistics Undermine the Fed, the Financial System, and the Economy, ISBN 9780262516884, won the American Publishers Award for Professional and Scholarly Excellence (the PROSE Awards) for the best book published in economics during 2012.   == Honorary Journal Special Issues == Special issues of two eminent professional journals, the Journal of Econometrics and Econometric Reviews, have been published in Professor Barnett's honor with contribution by many of the world's most prominent economists. These journals are: Special issue of the Journal of Econometrics on the topic of "Internally Consistent Modeling, Aggregation, Inference, and Policy," coedited in honor of William A. Barnett by James Heckman and Apostolos Serletis, v. 183, no. 1, November 2014, pp. 1 - 146. Special issue of Econometric Reviews on the topic of "Econometrics with Theory: A Volume Honoring William A. Barnett," coedited by James Heckman and Apostolos Serletis, v. 34, no. 1-2, 2015, pp. 1 - 254.   == Publications ==   === Selected books === Barnett, William and Apostolos Serletis (2000). The Theory of Monetary Aggregation. Elsevier.   Barnett, William and Jane Binner (2004). Functional Structure and Approximation in Econometrics. Elsevier.   Barnett, William and Paul Samuelson (2007). Inside the Economist's Mind: Conversations with Eminent Economists. Wiley/Blackwell.   Barnett, William and Marcelle Chauvet (2011). Financial Aggregation and Index Number Theory. World Scientific Publishing.   Barnett, William (2012). Getting It Wrong: How Faulty Monetary Statistics Undermine the Fed, the Financial System, and the Economy. MIT Press.     === Selected journal articles === Barnett, William (September 1980). "Economic Monetary Aggregates: An Application of Index Number and Aggregation Theory". Journal of Econometrics.  Barnett, William, Paul Spindt, and Edward Offenbacher (December 1984). "The New Divisia Monetary Aggregates". Journal of Political Economy. doi:10.1086/261275.  Barnett, William, A. R. Gallant, M. J. Hinich. J. A. Jungeilges, D. T. Kaplan, and M. J. Jensen (1997). "A Single-Blind Controlled Competition among Tests for Nonlinearity and Chaos". Journal of Econometrics.  Barnett, William, and Shu Wu (January 2005). "On User Costs of Risky Monetary Assets". Annals of Finance.  Barnett, William (February 2007). "Multilateral Aggregation-Theoretic Monetary Aggregation over Heterogeneous Countries". Journal of Econometrics.    == References ==   == External links == Barnett papers Personal web site Center for Financial Stability Society for Economic Measurement Blog

William "Vilim" Feller (July 7, 1906 – January 14, 1970), born Vilibald Srećko Feller, was a Croatian-American mathematician specializing in probability theory.   == Early life and education == Feller was born in Zagreb to Ida Oemichen-Perc, a Croatian-Austrian Catholic, and Eugen Viktor Feller, who was born to a Polish Jew named David Feller and an Austrian named Elsa Holzer. Eugen was a famous chemist and created Elsa fluid named after his mother. According to Gian-Carlo Rota, Feller's father's surname was a "Slavic tongue twister", which William changed at the age of twenty—but as can be seen, this claim was false. His christened name, Vilibald, was chosen by his Catholic mother for the saint day of his birthday. In his school documentation, the small municipality of Donja Stubica in Zagorje is mentioned. This is the birthplace of his father, who was an apothecary and owner of a company producing hygienic utensils and cosmetics. William finished his elementary and middle education in Zagreb, as well as two years of his math study. From 1925, he continued his study in Göttingen, Germany where he gained the doctoral degree in 1926 under the supervision of Richard Courant, with his work Über algebraisch rektifizierbare transzendente Kurven.   == Work == Feller held a docent position at the University of Kiel beginning in 1928. Because he refused to sign a Nazi oath, he fled the Nazis and went to Copenhagen, Denmark in 1933. He also lectured in Sweden (Stockholm and Lund). As a refugee in Sweden, Feller reported being troubled by increasing fascism at the universities. He reported that the mathematician Torsten Carleman would offer his opinion that Jews and foreigners should be executed. Finally, in 1939 he arrived in the U.S. where he became a citizen in 1944 and was on the faculty at Brown and Cornell. In 1950 he became a professor at Princeton University. The works of Feller are contained in 104 papers and two books on a variety of topics such as mathematical analysis, theory of measurement, functional analysis, geometry, and differential equations in addition to his work in mathematical statistics and probability. Feller was one of the greatest probabilists of the twentieth century, who is remembered for his championing of probability theory as a branch of mathematical analysis in Sweden and the United States. In the middle of the 20th century, probability theory was popular in France and Russia, while mathematical statistics was more popular in the United Kingdom and the United States, according to the Swedish statistician, Harald Cramér. His two-volume textbook on probability theory and its applications was called "the most successful treatise on probability ever written" by Gian-Carlo Rota. By stimulating his colleagues and students in Sweden and then in the United States, Feller helped establish research groups studying the analytic theory of probability. In his research, Feller contributed to the study of the relationship between Markov chains and differential equations, where his theory of generators of one-parameter semigroups of stochastic processes gave rise to the theory of "Feller operators".   == Results == Numerous topics relating to probability are named after him, including Feller processes, Feller's explosion test, Feller–Brown movement, and the Lindeberg–Feller theorem. Feller made fundamental contributions to renewal theory, Tauberian theorems, random walks, diffusion processes, and the law of the iterated logarithm. Feller was among those early editors who launched the journal Mathematical Reviews.   == Notable books == An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Volume I, 3rd edition (1968); 1st edn. (1950); 2nd edn. (1957) An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Volume II, 2nd edition (1971)   == References ==   == External links == William Feller at the Mathematics Genealogy Project A biographical memoir by Murray Rosenblatt Croatian Giants of Science - in Croatian O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "William Feller", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . "Fine Hall in its golden age: Remembrances of Princeton in the early fifties" by Gian-Carlo Rota. Contains a section on Feller at Princeton. Feller Matriculation Form giving personal details

William Fielding Ogburn (June 29, 1886 – April 27, 1959) was an American sociologist who was born in Butler, Georgia and died in Tallahassee, Florida. He was also a statistician and an educator. Ogburn received his B.A. degree from Mercer University and his M.A. and Ph.D. degrees from Columbia University. He was a professor of sociology at Columbia from 1919 until 1927, when he became chair of the Sociology Department at the University of Chicago. He served as the president of American Sociological Society in 1929. He was the editor of the Journal of the American Statistical Association from 1920 to 1926. In 1931, he was elected as the president of American Statistical Association. He was also known for his idea of "culture lag" in society's adjustment to technological and other changes. He played a pivotal role in producing the groundbreaking Recent Social Trends during his research directorship of President Herbert Hoover's Committee on Social Trends from 1930 to 1933. He was one of the most prolific sociologists of his time, with 175 articles under his name.   == Social Change == Perhaps Ogburn's most enduring intellectual legacy is the theory of social change he offered in 1922. He suggested that technology is the primary engine of progress, but tempered by social responses to it. Thus, his theory is often considered a case of Technological determinism, but is really more than that. Ogburn posited four stages of technical development: invention, accumulation, diffusion and adjustment. Invention is the process by which new forms of technology are created. Inventions are collective contributions to an existing cultural base that cannot occur unless the society has already gained a certain level of knowledge and expertise in the particular area. Accumulation is the growth of technology because new things are invented more rapidly than old ones are forgotten, and some inventions (such as writing) promote this accumulation process. Diffusion is the spread of an idea from one cultural group to another, or from one field of activity to another, and as diffusion brings inventions together, they combine to form new inventions. Adjustment is the process by which the non-technical aspects of a culture respond to invention, and any retardation of this adjustment process causes cultural lag.   == References ==   == External links == American Sociological Association

William Fleetwood Sheppard (20 November 1863 – 12 October 1936) Australian-British civil servant, mathematician and statistician remembered for his work in finite differences, interpolation and statistical theory, known in particular for the eponymous Sheppard's corrections. William Fleetwood Sheppard was born near Sydney, Australia. He was the second child of Edmund Sheppard, an Englishman who had gone to Australia in 1859, and his wife Mary Grace Murray; the couple had married in 1860. Edmund Sheppard was a lawyer and became a judge of the Supreme Court of Queensland. When he was about ten William was sent to Brisbane Grammar School. However he stayed for only one term for the headmaster believed that the school could not do justice to such a brilliant pupil and that he had better go to school in England. In England Sheppard went to Charterhouse School where he had a very successful academic career and was finally head of the school. He went to Trinity College, Cambridge as a Foundation Scholar. When he graduated in 1884 it was as the Senior Wrangler (the mathematics student with the highest mark). This was a great prize and the Senior Wrangler was somebody. Shortly after the results came out, a letter found him, addressed only to "The Senior Wrangler, Cambridge." The third wrangler was William Bragg and the fourth was W. H. Young. All the top wranglers that year were coached by E. J. Routh. After some years preparing to become a barrister and doing legal work, Sheppard joined the Education Department as a Junior Examiner in 1896. By 1914 he had been made an Assistant Secretary at the Board of Education. Sheppard had an extraordinary capacity for work; he would get up at 5 or 6 in the morning and work until 10 or 11 in the evening. He retired in 1921 at the age of 58. To save money, the government had asked all civil servants who would be retiring in the next few years to retire immediately; this was part of the Geddes Axe. Sheppard could not afford to retire and so he took on work as an examiner for the Cambridge School Certificate and the University of London. This was a great burden because he was amazingly thorough, recording all the errors that were made and the marks given to ensure consistency of marking across thousands of scripts. Sheppard had a parallel and equally distinguished career as a mathematician, distinguished enough for him to receive the degree of Sc. D. from Cambridge in 1908 and to be made a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1932. Sheppard was not unique in combining a civil service career with mathematical research; an almost exact contemporary was Thomas Little Heath, the historian of Greek mathematics, who went higher in the Civil Service and became much better known as an author. Another contemporary was the civil servant and statistician R H Hooker. Sheppard published his first paper in 1888 and then he published nothing during his legal years. Then he resumed publishing in 1897 and kept going until 1931. Sheppard was encouraged to turn his mathematical skills to statistics by Francis Galton, whom he had met during his Cambridge days when he visited Galton's Anthropometric Laboratory. In his memorial piece Aitken placed Sheppard with Edgeworth, Pearson and Yule as a contributor to the development of statistics at the turn of the 20th. century. The assessment was based on the series of papers on correlation and the calculation of moments that Sheppard produced between 1897 and 1907. The first Sheppard's correction paper was in 1897. After 1907 the focus of Sheppard's work moved from statistics to interpolation and graduation and he published in mathematical and actuarial journals. The characteristics of Sheppard's work that Aitken emphasised were "thoroughness and independence." "Agility, shafts of brilliance, these are not to be found; but there is not a trace of the superficiality which sometimes goes with these qualities." At the fifth International Congress of Mathematicians held in 1912 in Cambridge, Sampson presented a paper entitled Reduction of errors by means of negligible differences. When Sheppard died he was remembered in the Mathematical Gazette with a one-page note; Sheppard had been president of the Mathematical Association in 1928. The Annals of Eugenics published a long family memoir by Sheppard's son and an account of Sheppard's scientific work by Aitken. (These pieces form the basis of the present article.) The editor of the journal, Ronald Fisher, also contributed a piece. Fisher knew Sheppard through his work on mathematical tables. Of Sheppard's work, Fisher wrote, "We find practically nothing that ought to be retracted, and very little that is now obsolete." However, it is clear from Fisher's article and from the notes he added to Aitken's that Sheppard's main virtue was that he was not Karl Pearson. Pearson had died some months previously and this appreciation of Sheppard's life is uncomfortably like a disappreciation of Pearson's.   == Some publications of W. F. Sheppard == W. F. Sheppard (1897) "On the Calculation of the Average Square, Cube, of a Large Number of Magnitudes", Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 60, 698–703. W. F. Sheppard (1898) "On the Calculation of the Most Probable Values of Frequency Constants for data arranged according to Equidistant Divisions of a Scale", Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, 29, 353–80. W. F. Sheppard (1899) "On the Application of the Theory of Error to Cases of Normal Distribution and Normal Correlation", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, A, 192,101–167+531. W. F. Sheppard (1907) "Table of Deviates of the Normal Curve", Biometrika, v. 404–406. W. F. Sheppard (1921) "Reduction of Error by Linear Compounding", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, A, 221, 199–237. W. F. Sheppard (1923) From Determinant to Tensor, Clarendon Press Oxford. A bibliography appears with the obituaries in the Annals of Eugenics. It contains 40 publications, the first in 1888 and the last in 1931.   == Discussions == A. C. Aitken and E T Whittaker (1935–36) William Fleetwood Sheppard, Sc.D., LL.M., Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh 56, 279–282. There is a link to this obituary in the MacTutor article referred to below. "William Fleetwood Sheppard", Mathematical Gazette, 20, December 1936. N. F. Sheppard (1937) W. F. Sheppard, F.R.S.E., Sc. D., Ll. M.: "Personal History", Annals of Eugenics, 8, 1–9. A. C. Aitken (1937) "A Note on Sheppard’s Contributions to Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics", Annals of Eugenics, 8, 9–11. R. A. Fisher (1937) "The Character of Sheppard’s Work", Annals of Eugenics, 8, 11–12. Donald A. MacKenzie, Statistics in Britain 1865–1930 : the Social Construction of Scientific Knowledge, Edinburgh University Press. 1981. MacKenzie is particularly interested in the relationship between Sheppard and Galton. The standard modern histories and encyclopedias pay little attention to Sheppard. See, however, A. Hald (2001) "On the History of the Correction for Grouping, 1873–1922", Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 28, 417–428. This puts Sheppard's work into a story that begins with Thiele (1873) and ends with Fisher (1922).   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "William Fleetwood Sheppard", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Presidents of the Mathematical Association In 1926 Sheppard sent Karl Pearson the letters he had had from Galton and Pearson used them in his Life of Francis Galton, Vol 3b. See Letters of Galton to Dr. W. F. Sheppard Some correspondence between Sheppard and Fisher and between Sheppard's son and Fisher is available on the web from the University of Adelaide Calendar of Correspondence with W.F. Sheppard Calendar of Correspondence with N.F. Sheppard Also available are the letters that passed between Fisher and Aitken in May/June 1937. Calendar of Correspondence with A.C. Aitken

Colonel William Henry Sykes, FRS (25 January 1790 – 16 June 1872) was an English naturalist who served with the British military in India and was specifically known for his work with the Indian Army as a politician, Indologist and ornithologist. One of the pioneers of the Victorian statistical movement, a founder of the Royal Statistical Society, he conducted surveys and examined the efficiency of army operation. Returning from service in India, he became a director of the East India Company and a member of parliament representing Aberdeen.   == Life and career == Sykes was born near Bradford in Yorkshire. His father Samuel Sykes of Friezing Hall and they belonged to the family of Sykeses of Yorkshire. He joined military service as a cadet in 1803 and obtained a commission on 1 May 1804 with the Honourable East India Company. Joining the Bombay Army he was to lieutenancy on 12 October 1805. He saw action at the siege of Bhurtpur under Lord Lake in 1805. He commanded a regiment at the battles of Kirkee and Poonah and was involved in the capture of hill forts. By 1810 he could speak Hindi and Marathi languages. He became a captain on 25 January 1819 and travelled for four years across Europe from 1820. He returned to India in October 1824 and was appointed by Monstuart Elphinstone as a statistical reporter to the Bombay government. He then collected statistical and natural history researches, and completed a census of the population of the Deccan producing two voluminous statistical reports, and a complete natural history report illustrated with drawings. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Hay of Renistoun in 1824. He was promoted to the rank of a Major on 8 September 1826 and to Lieutenant-Colonel on 9 April 1831. In December 1829 the post of statistical reporter was abolished but he took leave from military duty and continued to work on his statistical surveys. He completed this in January 1831 and left for Europe on furlough. He retired from active service with the rank of colonel on 18 June 1833 and in September 1835 he became a Royal Commissioner in Lunacy, a post he held till 1845. On account of his knowledge of Indian matters, he was made a director of the East India Company in 1840. In 1867 he was elected chairman of the court of directors of the East India Company.  In 1847 he tried to contest for the Member of Parliament seat for Aberdeen but failed. In 1857 he contested again, representing the liberal interest against John Farley Leith, and was elected. He continued to hold the seat for several terms. He was elected President of the Royal Asiatic Society in 1858. He was also a member of the Society of Arts and the Royal British Association. Sykes was elected Lord Rector of Marischal College, Aberdeen in 1854. He was a founder member, in 1835, and President of the Royal Statistical Society, 1863–5; he was the eleventh holder of that post but the first not to be a peer or baronet. He also became an Honorary Metropolitan Commissioner in September 1835. Despite suffering from bronchitis he attended all parliament sessions and died in Kensington, London aged 82.   == Contributions == As a "Statistical Reporter" he travelled across the Deccan region, collecting data on populations apart from collecting natural history specimens. Some of statistical research contributions included the computations of the cost of maintenance per soldier. He calculated for instance that the French army had a much lower cost than that of the British army, which according to him allowed the French to maintain two soldiers for the cost of one "English" soldier. He also worked out that native Indian soldiers were healthier than their European counterparts and that it was possible to provide pension and insurance to Indian soldiers with a very low premium although this was never implemented. Sykes was a pioneer meteorologist in India, taking regular temperature and atmospheric pressure readings, he noticed regular patterns in diurnal pressure variations and noted that the range was greatest in winter while the least difference occurred during the monsoons.  Sykes collections of animals resulted in the publications of catalogues of birds and mammals from the Deccan region, many of which were published in the Proceedings of the Zoological Society. His discoveries included fifty-six birds new to science, including the Indian pond heron. Sykes also studied the fish of the area, and wrote papers on the quails and hemipodes of India. His list of birds of the Deccan contained almost 236 species. He was an authority on the natural history of the Deccan region and he corresponded with many other naturalists. He used his influence during his position at the East India Company and Charles Darwin wrote to him to influence decisions in favour of including Edward Blyth on an expedition to China. Sykes's lark (Galerida deva) of peninsular India is named after him. In addition, a race of blue-headed wagtail (Motacilla flava beema) was given the common name Sykes's wagtail in British Birds (1907). In 1856 the citizens of Bombay presented Sykes with a medal for his advocacy in favour of a native system of education. He wrote extensively on Buddhism and its antiquity and believed that it was the original religion followed in India. He also wrote on the Taiping Rebellion holding the British Government guilty of unjustifiable aggression towards China. He also held the British responsible for precipitating the 1857 rebellion by being insensitive to local customs, citing the earlier case of the Vellore mutiny. In a commentary to the British media which had suggested that the mutineers were using greased cartridges, one of the immediate causes of the uprising, against the British he pointed out that they were all using 'Brown Bess' and conventional musket ammunition. He was one of the founding members of the Asiatic Society of Bombay.   == Publications == Sykes, W.H. (1846). "Statistics of the Administration of Civil and Criminal Justice in British India from 1841 to 1844, both Inclusive". Journal of the Statistical Society of London 9 (4): 310–338.  Sykes, WH (1839). "On the Quails and Hemipodii of India". Transactions of the Zoological Society of London 2 (1): 1–24. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1839.tb00004.x.  Sykes, WH (1839). "On the Fishes of the Dukhun.". Transactions of the Zoological Society of London 2 (5): 349–378. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1839.tb00029.x.  Sykes, WH (1839). "Some Account of the Land-crabs of the Dukhun". Transactions of the Royal Entomological Society of London 2 (3): 181–184. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2311.1839.tb03206.x.  Sykes, WH (1836). "Land Tenures of Dukhun". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland 3: 350–376.  Sykes, WH 1834-8. On the Fishes of the Dukhun, and on the Fossils collected at Cutch. Sykes, WH (1835). "On Atmospheric Tides and Meteorology of Dukhun". Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 125: 161–220. doi:10.1098/rstl.1835.0012.  "Discussion of meteorological observations taken in India, at various heights, embracing those at Dodabetta on the Neelgherry Mountains, at 8640 feet above the leve of the sea". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 140: 297–378. 1850. doi:10.1098/rstl.1850.0016.  Sykes, W.H. (1833). "On a portion of Dukhun, East Indies". Transactions of the Geological Society 4: 409–432. doi:10.1144/transgslb.4.2.409.  Sykes, WH 1837. On the Increase of Wealth and Expenditure in the various classes of Society in the United Kingdom. Sykes, WH 1838. Special Reports on the Statistics of the Four Collectorates of Dukhun. Sykes, WH 1841. Notes on the Religious, Moral and Political State of Ancient India. Sykes, WH 1847. Prices of the Cerelia and other Edibles in India and England compared. Quarterly Journal of the Statistical Society of London 10(4):289-315. Notes in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Sykes, W.H. (1835). "Description of the wild dog of the Western Ghats". Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 3: 405–411.  Sykes, W.H. (1835). "Some account of the Kolisurra silk-worm of the Deccan". Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 3: 541–547.  Sykes, WH 1833. Ornaments on figures in cave temples at Karli. 451. Sykes, WH (1835). "Land Tenures of the Dekkan". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland 2 (2): 205–233.  Sykes, WH 1837. The Upas or Poison-tree of Java. 194. Sykes, WH 1837. Inscriptions from the Budh caves near Junar. 287. Sykes, WH 1837. Oil and cordage plants of the Dekhan, Addenda 22. Sykes, WH 1839. Siva in the cave temples at Elephanta and Ellora. 81. Sykes, WH 1839. Inscription at Sanchi re proprietary right in the soil. 246 Sykes, WH 1839. India before the Mohameddan invasion. 248. Sykes, WH 1848. Catalogue of Chinese Buddhistical works. 199 Sykes, WH 1856. Miniature chaityas and Buddhist inscriptions in Sarnath. 37. Sykes, WH 1858. Traits of Indian character. 223. Sykes, WH 1858. Golden relics discovered in Rangoon. 298   == References ==   == External links == Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by William Henry Sykes

William Henry ("Bill") Kruskal (/ˈkrʌskəl/; October 10, 1919 – April 21, 2005) was an American mathematician and statistician. He is best known for having formulated the Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance (together with W. Allen Wallis), a widely used nonparametric statistical method.   == Biography == Kruskal was born to a Jewish family in New York City to a successful fur wholesaler. His mother, Lillian Rose Vorhaus Kruskal Oppenheimer, became a noted promoter of Origami during the early era of television. He was the oldest of five children, three of whom, including himself, became researchers in mathematics and physics; see Joseph Kruskal and Martin Kruskal. Kruskal left Antioch College to attend Harvard University, receiving bachelor's and master's degrees in mathematics in 1940 and 1941. He pursued a Ph. D. in Mathematical Sciences at Columbia University, graduating in 1955. During the Second World War, Kruskal served at the U.S. Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren, Virginia. After brief stints working for his father and lecturing at Columbia, he joined the University of Chicago faculty as an instructor in statistics in 1950. He edited the Annals of Mathematical Statistics from 1958 to 1961, served as president of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in 1971, and of the American Statistical Association in 1982. Kruskal retired as Professor Emeritus in 1990. He died in Chicago.   == Notable works == Kruskal, William H; Allen Wallis, W (1952). "Use of ranks in one-criterion analysis of variance". Journal of the American Statistical Association 47 (260): 583–621. doi:10.2307/2280779. JSTOR 2280779.  Goodman, Leo A; Kruskal, William H (1954). "Measures of association for cross classifications". Journal of the American Statistical Association 49 (268): 732–764. doi:10.2307/2281536. JSTOR 2281536.  Goodman, Leo A; Kruskal, William H (1959). "Measures of Association for Cross Classifications. II: Further Discussion and References". Journal of the American Statistical Association 54 (285): 123–163. doi:10.2307/2282143. JSTOR 2282143.  Goodman, Leo A; Kruskal, William H (1963). "Measures of association for cross classification III: Approximate Sampling Theory" (PDF). Journal of the American Statistical Association 58 (302): 310–364. doi:10.2307/2283271. JSTOR 2283271.  "The coordinate-free approach to Gauss-Markov estimation, and its application to missing and extra observations". Proceedings of the Fourth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability 1: 435–451. 1961.  Kruskal, William (1968). "When are Gauss-Markov and least squares estimators identical? A coordinate-free approach". Annals of Mathematical Statistics 39: 70–75. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177698505.  Kruskal, William (December 1988). "Miracles and Statistics: The Casual Assumption of Independence (ASA Presidential address)". Journal of the American Statistical Association 83 (404): 929–940. doi:10.1080/01621459.1988.10478682. JSTOR 2290117.  Goodman, Leo A; Kruskal, William H (1979). "Measures of Association for Cross Classifications". New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-90443-3.  The Springer monograph cited is a reprint of the three Goodman and Kruskal Journal of the American Statistical Association cited above. There is a complete bibliography.   == References ==   === Interview ===

William Newmarch (28 January 1820 – 23 March 1882) was an English banker, economist and statistician born at Thirsk, Yorkshire. He took his schooling at York, and, as a young man, held posts as a clerk in that city He early showed his literary taste and talent by publishing a Guide to the City, by frequent correspondence with the "Sheffield Iris," and by the delivery of lectures. Having served as a clerk under a stamp distributor, he passed to the Yorkshire Fire and Life Office at York, then to the banking house of Messrs. Leatham, Few, and Co., at Wakefield (1843–1846). (Proceedings of the Royal Society of London) He then moved to London and worked for three financial institutions: the Agra Bank (1846–1851) secretary to the Globe Insurance Company (1851–1862) chief officer in the banking-house of Glyn, Mills & Co. (1862–1881) Notwithstanding the continuous pressure of an active business life he found time to contribute many valuable articles to the magazines and newspapers, and took an active part in the proceedings of the Royal Statistical Society (of which he was one of the honorary secretaries, editor of its journal, and in President (1869–1871)) and the Political Economy Club. He was also elected a fellow of the Royal Society. His extensive knowledge of banking was displayed in the evidence which he gave before the select committee on the Bank Acts in 1857. He collaborated with Thomas Tooke in the two final volumes of his History of Prices and was responsible for the greater part of the work in those volumes. For nineteen years he wrote a survey of the commercial history of the year in The Economist. He died at Torquay on 23 March 1882 and was buried at West Norwood Cemetery. After his death his friends founded, in perpetuation of his memory, a Newmarch Lectureship in economic science and statistics at University College, London. Arthur Bowley, Josiah Stamp, Udny Yule, and Theodore Gregory were amongst the distinguished Newmarch lecturers.   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    === Obituaries === "The Death of Mr. William Newmarch" Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 45, No. 1. (Mar., 1882), pp. 115–121. Obituary Notices of Fellows Deceased, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Vol. 34. (1882–1883), pp. xvii–xix.   === Discussion === There is a section on Newmarch in Paul J. FitzPatrick "Leading British Statisticians of the Nineteenth Century," Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 55, No. 289. (Mar., 1960), pp. 38–70. Reprinted in Studies in the History of Statistics and Probability II Edited by M G Kendall and R L Plackett, London 1977.   == External links == Royal Society citation There is more information about Newmarch in the following AIM25 library record NEWMARCH, William (1820–1882): papers Newmarch is placed among the classical economists in the opening (and sample) chapter of the following D. P. O'Brien The Classical Economists Revisited

William Playfair (22 September 1759 – 11 February 1823) was a Scottish engineer and political economist, the founder of graphical methods of statistics. William Playfair invented three types of diagrams: in 1786 the line graph and bar chart of economic data, and in 1801 the pie chart and circle graph, used to show part-whole relations.   == Biography == Playfair was born in 1759 in Scotland during the Enlightenment, a Golden Age in the arts, sciences, industry and commerce. He was the fourth son of the reverend James Playfair of the parish of Liff & Benvie near the city of Dundee in Scotland; his notable brothers were architect James Playfair and mathematician John Playfair. His father died in 1772 when William was 13, leaving the eldest brother John to care for the family and his education. After his apprenticeship with Andrew Meikle, the inventor of the threshing machine, Playfair became draftsman and personal assistant to James Watt at the Boulton and Watt steam engine manufactory in Soho, Birmingham. Playfair had a variety of careers. He was in turn a millwright, engineer, draftsman, accountant, inventor, silversmith, merchant, investment broker, economist, statistician, pamphleteer, translator, publicist, land speculator, convict, banker, ardent royalist, editor, blackmailer and journalist. On leaving Watt's company in 1782, he set up a silversmithing business and shop in London, which failed. In 1787 he moved to Paris, taking part in the storming of the Bastille two years later. He returned to London in 1793, where he opened a "security bank", which also failed. From 1775 he worked as a writer and pamphleteer and did some engineering work.   == Work == Ian Spence and Howard Wainer in 2001 describe Playfair as "engineer, political economist and scoundrel" while "Eminent Scotsmen" calls him an "ingenious mechanic and miscellaneous writer." It compares his career with the glorious one of his older brother John Playfair, the distinguished Edinburgh professor, and draws a moral about the importance of "steadiness and consistency of plan" as well as of "genius."   === Bar chart === Two decades before Playfair's first achievements, in 1765 Joseph Priestley had created the innovation of the first timeline charts, in which individual bars were used to visualise the life span of a person, and the whole can be used to compare the life spans of multiple persons. According to James R. Beniger and Robyn (1978) "Priestley's timelines proved a commercial success and a popular sensation, and went through dozens of editions".  These timelines directly inspired Wiliam Playfair's invention of the bar chart, which first appeared in his Commercial and Political Atlas, published in 1786. According to Beniger and Robyn (1978) "Playfair was driven to this invention by a lack of data. In his Atlas he had collected a series of 34 plates about the import and export from different countries over the years, which he presented as line graphs or surface charts: line graphs shaded or tinted between abscissa and function. Because Playfair lacked the necessary series data for Scotland, he graphed its trade data for a single year as a series of 34 bars, one for each of 17 trading partners".  In this bar chart Scotland's imports and exports from and to 17 countries in 1781 are represented. "This bar chart was the first quantitative graphical form that did not locate data either in space, as had coordinates and tables, or time, as had Priestley's timelines. It constitutes a pure solution to the problem of discrete quantitative comparison".   === Graphics ===  Playfair, who argued that charts communicated better than tables of data, has been credited with inventing the line, bar, and pie charts. His time-series plots are still presented as models of clarity. Playfair first published The Commercial and Political Atlas in London in 1786. It contained 43 time-series plots and one bar chart, a form apparently introduced in this work. It has been described as the first major work to contain statistical graphs. Playfair's Statistical Breviary, published in London in 1801, contains what is generally credited as the first pie chart.   === Playfair cycle === The following quotation, known as the "Playfair cycle," has achieved notoriety as it pertains to the "Tytler cycle":  :...wealth and power have never been long permanent in any place. ...they travel over the face of the earth, something like a caravan of merchants. On their arrival, every thing is found green and fresh; while they remain all is bustle and abundance, and, when gone, all is left trampled down, barren, and bare.   == Works == 1785. The Increase of Manufactures, Commerce, and Finance, with the Extension of Civil Liberty, Proposed in Regulations for the Interest of Money. London: G.J. & J. Robinson. 1786. The Commercial and Political Atlas: Representing, by Means of Stained Copper-Plate Charts, the Progress of the Commerce, Revenues, Expenditure and Debts of England during the Whole of the Eighteenth Century. 1787. Joseph and Benjamin, a Conversation Translated from a French Manuscript. London: J. Murray. 1793. Thoughts on the Present State of French Politics, and the Necessity and Policy of Diminishing France, for Her Internal Peace, and to Secure the Tranquillity of Europe. London: J. Stockdale. 1793. A general view of the actual force and resources of France, in January, M. DCC. XCIII: to which is added, a table, shewing the depreciation of assignats, arising from their increase in quantity. J. Stockdale. 1796. The History of Jacobinism, Its Crimes, Cruelties and Perfidies: Comprimising an Inquiry into the Manner of Disseminating, under the Appearance of Philosophy and Virtue, Principles which are Equally Subversive of Order, Virtue, Religion, Liberty and Happiness. Vol. I.. Philadelphia: W. Cobbett. 1796. For the Use of the Enemies of England, a Real Statement of the Finances and Resources of Great Britain 1798. Lineal arithmetic, Applied to Shew the Progress of the Commerce and Revenue of England During the Present Century. A. Paris. 1799. Stricture on the Asiatic Establishments of Great Britain, With a View to an Enquiry into the True Interests of the East India Company. Bunney & Gold. 1801. Statistical Breviary; Shewing, on a Principle Entirely New, the Resources of Every State and Kingdom in Europe. London: Wallis. 1805. An Inquiry into the Permanent Causes of the Decline and Fall of Powerful and Wealthy Nations. London: Greenland & Norris. 1805. European commerce, shewing new and secure channels of trade with the continent of Europe... 1805. Statistical Account of the United States of America by D. F. Donnant. London: J. Whiting. William Playfair, Trans. 1807. European Commerce, Shewing New and Secure Channels of Trade with the Continent of Europe. Vol. I.. Philadelphia: J. Humphreys. 1808. Inevitable Consequences of a Reform in Parliament 1809. A Fair and Candid Address to the Nobility and Baronets of the United Kingdom; Accompanied with Illustrations and Proofs of the Advantage of Hereditary Rank and Title in a Free Country 1811. British Family Antiquity: Index to the 9 Volumes of William Playfair's Family Antiquity of the British Nobility 1813. Outlines of a Plan for a New and Solid Balance of Power in Europe. J. Stockdale. 1814. Political Portraits in This New Æra, Vol. II . London: C. Chapple. 1816. Supplementary Volume to Political Portraits in This New Æra. London: C. Chapple. 1818. The History of England, from the Revolution in 1688 to the Death of George II. Vol. II. R. Scholey. 1819. France as it Is, Not Lady Morgan's France, Vol. I. London: C. Chapple. 1820. France as it Is, Not Lady Morgan's France, Vol. II. London: C. Chapple.   == References ==   == External links == Playfair, William (1759–1823) at oxforddnb.com William PLAYFAIR b. 22 September 1759 - d. 11 February 1823 at statprob.com "Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen" Works by William Playfair at Project Gutenberg Works by or about William Playfair at Internet Archive

Yuan-Shih Chow (Chinese: 周元燊, Pinyin: Zhōu Yuánshēn) (1924-), also known as Y.S.Chow or Zhou Yuanshen, is a Chinese American probabilist. Currently he is Professor Emeritus, Columbia University, USA. He is the former director-general of the Institute of Mathematics, Academia Sinica, and the director of the Center of Applied Statistics, Nankai University (Tianjin). He is an academician of the Academia Sinica.   == Life == Chow was born in Zhouwan Village, Zhangnan County, Xiangfan, Hubei Province on Sep 1, 1924. He entered the (National) Hechuan No.2 Meddile School (合川国立二中). But because of the Japanese invasion, he left his hometown and finished his high school education in Chongqing - the capital of China during the Second Sino-Japanese War. He became a student of the Department of Mathematics, National Chekiang University (Zhejiang University) and he was a student of Su Buqing. About 1949, he went to Taiwan and taught Mathematics at the National Taiwan University in Taipei. Jul, 1954, followed the advice from Chung Tao Yang, Chow went to USA. He entered the University of Illinois and studied under the guidance from Joseph Leo Doob. 1958, He received his PhD. He became a staff at the IBM Watson Research Laboratory, later at Columbia University till 1962. 1962–1968, He served for the Statistics Department, Purdue University. 1968–1993, he was the Professor of Mathematical Statistics, Columbia University. He was also a visiting professor at different universities including the University of California at Berkeley, the National Central University in Taiwan, the University of Heidelberg in Germany. Now he is Professor Emeritus, Columbia University.   == Membership == Fellow, Institute of Mathematical Statistics (1966 election)  Fellow, International Statistical Institute (1980 election) Academician, Academia Sinica (1974 election)    == Books by him == Probability Theory: Independence, Interchangeability, Martingales, (with Henry Teicher), Springer Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-40607-7  The Theory of Optimal Stopping, with Herbert Robbins and David Siegmund, 1971    == References ==   == External links == A Conversation with Yuan Shih Chow, abstract (English) A Conversation with Yuan Shih Chow pdf pdf version, full biography including photos, by Zhiliang Ying and Cun-Hui Zhang(English) Archive at Harvard University (English) Chow's biography from the website of East China Normal University(Chinese) Chow's résumé (Chinese)

Yuri Vladimirovich Linnik (Russian: Ю́рий Влади́мирович Ли́нник; January 8, 1915 – June 30, 1972) was a Soviet mathematician active in number theory, probability theory and mathematical statistics. Linnik was born in Bila Tserkva, in present-day Ukraine. He went to St Petersburg University where his supervisor was Vladimir Tartakovski, and later worked at that university and the Steklov Institute. He was a member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, as was his father, Vladimir Pavlovich Linnik. He was awarded both State and Lenin Prizes. He died in Leningrad.   == Work in number theory == Linnik's theorem in analytic number theory The dispersion method (which allowed him to solve the Titchmarsh problem). The large sieve (which turned out to be extremely influential). An elementary proof of the Hilbert-Waring theorem; see also Schnirelmann density. The Linnik ergodic method, see Linnik (1968), which allowed him to study the distribution properties of the representations of integers by integral ternary quadratic forms.   == Work in probability theory and statistics ==   === Infinitely divisible distributions === Linnik obtained numerous results concerning infinitely divisible distributions. In particular, he proved the following generalisation of Cramér's theorem: any divisor of a convolution of Gaussian and Poisson random variables is also a convolution of Gaussian and Poisson. He has also coauthored the book Linnik & Ostrovskii (1977) on the arithmetics of infinitely divisible distributions.   === Central limit theorem === Linnik zones (zones of asymptotic normality) Information-theoretic proof of the central limit theorem   === Statistics === Behrens–Fisher problem   == Selected publications == Linnik, Yu.V. (1971), Independent and stationary sequences of random variables, Series of Monographs and Textbooks on Pure and Applied Mathematics, Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff Publishing  Linnik, Yu.V. (1961), Method of least squares and principles of the theory of observations, New York-Oxford-London-Paris: Pergamon Press, MR 0124121  Linnik, Yu.V.; Ostrovskii, I.V. (1977), Decomposition of random variables and vectors, Translations of Mathematical Monographs 48, Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society  Linnik, Yu.V. (1968), Ergodic properties of algebraic fields, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete 45, New York: Springer-Verlag New York Inc.    == Notes ==   == External links == Yuri Linnik at the Mathematics Genealogy Project O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Yuri Linnik", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Acta Arithmetica: Linnik memorial issue (1975) List of books by Linnik provided by National Library of Australia

