Abraham Robinson (born Robinsohn; October 6, 1918 – April 11, 1974) was a mathematician who is most widely known for development of non-standard analysis, a mathematically rigorous system whereby infinitesimal and infinite numbers were reincorporated into modern mathematics. Nearly half of Robinson's papers were in Applied mathematics rather than in Pure mathematics (according to MacTutor).   == Biography == He was born to a Jewish family with strong Zionist beliefs, in Waldenburg, Germany, which is now Wałbrzych, in Poland. In 1933, he emigrated to British Mandate of Palestine, where he earned a first degree from the Hebrew University. Robinson was in France when the Nazis invaded during World War II, and escaped by train and on foot, being alternately questioned by French soldiers suspicious of his German passport and asked by them to share his map, which was more detailed than theirs. While in London, he joined the Free French Air Force and contributed to the war effort by teaching himself aerodynamics and becoming an expert on the airfoils used in the wings of fighter planes. After the war, Robinson worked in London, Toronto, and Jerusalem, but ended up at University of California, Los Angeles in 1962.   == Work in model theory == He became known for his approach of using the methods of mathematical logic to attack problems in analysis and abstract algebra. He "introduced many of the fundamental notions of model theory". Using these methods, he found a way of using formal logic to show that there are self-consistent nonstandard models of the real number system that include infinite and infinitesimal numbers. Others, such as Wilhelmus Luxemburg, showed that the same results could be achieved using ultrafilters, which made Robinson's work more accessible to mathematicians who lacked training in formal logic. Robinson's book Non-standard Analysis was published in 1966. Robinson was strongly interested in the history and philosophy of mathematics, and often remarked that he wanted to get inside the head of Leibniz, the first mathematician to attempt to articulate clearly the concept of infinitesimal numbers. While at UCLA his colleagues remember him as working hard to accommodate PhD students of all levels of ability by finding them projects of the appropriate difficulty. He was courted by Yale, and after some initial reluctance, he moved there in 1967. He died of pancreatic cancer in 1974.   == Notes ==   == Publications == Robinson, Abraham (1963), Introduction to model theory and to the metamathematics of algebra, Amsterdam: North-Holland, ISBN 978-0-7204-2222-1, MR 0153570  Robinson, Abraham (1977) [1956], Keisler, H. Jerome, ed., Complete theories, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics (2nd ed.), Amsterdam: North-Holland, ISBN 978-0-7204-0690-0, MR 0472504  Robinson, Abraham (1979), Keisler, H. Jerome, ed., Selected papers of Abraham Robinson. Vol. I Model theory and algebra, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-02071-7, MR 533887  Robinson, Abraham (1979), Luxemburg, W. A. J.; Körner, S., eds., Selected papers of Abraham Robinson. Vol. II Nonstandard analysis and philosophy, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-02072-4, MR 533888  Robinson, Abraham (1979), Young, A. D., ed., Selected papers of Abraham Robinson. Vol. III Aeronautics, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-02073-1, MR 533889  Robinson, Abraham (1996) [1966], Non-standard analysis, Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics (2nd ed.), Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-04490-3, MR 0205854    == See also == Influence of non-standard analysis   == References == J. W. Dauben, Abraham Robinson: The Creation of Nonstandard Analysis, A Personal and Mathematical Odyssey, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Abraham Robinson", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Abraham Robinson at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Abraham Robinson — Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences



Adolf Lindenbaum (June 12, 1904 in Warsaw, Kingdom of Poland, Russian Empire (now Poland) – 1941 in Paneriai), was a Polish logician and mathematician. He was a student of Wacław Sierpiński, became a distinguished author of works on set theory and had served as an Assistant Professor at Warsaw University. He was killed by the Nazis in Paneriai (Ponary), near Vilnius. Among his most famous works are the Lindenbaum's lemma and Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra.   == References == Page on Sierpinski, contains fragments of his memoirs mentioning the murder of Lindenbaum An entry about Lindenbaum written by Edward Marczewski and Andrzej Mostowski, Polski słownik biograficzny, Tom XVII, p. 364–365 An Open Access article on Lindenbaum′s life and works in Logica Universalis, Volume 8, Issue 3–4 (December 2014), pp 285–320



Alan Richard Bundy, CBE, FRS, FREng, FRSE, FBCS, FAAAI, FECCAI, FAISB, is a professor at the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh, known for his contributions to automated reasoning, especially to proof-planning, the use of meta-level reasoning to guide proof search.   == Education == Alan Bundy was educated as a Mathematician, obtaining an honours degree in Mathematics in 1968 from the University of Leicester and a PhD in Mathematical Logic in 1971, also from Leicester.   == Career == Since 1971, Bundy has been at the University of Edinburgh: initially in the 'Metamathematics' Unit, which in 1972 became the Department of Computational Logic, in 1974 was absorbed into the new Department of Artificial Intelligence and in 1998 was absorbed into the new School of Informatics. From 1971–73, he was a research fellow on Prof. B. Meltzer's SERC grant Theorem Proving by Computer; in 1973 he became a university lecturer; in 1984 he was promoted to reader; in 1987 he was promoted to professorial fellow; and in 1990 he was promoted to professor. From 1987–92 he held an Science and Engineering Research Council Senior Fellowship. From 1998–2001 he was Head of the newly formed of Division (subsequently School) of Informatics at Edinburgh. From 2000–2005 he was a founder and convener of the UK Computing Research Committee, which plays an advocacy role for computing research in the UK. From 2010 he is a Vice-President and Trustee of the British Computer Society with special responsibility for the Academy of Computing. Bundy is the leader of the Mathematical Reasoning Group at Edinburgh.   == Honours and awards == Bundy was elected a founding Fellow of AAAI in 1990, a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1996, a founding fellow of AISB in 1997, a founding fellow of ECCAI in 1999, a fellow of the British Computer Society in 2004, and a Fellow of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 2005. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 2008. He was elected to ACM Fellow (2014) "For contributions to artificial intelligence, automated reasoning, and the formation and evolution of representations.". He is the winner of the 2007 IJCAI Award for Research Excellence and Herbrand Award for Distinguished Contributions to Automated Deduction. He was one of the 41 professors selected worldwide to receive one of the HP Labs Innovation Research Awards 2008. Bundy was appointed CBE in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to computing science. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2012, his certificate of election reads   == References ==

Alan Ross Anderson (1925–1973) was an American logician and professor of philosophy at Yale University and the University of Pittsburgh. A frequent collaborator with Nuel Belnap, Anderson was instrumental in the development of relevance logic and deontic logic. Anderson died of cancer in 1973.   == Relevance logic == Anderson believed that the conclusion of a valid inference ought to have something to do with (i.e. be relevant to) the premises. Formally, he captured this "relevance condition" with the principle that A entails B only if A and B share at least one non-logical constant. As simple as this idea appears, implementing it in a formal system requires a radical departure from the semantics of classical logic. Anderson and Belnap (with contributions from J. Michael Dunn, Kit Fine, Alasdair Urquhart, Robert K. Meyer, Anil Gupta (logician), and others) explored the formal consequences of the relevance condition in great detail in their influential Entailment books (see references below), which are the most frequently cited works in the field of relevance logic. Anderson and Belnap were quick to observe that the concept of relevance had been central to logic since Aristotle, but had been unduly neglected since Gottlob Frege and George Boole laid the foundations for what would come to be known, somewhat ironically, as "classical" logic. (For an example of classical logic's failure to satisfy the relevance condition, see the article on the principle of explosion.)   == Deontic logic == Anderson advocated the view that sentences of the form "It ought to be (the case) that A" should be interpreted logically as: Not-A entails v, where v means something like a norm has been violated. He developed systems of deontic relevance logic containing a special constant v (notation varies) for this purpose. Such systems have sometimes been characterized as "reductions" of deontic logic to alethic modal logic. This is misleading at best, however, since alethic modal logics generally do not contain anything like Anderson's special v constant.   == Philosophy of logic == Anderson was known for being a Platonist (or realist, or monist) about logic; he believed in "The One True Logic," and he believed that it was a relevance logic.   == Resources == Anderson, A. R. 1967. Some nasty problems in the formal logic of ethics. Nous I(4): 345-60. Anderson, A. R. and Belnap, N. D. 1975. Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and Necessity. Vol. 1. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Anderson, A. R., Belnap, N. D., and Dunn, J. M. 1992. Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and Necessity. Vol. 2. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-07339-2 Mares, E. D. 1992. Andersonian deontic logic. Theoria 58: 3-20.

Alan Mathison Turing, OBE, FRS (/ˈtjʊərɪŋ/; 23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954) was a British pioneering computer scientist, mathematician, logician, cryptanalyst and theoretical biologist. He was highly influential in the development of computer science, providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine, which can be considered a model of a general purpose computer. Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence. During the Second World War, Turing worked for the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS) at Bletchley Park, Britain's codebreaking centre. For a time he led Hut 8, the section responsible for German naval cryptanalysis. He devised a number of techniques for breaking German ciphers, including improvements to the pre-war Polish bombe method and an electromechanical machine that could find settings for the Enigma machine. Turing played a pivotal role in cracking intercepted coded messages that enabled the Allies to defeat the Nazis in many crucial engagements, including the Battle of the Atlantic; it has been estimated that this work shortened the war in Europe by as many as two to four years. After the war, he worked at the National Physical Laboratory, where he designed the ACE, among the first designs for a stored-program computer. In 1948 Turing joined Max Newman's Computing Laboratory at the University of Manchester, where he helped develop the Manchester computers and became interested in mathematical biology. He wrote a paper on the chemical basis of morphogenesis, and predicted oscillating chemical reactions such as the Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction, first observed in the 1960s. Turing was prosecuted in 1952 for homosexual acts, when such behaviour was still a criminal act in the UK. He accepted treatment with oestrogen injections (chemical castration) as an alternative to prison. Turing died in 1954, 16 days before his 42nd birthday, from cyanide poisoning. An inquest determined his death as suicide, but it has been noted that the known evidence is equally consistent with accidental poisoning. In 2009, following an Internet campaign, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown made an official public apology on behalf of the British government for "the appalling way he was treated". Queen Elizabeth II granted him a posthumous pardon in 2013.   == Early life and familyEdit == Turing was born in Maida Vale, London, while his father, Julius Mathison Turing (1873–1947), was on leave from his position with the Indian Civil Service (ICS) at Chhatrapur, Bihar and Orissa Province, in British India. Turing's father was the son of a clergyman, the Rev. John Robert Turing, from a Scottish family of merchants which had been based in the Netherlands and included a baronet. Turing's mother, Julius' wife, was Ethel Sara (née Stoney; 1881–1976), daughter of Edward Waller Stoney, chief engineer of the Madras Railways. The Stoneys were a Protestant Anglo-Irish gentry family from both County Tipperary and County Longford, while Ethel herself had spent much of her childhood in County Clare. Julius' work with the ICS brought the family to British India, where his grandfather had been a general in the Bengal Army. However, both Julius and Ethel wanted their children to be brought up in Britain, so they moved to Maida Vale, London, where Turing was born on 23 June 1912, as recorded by a blue plaque on the outside of the house of his birth, later the Colonnade Hotel. He had an elder brother, John (the father of Sir John Dermot Turing, 12th Baronet of the Turing baronets). Turing's father's civil service commission was still active and during Turing's childhood years Turing's parents travelled between Hastings in England and India, leaving their two sons to stay with a retired Army couple. At Hastings, Turing stayed at Baston Lodge, Upper Maze Hill, St Leonards-on-Sea, now marked with a blue plaque. Very early in life, Turing showed signs of the genius that he was later to display prominently. His parents purchased a house in Guildford in 1927, and Turing lived there during school holidays. The location is also marked with a blue plaque.   == EducationEdit ==   === SchoolEdit === Turing's parents enrolled him at St Michael's, a day school at 20 Charles Road, St Leonards-on-Sea, at the age of six. The headmistress recognised his talent early on, as did many of his subsequent educators. In 1926, at the age of 13, he went on to Sherborne School, an independent school in the market town of Sherborne in Dorset. The first day of term coincided with the 1926 General Strike in Britain, but he was so determined to attend that he rode his bicycle unaccompanied more than 60 miles (97 km) from Southampton to Sherborne, stopping overnight at an inn. Turing's natural inclination towards mathematics and science did not earn him respect from some of the teachers at Sherborne, whose definition of education placed more emphasis on the classics. His headmaster wrote to his parents: "I hope he will not fall between two stools. If he is to stay at public school, he must aim at becoming educated. If he is to be solely a Scientific Specialist, he is wasting his time at a public school". Despite this, Turing continued to show remarkable ability in the studies he loved, solving advanced problems in 1927 without having studied even elementary calculus. In 1928, aged 16, Turing encountered Albert Einstein's work; not only did he grasp it, but it is possible that he managed to deduce Einstein's questioning of Newton's laws of motion from a text in which this was never made explicit. At Sherborne, Turing formed a significant friendship with fellow pupil Christopher Morcom, who has been described as Turing's "first love". Their relationship provided inspiration in Turing's future endeavours, but it was cut short by Morcom's death, in February 1930, from complications of bovine tuberculosis, contracted after drinking infected cow's milk some years previously. The event caused Turing great sorrow. He coped with his grief by working that much harder on the topics of science and mathematics that he had shared with Morcom. In a letter to Morcom's mother Turing said:  I am sure I could not have found anywhere another companion so brilliant and yet so charming and unconceited. I regarded my interest in my work, and in such things as astronomy (to which he introduced me) as something to be shared with him and I think he felt a little the same about me ... I know I must put as much energy if not as much interest into my work as if he were alive, because that is what he would like me to do.  Some have speculated that Morcom's death was the cause of Turing's atheism and materialism, but this seems unlikely. Apparently, at this point in his life he still believed in such concepts as a spirit, independent of the body and surviving death. In a later letter, also written to Morcom's mother, Turing said:  Personally, I believe that spirit is really eternally connected with matter but certainly not by the same kind of body ... as regards the actual connection between spirit and body I consider that the body [can] hold on to a 'spirit', whilst the body is alive and awake the two are firmly connected. When the body is asleep I cannot guess what happens but when the body dies, the 'mechanism' of the body, holding the spirit is gone and the spirit finds a new body sooner or later, perhaps immediately.   === University and work on computabilityEdit === After Sherborne, Turing studied as an undergraduate from 1931 to 1934 at King's College, Cambridge, whence he gained first-class honours in mathematics. In 1935, at the age of 22, he was elected a fellow of King's on the strength of a dissertation in which he proved the central limit theorem, despite the fact that the committee had failed to identify that it had already been proven, in 1922, by Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg. In 1928, German mathematician David Hilbert had called attention to the Entscheidungsproblem (decision problem). In his paper "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem" (submitted on 28 May 1936 and delivered 12 November), Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing Gödel's universal arithmetic-based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines. He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm. He went on to prove that there was no solution to the Entscheidungsproblem by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: in general, it is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt.  Although Turing's proof was published shortly after Alonzo Church's equivalent proof using his lambda calculus, Turing's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive than Church's. It also included a notion of a 'Universal Machine' (now known as a universal Turing machine), with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other computation machine (as indeed could Church's lambda calculus). According to the Church–Turing thesis, Turing machines and the lambda calculus are capable of computing anything that is computable. John von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to Turing's paper. To this day, Turing machines are a central object of study in theory of computation. From September 1936 to July 1938, Turing spent most of his time studying under Church at Princeton University. In addition to his purely mathematical work, he studied cryptology and also built three of four stages of an electro-mechanical binary multiplier. In June 1938, he obtained his PhD from Princeton; his dissertation, Systems of Logic Based on Ordinals, introduced the concept of ordinal logic and the notion of relative computing, where Turing machines are augmented with so-called oracles, allowing a study of problems that cannot be solved by a Turing machine. When Turing returned to Cambridge, he attended lectures given in 1939 by Ludwig Wittgenstein about the foundations of mathematics. Remarkably, the lectures have been reconstructed verbatim, including interjections from Turing and other students, from students' notes. Turing and Wittgenstein argued and disagreed, with Turing defending formalism and Wittgenstein propounding his view that mathematics does not discover any absolute truths but rather invents them.   == CryptanalysisEdit == During the Second World War, Turing was a leading participant in the breaking of German ciphers at Bletchley Park. The historian and wartime codebreaker Asa Briggs has said, "You needed exceptional talent, you needed genius at Bletchley and Turing's was that genius." From September 1938, Turing had been working part-time with the GC&CS, the British code breaking organisation. He concentrated on cryptanalysis of the Enigma, with Dilly Knox, a senior GC&CS codebreaker. Soon after the July 1939 Warsaw meeting at which the Polish Cipher Bureau had provided the British and French with the details of the wiring of Enigma rotors and their method of decrypting Enigma code messages, Turing and Knox started to work on a less fragile approach to the problem. The Polish method relied on an insecure indicator procedure that the Germans were likely to change, which they did in May 1940. Turing's approach was more general, using crib-based decryption for which he produced the functional specification of the bombe (an improvement of the Polish Bomba).  On 4 September 1939, the day after the UK declared war on Germany, Turing reported to Bletchley Park, the wartime station of GC&CS. Specifying the bombe was the first of five major cryptanalytical advances that Turing made during the war. The others were: deducing the indicator procedure used by the German navy; developing a statistical procedure for making much more efficient use of the bombes dubbed Banburismus; developing a procedure for working out the cam settings of the wheels of the Lorenz SZ 40/42 (Tunny) dubbed Turingery and, towards the end of the war, the development of a portable secure voice scrambler at Hanslope Park that was codenamed Delilah. By using statistical techniques to optimise the trial of different possibilities in the code breaking process, Turing made an innovative contribution to the subject. He wrote two papers discussing mathematical approaches which were entitled The Applications of Probability to Cryptography and Paper on Statistics of Repetitions, which were of such value to GC&CS and its successor GCHQ that they were not released to the UK National Archives until April 2012, shortly before the centenary of his birth. A GCHQ mathematician said at the time that the fact that the contents had been restricted for some 70 years demonstrated their importance. Turing had something of a reputation for eccentricity at Bletchley Park. He was known to his colleagues as 'Prof' and his treatise on Enigma was known as 'The Prof's Book'. Jack Good, a cryptanalyst who worked with him, is quoted by Ronald Lewin as having said of Turing:  In the first week of June each year he would get a bad attack of hay fever, and he would cycle to the office wearing a service gas mask to keep the pollen off. His bicycle had a fault: the chain would come off at regular intervals. Instead of having it mended he would count the number of times the pedals went round and would get off the bicycle in time to adjust the chain by hand. Another of his eccentricities is that he chained his mug to the radiator pipes to prevent it being stolen.  While working at Bletchley, Turing, who was a talented long-distance runner, occasionally ran the 40 miles (64 km) to London when he was needed for high-level meetings, and he was capable of world-class marathon standards. Turing tried out for the 1948 British Olympic team, hampered by an injury. His tryout time for the marathon was only 11 minutes slower than British silver medalist Thomas Richards' Olympic race time of 2 hours 35 minutes. He was Walton Athletic Club's best runner, a fact discovered when he passed the group while running alone. In 1945, Turing was awarded the OBE by King George VI for his wartime services, but his work remained secret for many years.   === BombeEdit === Within weeks of arriving at Bletchley Park, Turing had specified an electromechanical machine that could help break Enigma more effectively than the Polish bomba kryptologiczna, from which its name was derived. The bombe, with an enhancement suggested by mathematician Gordon Welchman, became one of the primary tools, and the major automated one, used to attack Enigma-enciphered messages. Jack Good opined:  Turing's most important contribution, I think, was of part of the design of the bombe, the cryptanalytic machine. He had the idea that you could use, in effect, a theorem in logic which sounds, to the untrained ear, rather absurd; namely that, from a contradiction, you can deduce everything.  The bombe searched for possible correct settings used for an Enigma message (i.e., rotor order, rotor settings and plugboard settings), using a suitable crib: a fragment of probable plaintext. For each possible setting of the rotors (which had on the order of 1019 states, or 1022 states for the four-rotor U-boat variant), the bombe performed a chain of logical deductions based on the crib, implemented electrically. The bombe detected when a contradiction had occurred, and ruled out that setting, moving on to the next. Most of the possible settings would cause contradictions and be discarded, leaving only a few to be investigated in detail. The first bombe was installed on 18 March 1940. By late 1941, Turing and his fellow cryptanalysts Gordon Welchman, Hugh Alexander, and Stuart Milner-Barry were frustrated. Building on the work of the Poles, they had set up a good working system for decrypting Enigma signals but they only had a few people and a few bombes so they did not have time to translate all the signals. In the summer they had had considerable success and shipping losses had fallen to under 100,000 tons a month but they were still on a knife-edge. They badly needed more resources to keep abreast of German adjustments. They had tried to get more people and fund more bombes through the proper channels but they were getting nowhere. Finally, breaking all the rules, on 28 October they wrote directly to Winston Churchill spelling out their difficulties, with Turing as the first named. They emphasised how small their need was compared with the vast expenditure of men and money by the forces and compared with the level of assistance they could offer to the forces. As Andrew Hodges, biographer of Turing, later wrote, "This letter had an electric effect." Churchill wrote a memo to General Ismay which read: "ACTION THIS DAY. Make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done." On 18 November, the chief of the secret service reported that every possible measure was being taken. The cryptographers at Bletchley Park did not know of the prime minister's response, but as Milner-Barry later recalled, "All that we did notice was that almost from that day the rough ways began miraculously to be made smooth." More than two hundred bombes were in operation by the end of the war.   === Hut 8 and Naval EnigmaEdit ===  Turing decided to tackle the particularly difficult problem of German naval Enigma "because no one else was doing anything about it and I could have it to myself". In December 1939, Turing solved the essential part of the naval indicator system, which was more complex than the indicator systems used by the other services. That same night he also conceived of the idea of Banburismus, a sequential statistical technique (what Abraham Wald later called sequential analysis) to assist in breaking naval Enigma, "though I was not sure that it would work in practice, and was not, in fact, sure until some days had actually broken."  For this, he invented a measure of weight of evidence that he called the ban. Banburismus could rule out certain sequences of the Enigma rotors, substantially reducing the time needed to test settings on the bombes. In 1941, Turing proposed marriage to Hut 8 colleague Joan Clarke, a fellow mathematician and cryptanalyst, but their engagement was short-lived. After admitting his homosexuality to his fiancée, who was reportedly "unfazed" by the revelation, Turing decided that he could not go through with the marriage.  Turing travelled to the United States in November 1942 and worked with US Navy cryptanalysts on naval Enigma and bombe construction in Washington; he also visited their Computing Machine Laboratory in Dayton, Ohio. His reaction to the American bombe design was far from enthusiastic:  It seems a pity for them to go out of their way to build a machine to do all this stopping if it is not necessary. I am now converted to the extent of thinking that, starting from scratch on the design of a bombe, this method is about as good as our own. The American bombe program was to produce 336 bombes, one for each wheel order. I used to smile inwardly at the conception of test (of commutators) can hardly be considered conclusive, as they were not testing for the bounce with electronic stop finding devices.  During this trip, he also assisted at Bell Labs with the development of secure speech devices. He returned to Bletchley Park in March 1943. During his absence, Hugh Alexander had officially assumed the position of head of Hut 8, although Alexander had been de facto head for some time (Turing had little interest in the day-to-day running of the section). Turing became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at Bletchley Park. Alexander wrote as follows about his contribution:  There should be no question in anyone's mind that Turing's work was the biggest factor in Hut 8's success. In the early days, he was the only cryptographer who thought the problem worth tackling and not only was he primarily responsible for the main theoretical work within the Hut, but he also shared with Welchman and Keen the chief credit for the invention of the bombe. It is always difficult to say that anyone is 'absolutely indispensable', but if anyone was indispensable to Hut 8, it was Turing. The pioneer's work always tends to be forgotten when experience and routine later make everything seem easy and many of us in Hut 8 felt that the magnitude of Turing's contribution was never fully realised by the outside world.   === TuringeryEdit === In July 1942, Turing devised a technique termed Turingery (or jokingly Turingismus) for use against the Lorenz cipher messages produced by the Germans' new Geheimschreiber (secret writer) machine. This was a teleprinter rotor cipher attachment codenamed Tunny at Bletchley Park. Turingery was a method of wheel-breaking, i.e., a procedure for working out the cam settings of Tunny's wheels. He also introduced the Tunny team to Tommy Flowers who, under the guidance of Max Newman, went on to build the Colossus computer, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer, which replaced a simpler prior machine (the Heath Robinson), and whose superior speed allowed the statistical decryption techniques to be applied usefully to the messages. Some have mistakenly said that Turing was a key figure in the design of the Colossus computer. Turingery and the statistical approach of Banburismus undoubtedly fed into the thinking about cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher, but he was not directly involved in the Colossus development.   === DelilahEdit === Following his work at Bell Labs in the US, Turing pursued the idea of electronic enciphering of speech in the telephone system, and in the latter part of the war, he moved to work for the Secret Service's Radio Security Service (later HMGCC) at Hanslope Park. There he further developed his knowledge of electronics with the assistance of engineer Donald Bayley. Together they undertook the design and construction of a portable secure voice communications machine codenamed Delilah. It was intended for different applications, lacking capability for use with long-distance radio transmissions, and in any case, Delilah was completed too late to be used during the war. Though the system worked fully, with Turing demonstrating it to officials by encrypting and decrypting a recording of a Winston Churchill speech, Delilah was not adopted for use. Turing also consulted with Bell Labs on the development of SIGSALY, a secure voice system that was used in the later years of the war.   == Early computers and the Turing testEdit ==  From 1945 to 1947, Turing lived in Hampton, London while he worked on the design of the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine) at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). He presented a paper on 19 February 1946, which was the first detailed design of a stored-program computer. Von Neumann's incomplete First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC had predated Turing's paper, but it was much less detailed and, according to John R. Womersley, Superintendent of the NPL Mathematics Division, it "contains a number of ideas which are Dr. Turing's own". Although ACE was a feasible design, the secrecy surrounding the wartime work at Bletchley Park led to delays in starting the project and he became disillusioned. In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year during which he produced a seminal work on Intelligent Machinery that was not published in his lifetime. While he was at Cambridge, the Pilot ACE was being built in his absence. It executed its first program on 10 May 1950, and a number of later computers around the world owe much to it, including the English Electric DEUCE and the American Bendix G-15. The full version of Turing's ACE was not built until after his death. According to the memoirs of the German computer pioneer Heinz Billing from the Max Planck Institute for Physics, published by Genscher, Düsseldorf, there was a meeting between Alan Turing and Konrad Zuse. It took place in Göttingen in 1947. The interrogation had the form of a colloquium. Participants were Womersley, Turing, Porter from England and a few German researchers like Zuse, Walther, and Billing. (For more details see Herbert Bruderer, Konrad Zuse und die Schweiz). In 1948 Turing was appointed Reader in the Mathematics Department at the University of Manchester. In 1949, he became Deputy Director of the Computing Laboratory there, working on software for one of the earliest stored-programme computers—the Manchester Mark 1. During this time he continued to do more abstract work in mathematics, and in "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" (Mind, October 1950), Turing addressed the problem of artificial intelligence, and proposed an experiment which became known as the Turing test, an attempt to define a standard for a machine to be called "intelligent". The idea was that a computer could be said to "think" if a human interrogator could not tell it apart, through conversation, from a human being. In the paper, Turing suggested that rather than building a programme to simulate the adult mind, it would be better rather to produce a simpler one to simulate a child's mind and then to subject it to a course of education. A reversed form of the Turing test is widely used on the Internet; the CAPTCHA test is intended to determine whether the user is a human or a computer. In 1948 Turing, working with his former undergraduate colleague, D. G. Champernowne, began writing a chess program for a computer that did not yet exist. By 1950, the programme was completed and dubbed the Turochamp. In 1952, he tried to implement it on a Ferranti Mark 1, but lacking enough power, the computer was unable to execute the programme. Instead, Turing played a game in which he simulated the computer, taking about half an hour per move. The game was recorded. The program lost to Turing's colleague Alick Glennie, although it is said that it won a game against Champernowne's wife. His Turing test was a significant, characteristically provocative and lasting contribution to the debate regarding artificial intelligence, which continues after more than half a century. He also invented the LU decomposition method in 1948, used today for solving matrix equations.   == Pattern formation and mathematical biologyEdit == Towards the end of his life, Turing turned to mathematical biology, publishing the "The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis" in 1952. He was interested in morphogenesis, the development of patterns and shapes in biological organisms. His central interest in the field was understanding Fibonacci phyllotaxis, the existence of Fibonacci numbers in plant structures. He suggested that a system of chemicals reacting with each other and diffusing across space, termed a reaction-diffusion system, could account for "the main phenomena of morphogenesis." Instability in the system of linear partial differential equations used to model the system allows for small random perturbations to homogeneous initial state to drive the development of patterns. Though published before even the structure or role of DNA was understood, Turing's work on morphogenesis remains relevant today, and is considered a seminal piece of work in mathematical biology. Experiments suggest that Turing's work can partially explain growth of "feathers, hair follicles, the branching pattern of lungs, and even the left-right asymmetry that puts the heart on the left side of the chest." In 2012, Sheh, et al. found that in mice, removal of Hox genes causes an increase in the number of digits without an increase in the overall size of the limb, suggesting that Hox genes control digit formation by tuning the wavelength of a Turing-type mechanism. Later papers, though promised, were not available until Collected Works of A. M. Turing was published in 1992.   == Conviction for indecencyEdit == In January 1952, Turing, then 39, started a relationship with Arnold Murray, a 19-year-old unemployed man. Turing had met Murray just before Christmas outside the Regal Cinema when walking down Manchester's Oxford Road and invited him to lunch. On 23 January Turing's house was burgled. Murray told Turing that the burglar was an acquaintance of his, and Turing reported the crime to the police. During the investigation he acknowledged a sexual relationship with Murray. Homosexual acts were criminal offences in the United Kingdom at that time, and both men were charged with gross indecency under Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885. Initial committal proceedings for the trial were held on 27 February during which Turing's solicitor "reserved his defence". Later, convinced by the advice of his brother and his own solicitor, Turing entered a plea of guilty. The case, Regina v. Turing and Murray, was brought to trial on 31 March 1952, when Turing was convicted and given a choice between imprisonment and probation, which would be conditional on his agreement to undergo hormonal treatment designed to reduce libido. He accepted the option of treatment via injections of stilboestrol, a synthetic oestrogen; this treatment was continued for the course of one year. The treatment rendered Turing impotent and caused gynaecomastia, fulfilling in the literal sense Turing's prediction that "no doubt I shall emerge from it all a different man, but quite who I've not found out". Murray was given a conditional discharge. Turing's conviction led to the removal of his security clearance and barred him from continuing with his cryptographic consultancy for the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the British signals intelligence agency that had evolved from GC&CS in 1946 (though he kept his academic job). He was denied entry into the United States after his conviction in 1952, but was free to visit other European countries, even though this was viewed by some as a security risk. At the time, there was acute public anxiety about homosexual entrapment of spies by Soviet agents, because of the recent exposure of the first two members of the Cambridge Five, Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, as KGB double agents. Turing was never accused of espionage, but in common with all who had worked at Bletchley Park, he was prevented by the Official Secrets Act from discussing his war work.   == DeathEdit == On 8 June 1954, Turing's housekeeper found him dead. He had died the previous day. A post-mortem examination established that the cause of death was cyanide poisoning. When his body was discovered, an apple lay half-eaten beside his bed, and although the apple was not tested for cyanide, it was speculated that this was the means by which a fatal dose was consumed. An inquest determined that he had committed suicide, and he was cremated at Woking Crematorium on 12 June 1954. Turing's ashes were scattered there, just as his father's had been.   === Alternative death theoriesEdit === Philosophy professor Jack Copeland has questioned various aspects of the coroner's historical verdict, suggesting the alternative explanation of the accidental inhalation of cyanide fumes from an apparatus for gold electroplating spoons, using potassium cyanide to dissolve the gold, which Turing had set up in his tiny spare room. Copeland notes that the autopsy findings were more consistent with inhalation than with ingestion of the poison. Turing also habitually ate an apple before bed, and it was not unusual for it to be discarded half-eaten. In addition, Turing had reportedly borne his legal setbacks and hormone treatment (which had been discontinued a year previously) "with good humour" and had shown no sign of despondency prior to his death, setting down, in fact, a list of tasks he intended to complete upon return to his office after the holiday weekend. At the time, Turing's mother believed that the ingestion was accidental, resulting from her son's careless storage of laboratory chemicals. Biographer Andrew Hodges suggests that Turing may have arranged the cyanide experiment deliberately, to give his mother some plausible deniability. Andrew Hodges, and another biographer, David Leavitt, have both suggested that Turing was re-enacting a scene from the Walt Disney film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), his favourite fairy tale, both noting that (in Leavitt's words) he took "an especially keen pleasure in the scene where the Wicked Queen immerses her apple in the poisonous brew".   == Recognition and tributesEdit == A biography published by the Royal Society shortly after Turing's death, while his wartime work was still subject to the Official Secrets Act, recorded:  Three remarkable papers written just before the war, on three diverse mathematical subjects, show the quality of the work that might have been produced if he had settled down to work on some big problem at that critical time. For his work at the Foreign Office he was awarded the OBE.  Since 1966, the Turing Award has been given annually by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) for technical or theoretical contributions to the computing community. It is widely considered to be the computing world's highest honour, equivalent to the Nobel Prize.  On 23 June 1998, on what would have been Turing's 86th birthday, his biographer, Andrew Hodges, unveiled an official English Heritage blue plaque at his birthplace and childhood home in Warrington Crescent, London, later the Colonnade Hotel. To mark the 50th anniversary of his death, a memorial plaque was unveiled on 7 June 2004 at his former residence, Hollymeade, in Wilmslow, Cheshire. On 13 March 2000, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines issued a set of postage stamps to celebrate the greatest achievements of the 20th century, one of which carries a portrait of Turing against a background of repeated 0s and 1s, and is captioned: "1937: Alan Turing's theory of digital computing". On 1 April 2003, Turing's work at Bletchley Park was named an IEEE Milestone. On 28 October 2004, a bronze statue of Alan Turing sculpted by John W. Mills was unveiled at the University of Surrey in Guildford, marking the 50th anniversary of Turing's death; it portrays him carrying his books across the campus. In 2006, Boston Pride named Turing their Honorary Grand Marshal. Turing was one of four mathematicians examined in the BBC documentary entitled Dangerous Knowledge (2008). The Princeton Alumni Weekly named Turing the second most significant alumnus in the history of Princeton University, second only to President James Madison. A 1.5-ton, life-size statue of Turing was unveiled on 19 June 2007 at Bletchley Park. Built from approximately half a million pieces of Welsh slate, it was sculpted by Stephen Kettle, having been commissioned by the American billionaire Sidney Frank. Turing has been honoured in various ways in Manchester, the city where he worked towards the end of his life. In 1994, a stretch of the A6010 road (the Manchester city intermediate ring road) was named "Alan Turing Way". A bridge carrying this road was widened, and carries the name Alan Turing Bridge. A statue of Turing was unveiled in Manchester on 23 June 2001 in Sackville Park, between the University of Manchester building on Whitworth Street and Canal Street. The memorial statue depicts the "father of Computer Science" sitting on a bench at a central position in the park. Turing is shown holding an apple. The cast bronze bench carries in relief the text 'Alan Mathison Turing 1912–1954', and the motto 'Founder of Computer Science' as it could appear if encoded by an Enigma machine: 'IEKYF ROMSI ADXUO KVKZC GUBJ'.  A plaque at the statue's feet reads 'Father of computer science, mathematician, logician, wartime codebreaker, victim of prejudice'. There is also a Bertrand Russell quotation saying 'Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty — a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture.' The sculptor buried his own old Amstrad computer under the plinth as a tribute to "the godfather of all modern computers". In 1999, Time Magazine named Turing as one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century and stated: "The fact remains that everyone who taps at a keyboard, opening a spreadsheet or a word-processing program, is working on an incarnation of a Turing machine." Turing is featured in the Neal Stephenson novel Cryptonomicon (1999). In 2002, a new building named after Alan Turing was constructed on the Malvern site of QinetiQ. It houses about 200 scientists and engineers, some of whom work on big data computing. In 2002, Turing was ranked twenty-first on the BBC nationwide poll of the 100 Greatest Britons. In 2006 British writer and mathematician Ioan James chose Turing as one of twenty people to feature in his book about famous historical figures who may have had some of the traits of Asperger syndrome. In 2010, actor/playwright Jade Esteban Estrada portrayed Turing in the solo musical, ICONS: The Lesbian and Gay History of the World, Vol. 4. In 2011, in The Guardian's "My hero" series, writer Alan Garner chose Turing as his hero and described how they had met whilst out jogging in the early 1950s. Garner remembered Turing as "funny and witty" and said that he "talked endlessly".  In 2006, Alan Turing was named with online resources as an LGBT History Month Icon.  In February 2011, Turing's papers from the Second World War were bought for the nation with an 11th-hour bid by the National Heritage Memorial Fund, allowing them to stay at Bletchley Park. The logo of Apple Inc. is often erroneously referred to as a tribute to Alan Turing, with the bite mark a reference to his death. Both the designer of the logo and the company deny that there is any homage to Turing in the design of the logo. Stephen Fry has recounted asking Steve Jobs whether the design was intentional, saying that Jobs' response was, "God, we wish it were." The Turing Rainbow Festival, held in Madurai, India in 2012 for celebrating the LGBT and Genderqueer cause, was named in honour of Alan Turing by Gopi Shankar of Srishti Madurai. Also in 2012 Turing was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people. The francophone singer-songwriter Salvatore Adamo makes a tribute to Turing with his song "Alan et la Pomme". Turing's life and work featured in a BBC children's programme about famous scientists – Absolute Genius with Dick and Dom – the episode was first broadcast on 12 March 2014. On 17 May 2014, the world's first work of public art to recognise Alan Turing as gay was commissioned in Bletchley, close by to Bletchley Park where his war-time work was carried out. The commission was announced by the owners of Milton Keynes-based LGBT venue and nightclub, Pink Punters to mark International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia. The work was unveiled at a ceremony on Turing's birthday, 23 June 2014, and is placed outside Pink Punter's alongside the busy Watling Street, the old main road to London where Turing himself would have passed by on many occasions. On 22 October 2014, Turing was inducted into the NSA Hall of Honor.   === Tributes by universities and research institutionsEdit === The computer room at King's College, Cambridge, Alan Turing's alma mater, is called the Turing Room. The Turing Room at the University of Edinburgh's School of Informatics houses a bust of Turing by Eduardo Paolozzi, and a set (No. 42/50) of his Turing prints (2000). The University of Surrey has a statue of Turing on their main piazza and one of the buildings of Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences is named after him. Istanbul Bilgi University organises an annual conference on the theory of computation called "Turing Days". The University of Texas at Austin has an honours computer science programme named the Turing Scholars. In the early 1960s Stanford University named the sole lecture room of the Polya Hall Mathematics building "Alan Turing Auditorium". One of the amphitheatres of the Computer Science department (LIFL) at the University of Lille in Northern France is named in honour of Alan M. Turing (the other amphitheatre is named after Kurt Gödel).  The Department of Computer Science at Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, the University of Buenos Aires, the Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico, Los Andes University in Bogotá, Colombia, King's College, Cambridge, Bangor University in Wales, the Universities of Ghent and Mons in Belgium, the University of Turin (Università degli Studi di Torino), the University of Puerto Rico at Humacao, Keele University and the University of Washington have computer laboratories named after Turing. The University of Manchester, the Open University, Oxford Brookes University and Aarhus University (in Aarhus, Denmark) all have buildings named after Turing. Alan Turing Road in the Surrey Research Park and the Alan Turing Way, part of the Manchester inner ring road are named after Alan Turing. Carnegie Mellon University has a granite bench, situated in the Hornbostel Mall, with the name "A. M. Turing" carved across the top, "Read" down the left leg, and "Write" down the other. The École Internationale des Sciences du Traitement de l'Information has named its third building "Turing". The University of Oregon has a bust of Turing on the side of the Deschutes Hall, the computer science building. The École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne has a road and a square named after Alan Turing (Chemin de Alan Turing and Place de Alan Turing). The Faculty of Informatics and Information Technologies Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava, Slovakia has a lecture room named "Turing Auditorium". The Paris Diderot University has a lecture room named "Amphithéâtre Turing". The Paul Sabatier University has a lecture room named "Amphithéâtre Turing" (Bâtiment U4). The Department of Computer Science at the College of Engineering, Guindy has named its lecture hall as the "Turing Hall". The Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the University of Würzburg has a lecture hall named "Turing Hörsaal". The largest conference hall at the Amsterdam Science Park is named Turingzaal. In the summer of 2014, King's College London's School of Natural and Mathematical Sciences awarded the Alan Turing Centenary Prize to "the student ... who has not only achieved outstanding academic performance, but also made a significant contribution to the life of [the department]". The University of Kent will open a brand new college, named Turing College at their Canterbury campus, to provide more than 800 new rooms to accommodate undergraduate and postgraduate students and keep up with increased demand for 'on campus living'. Other features of the new college include a hub to provide a social space for residents, study areas, office space and catering. Scientist George McVittie, an Honorary Professor at Kent from 1972 to 1988, worked with Alan Turing at Bletchley Park. The campus of the École polytechnique has a building named after Alan Turing; it is a research centre of which premises are shared by the École Polytechnique, the INRIA and Microsoft. The University of Toronto developed the Turing programming language in 1982, named after Alan Turing The Faculty of Exact Sciences at the University of Buenos Aires has a computer laboratory named after Alan Turing.   == Government apology and pardonEdit ==  In August 2009, John Graham-Cumming started a petition urging the British Government to apologise for Turing's prosecution as a homosexual. The petition received more than 30,000 signatures. Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged the petition, releasing a statement on 10 September 2009 apologising and describing the treatment of Turing as "appalling":  Thousands of people have come together to demand justice for Alan Turing and recognition of the appalling way he was treated. While Turing was dealt with under the law of the time and we can't put the clock back, his treatment was of course utterly unfair and I am pleased to have the chance to say how deeply sorry I and we all are for what happened to him ... So on behalf of the British government, and all those who live freely thanks to Alan's work I am very proud to say: we're sorry, you deserved so much better.  In December 2011, William Jones created an e-petition requesting the British Government pardon Turing for his conviction of "gross indecency":  We ask the HM Government to grant a pardon to Alan Turing for the conviction of "gross indecency". In 1952, he was convicted of "gross indecency" with another man and was forced to undergo so-called "organo-therapy" – chemical castration. Two years later, he killed himself with cyanide, aged just 41. Alan Turing was driven to a terrible despair and early death by the nation he'd done so much to save. This remains a shame on the British government and British history. A pardon can go to some way to healing this damage. It may act as an apology to many of the other gay men, not as well-known as Alan Turing, who were subjected to these laws.  The petition gathered over 37,000 signatures, but the request was discouraged by Lord McNally, who gave the following opinion in his role as the Justice Minister:  A posthumous pardon was not considered appropriate as Alan Turing was properly convicted of what at the time was a criminal offence. He would have known that his offence was against the law and that he would be prosecuted. It is tragic that Alan Turing was convicted of an offence which now seems both cruel and absurd—particularly poignant given his outstanding contribution to the war effort. However, the law at the time required a prosecution and, as such, long-standing policy has been to accept that such convictions took place and, rather than trying to alter the historical context and to put right what cannot be put right, ensure instead that we never again return to those times.  On 26 July 2012, a bill was introduced in the House of Lords to grant a statutory pardon to Turing for offences under section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, of which he was convicted on 31 March 1952. Late in the year in a letter to The Daily Telegraph, the physicist Stephen Hawking and 10 other signatories including the Astronomer Royal Lord Rees, President of the Royal Society Sir Paul Nurse, Lady Trumpington (who worked for Turing during the war) and Lord Sharkey (the bill's sponsor) called on Prime Minister David Cameron to act on the pardon request. The Government indicated it would support the bill, and it passed its third reading in the Lords in October. Before the bill could be debated in the House of Commons, the Government elected to proceed under the royal prerogative of mercy. On 24 December 2013, Queen Elizabeth II signed a pardon for Turing's conviction for gross indecency, with immediate effect. Announcing the pardon, Justice Secretary Chris Grayling said Turing deserved to be "remembered and recognised for his fantastic contribution to the war effort" and not for his later criminal conviction. The Queen officially pronounced Turing pardoned in August 2014. The Queen's action is only the fourth royal pardon granted since the conclusion of the Second World War. This case is unusual in that pardons are normally granted only when the person is technically innocent, and a request has been made by the family or other interested party. Neither condition was met in regard to Turing's conviction. In a letter to Prime Minister David Cameron after announcement of the pardon, human rights advocate Peter Tatchell criticised the decision to single out Turing due to his fame and achievements, when thousands of others convicted under the same law have not received pardons. Tatchell also called for a new investigation into Turing's death:  A new inquiry is long overdue, even if only to dispel any doubts about the true cause of his death – including speculation that he was murdered by the security services (or others). I think murder by state agents is unlikely. There is no known evidence pointing to any such act. However, it is a major failing that this possibility has never been considered or investigated.   == Centenary celebrationsEdit ==  To mark the 100th anniversary of Turing's birth, the Turing Centenary Advisory Committee (TCAC) co-ordinated the Alan Turing Year, a year-long programme of events around the world honouring Turing's life and achievements. The TCAC, chaired by S. Barry Cooper with Alan Turing's nephew Sir John Dermot Turing acting as Honorary President, worked with the University of Manchester faculty members and a broad spectrum of people from Cambridge University and Bletchley Park. On 23 June 2012, Google featured an interactive doodle where visitors had to change the instructions of a Turing Machine, so when run, the symbols on the tape would match a provided sequence, featuring "Google" in Baudot-Murray code. The Bletchley Park Trust collaborated with Winning Moves to publish an Alan Turing edition of the board game Monopoly. The game's squares and cards have been revised to tell the story of Alan Turing's life, from his birthplace in Maida Vale to Hut 8 at Bletchley Park. The game also includes a replica of an original hand-drawn board created by William Newman, son of Turing's mentor, Max Newman, which Turing played on in the 1950s. In the Philippines, the Department of Philosophy at De La Salle University-Manila hosted Turing 2012, an international conference on philosophy, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science from 27 to 28 March 2012 to commemorate the centenary birth of Turing. Madurai, India held celebrations, in conjunction with Asia's first Gay Pride festival, with a programme attended by 6,000 students.   === UK celebrationsEdit ===  There was a three-day conference in Manchester in June, a two-day conference in San Francisco, organised by the ACM, and a birthday party and Turing Centenary Conference in Cambridge organised at King's College, Cambridge and the University of Cambridge, the latter organised by the association Computability in Europe. The Science Museum in London launched a free exhibition devoted to Turing's life and achievements in June 2012, to run until July 2013. In February 2012, the Royal Mail issued a stamp featuring Turing as part of its "Britons of Distinction" series. The London 2012 Olympic Torch flame was passed on in front of Turing's statue in Sackville Gardens, Manchester, on the evening of 23 June 2012, the 100th anniversary of his birth. On 22 June 2012 Manchester City Council, in partnership with the Lesbian and Gay Foundation, launched the Alan Turing Memorial Award which will recognise individuals or groups who have made a significant contribution to the fight against homophobia in Manchester. At the University of Oxford, a new course in Computer Science and Philosophy was established to coincide with the centenary of Turing's birth. Previous events have included a celebration of Turing's life and achievements, at the University of Manchester, arranged by the British Logic Colloquium and the British Society for the History of Mathematics on 5 June 2004.   == Portrayal in adaptationsEdit ==   === TheatreEdit ===  Breaking the Code is a 1986 play by Hugh Whitemore about Alan Turing. The play ran in London's West End beginning in November 1986 and on Broadway from 15 November 1987 to 10 April 1988. There was also a 1996 BBC television production (broadcast in the United States by PBS). In all three performances Turing was played by Derek Jacobi. The Broadway production was nominated for three Tony Awards including Best Actor in a Play, Best Featured Actor in a Play, and Best Direction of a Play, and for two Drama Desk Awards, for Best Actor and Best Featured Actor. Turing was again portrayed by Jacobi in the 1996 television film adaptation of Breaking the Code. In 2012, in honour of the Turing Centennial, American Lyric Theater commissioned an operatic exploration of the life and death of Alan Turing from composer Justine F. Chen and librettist David Simpatico. Titled The Life and Death(s) of Alan Turing, the opera is a historical fantasia on the life of the brilliant scientist. The opera will receive a concert performance in October 2015 in New York City. In November 2014, the opera and several other artistic works inspired by Turing's life were featured on Studio 360.   === LiteratureEdit === The 2006 novel A Madman Dreams of Turing Machines contrasts fictionalised accounts of the lives and ideas of Turing and Kurt Gödel.   === MusicEdit === Electronic music duo Matmos released an EP titled For Alan Turing in 2006, which was based on material commissioned by Dr. Robert Osserman and David Elsenbud of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute. In one of its tracks, an original Enigma Machine is sampled. In 2012, Spanish group Hidrogenesse dedicated their LP Un dígito binario dudoso. Recital para Alan Turing (A dubious binary digit. Concert for Alan Turing) to the memory of the mathematician. A musical work inspired by Turing's life, written by Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe of the Pet Shop Boys, entitled A Man from the Future, was announced in late 2013. It was performed by the Pet Shop Boys and Juliet Stevenson (narrator), the BBC Singers, and the BBC Concert Orchestra conducted by Dominic Wheeler at the BBC Proms in the Royal Albert Hall on 23 July 2014. Codebreaker is also the title of a choral work by the composer James McCarthy. It includes settings of texts by the poets Wilfred Owen, Sara Teasdale, Walt Whitman, Oscar Wilde and Robert Burns that are used to illustrate aspects of Turing's life. It was premiered on 26 April 2014 at the Barbican Centre in London, where it was performed by the Hertfordshire Chorus, who commissioned the work, led by David Temple with the soprano soloist Naomi Harvey providing the voice of Turing's mother.   === FilmEdit === The drama-documentary Codebreaker, about Turing's life, was aired by UK's Channel 4 in November 2011 and was released in the US in October 2012. It is also known as Britain's Greatest Codebreaker. The film features Ed Stoppard as Turing and Henry Goodman as Franz Greenbaum. The historical drama film The Imitation Game, directed by Morten Tyldum and starring Benedict Cumberbatch as Turing and Keira Knightley as Joan Clarke, was released in the UK on 14 November 2014 and released theatrically in the US on 28 November 2014. It is about Alan Turing breaking the Enigma code with other codebreakers in Bletchley Park.   == Awards and honoursEdit == Turing was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1951. In addition, he has had several things named in his honour.  Good–Turing frequency estimation Turing completeness Turing degree Turing Institute Turing Lecture Turing machine examples Turing patterns Turing reduction Turing switch Unorganised machine   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit ==   === PapersEdit === List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search Alan Turing's publications indexed by Google Scholar, a service provided by Google Turing, Alan (October 1950), "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind LIX (236): 433–460, doi:10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433, ISSN 0026-4423, retrieved 2008-08-18  Oral history interview with Nicholas C. Metropolis, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Metropolis was the first director of computing services at Los Alamos National Laboratory; topics include the relationship between Alan Turing and John von Neumann   == External linksEdit == Turing family house in Coonoor, India A podcast program about Turing made by Radio Lab. Alan Turing RKBExplorer Alan Turing Year CiE 2012: Turing Centenary Conference Alan Turing site maintained by Andrew Hodges including a short biography AlanTuring.net – Turing Archive for the History of Computing by Jack Copeland The Turing Archive – contains scans of some unpublished documents and material from the King's College, Cambridge archive Jones, G. James (11 December 2001). "Alan Turing – Towards a Digital Mind: Part 1". System Toolbox (The Binary Freedom Project).  Happy 100th Birthday, Alan Turing by Stephen Wolfram. Sherborne School Archives – holds papers relating to Alan Turing's time at Sherborne School Alan Turing plaques recorded on openplaques.org Turing's treatise on Enigma (The Prof's Book) Codebreaker film, official site Turing 2012 Codebreaker choral work on YouTube

Alasdair Ian Fenton Urquhart /ˈɜrkərt/, born 20 December 1945, is an emeritus Professor of Philosophy at the University of Toronto. He has made notable contributions to the field of logic, especially non-classical logic. One of his most notable achievements is proving the undecidability of the relevance logic R. He also published numerous papers in major theoretical computer science venues, mostly on mathematical logic topics of relevance to computer science. A native of Scotland, Urquhart received his MA in Philosophy from the University of Edinburgh in 1967, and his Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh in 1973 under the supervision of Alan Ross Anderson and Nuel Belnap.   == Selected publications == "The Undecidability of Entailment and Relevant Implication." Journal of Symbolic Logic 49(4): 1059-1073 (1984). with Stephen A. Cook, "Functional Interpretations of Feasibly constructive Arithmetic", Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 1993; preliminary version at STOC'89 "The Complexity of Decision Procedures in Relevance Logic II", J. Symbolic Logic, Volume 64, Issue 4 (1999), 1774-1802.   == References ==  Curriculum vitae   == External links == home page Math genealogy DBLP publications


Alcuin of York (Latin: Alcuinus, c. 735 – 19 May 804), also called Ealhwine, Albinus or Flaccus, was an English scholar, ecclesiastic, poet and teacher from York, Northumbria. He was born around 735 and became the student of Archbishop Ecgbert at York. At the invitation of Charlemagne, he became a leading scholar and teacher at the Carolingian court, where he remained a figure in the 780s and 790s. He wrote many theological and dogmatic treatises, as well as a few grammatical works and a number of poems. He was made Abbot of Tours in 796, where he remained until his death. "The most learned man anywhere to be found", according to Einhard's Life of Charlemagne, he is considered among the most important architects of the Carolingian Renaissance. Among his pupils were many of the dominant intellectuals of the Carolingian era.   == BiographyEdit ==   === BackgroundEdit === Alcuin was born in Northumbria, presumably sometime in the 730s. Virtually nothing is known of his parents, family background, or origin. In common hagiographical fashion, the Vita Alcuini asserts that Alcuin was 'of noble English stock,' and this statement has usually been accepted by scholars. Alcuin's own work only mentions such collateral kinsmen as Wilgils, father of the missionary saint Willibrord; and Beornred, abbot of Echternach and bishop of Sens, who was more distantly related. In his Life of St Willibrord, Alcuin writes that Wilgils, called a paterfamilias, had founded an oratory and church at the mouth of the Humber, which had fallen into Alcuin's possession by inheritance. Because in early Anglo-Latin writing paterfamilias ("head of a family, householder") usually referred to a ceorl, Donald A. Bullough suggests that Alcuin's family was of cierlisc status: i.e., free but subordinate to a noble lord, and that Alcuin and other members of his family rose to prominence through beneficial connections with the aristocracy. If so, Alcuin's origins may lie in the southern part of what was formerly known as Deira.   === YorkEdit === The young Alcuin came to the cathedral church of York during the golden age of Archbishop Ecgbert and his brother, the Northumbrian King Eadberht. Ecgbert had been a disciple of the Venerable Bede, who urged him to raise York to an archbishopric. King Eadberht and Archbishop Ecgbert oversaw the re-energising and re-organisation of the English church, with an emphasis on reforming the clergy and on the tradition of learning that Bede had begun. Ecgbert was devoted to Alcuin, who thrived under his tutelage. The York school was renowned as a centre of learning in the liberal arts, literature, and science, as well as in religious matters. It was from here that Alcuin drew inspiration for the school he would lead at the Frankish court. He revived the school with the trivium and quadrivium disciplines, writing a codex on the trivium, while his student Hraban wrote one on the quadrivium. Alcuin graduated to become a teacher during the 750s. His ascendancy to the headship of the York school, the ancestor of St Peter's School, began after Aelbert became Archbishop of York in 767. Around the same time Alcuin became a deacon in the church. He was never ordained as a priest and there is no real evidence that he became an actual monk, but he lived his life as one. In 781, King Elfwald sent Alcuin to Rome to petition the Pope for official confirmation of York's status as an archbishopric and to confirm the election of the new archbishop, Eanbald I. On his way home he met Charlemagne (whom he had met once before), this time in the Italian city of Parma.   === CharlemagneEdit === Alcuin's intellectual curiosity allowed him to be reluctantly persuaded to join Charlemagne's court. He joined an illustrious group of scholars that Charlemagne had gathered around him, the mainsprings of the Carolingian Renaissance: Peter of Pisa, Paulinus of Aquileia, Rado, and Abbot Fulrad. Alcuin would later write that "the Lord was calling me to the service of King Charles." He was welcomed at the Palace School of Charlemagne in Aachen (Urbs Regale) in 782. It had been founded by the king's ancestors as a place for the education of the royal children (mostly in manners and the ways of the court). However, Charlemagne wanted to include the liberal arts and, most importantly, the study of the religion. From 782 to 790, Alcuin taught Charlemagne himself, his sons Pepin and Louis, the young men sent to be educated at court, and the young clerics attached to the palace chapel. Bringing with him from York his assistants Pyttel, Sigewulf, and Joseph, Alcuin revolutionised the educational standards of the Palace School, introducing Charlemagne to the liberal arts and creating a personalised atmosphere of scholarship and learning, to the extent that the institution came to be known as the 'school of Master Albinus'. In this role as adviser, he tackled the emperor over his policy of forcing pagans to be baptised on pain of death, arguing, "Faith is a free act of the will, not a forced act. We must appeal to the conscience, not compel it by violence. You can force people to be baptised, but you cannot force them to believe." His arguments seem to have prevailed – Charlemagne abolished the death penalty for paganism in 797. Charlemagne was a master at gathering the best men of every land in his court. He himself became far more than just the king at the centre. It seems that he made many of these men his closest friends and counsellors. They referred to him as 'David', a reference to the Biblical king David. Alcuin soon found himself on intimate terms with Charlemagne and the other men at court, where pupils and masters were known by affectionate and jesting nicknames. Alcuin himself was known as 'Albinus' or 'Flaccus'. While at Aachen, Alcuin bestowed pet names upon his pupils – derived mainly from Virgil's Eclogues.   === Return to Northumbria and back to FranciaEdit === In 790 Alcuin returned from the court of Charlemagne to England, to which he had remained attached. He dwelt there for some time, but Charlemagne then invited him back to help in the fight against the Adoptionist heresy which was at that time making great progress in Toledo, the old capital of the Visigoths and still a major city for the Christians under Islamic rule in Spain. He is believed to have had contacts with Beatus of Liébana, from the Kingdom of Asturias, who fought against Adoptionism. At the Council of Frankfurt in 794, Alcuin upheld the orthodox doctrine against the views expressed by Felix of Urgel, an heresiarch according to the Catholic Encyclopaedia. Having failed during his stay in Northumbria to influence King Æthelred in the conduct of his reign, Alcuin never returned home. He was back at Charlemagne's court by at least mid-792, writing a series of letters to Æthelred, to Hygbald, Bishop of Lindisfarne, and to Æthelhard, Archbishop of Canterbury in the succeeding months, dealing with the Viking attack on Lindisfarne in July 793. These letters and Alcuin's poem on the subject, De clade Lindisfarnensis monasterii, provide the only significant contemporary account of these events. In his description of the Viking attack, he wrote: "Never before has such terror appeared in Britain. Behold the church of St Cuthbert, splattered with the blood of God's priests, robbed of its ornaments."   === Tours and deathEdit === In 796 Alcuin was in his sixties. He hoped to be free from court duties and was given the chance upon the death of Abbot Itherius of Saint Martin at Tours, when Charlemagne put Marmoutier Abbey into Alcuin's care, with the understanding that he should be available if the king ever needed his counsel. Alcuin died on 19 May 804, some ten years before the emperor, and was buried at St. Martin's Church under an epitaph that partly read:  Dust, worms, and ashes now ... Alcuin my name, wisdom I always loved, Pray, reader, for my soul.  He was later canonised as a saint, and remains recognised within the Roman Catholic, Anglican and Eastern Orthodox traditions. The majority of details on Alcuin's life come from his letters and poems. There are also autobiographical sections in Alcuin's poem on York and in the Vita Alcuini, a Life written for him at Ferrières in the 820s, possibly based in part on the memories of Sigwulf, one of Alcuin's pupils.   == Carolingian Renaissance figure and legacyEdit ==   === MathematicianEdit ===  The collection of mathematical and logical word problems entitled Propositiones ad acuendos juvenes ("Problems to Sharpen Youths") is sometimes attributed to Alcuin. In a 799 letter to Charlemagne the scholar claimed to have sent "certain figures of arithmetic for the joy of cleverness," which some scholars have identified with the Propositiones. The text contains about 53 mathematical word problems (with solutions), in no particular pedagogical order. Among the most famous of these problems are: four that involve river crossings, including the problem of three anxious brothers, each of whom has an unmarried sister whom he cannot leave alone with either of the other men lest she be defiled (Problem 17); the problem of the wolf, goat, and cabbage (Problem 18); and the problem of "the two adults and two children where the children weigh half as much as the adults" (Problem 19). Alcuin's sequence is the solution to one of the problems of that book.   === Literary influenceEdit === Alcuin made the abbey school into a model of excellence and many students flocked to it. He had many manuscripts copied using outstandingly beautiful calligraphy, the Carolingian minuscule based on round and legible uncial letters. He wrote many letters to his English friends, to Arno, bishop of Salzburg and above all to Charlemagne. These letters (of which 311 are extant) are filled mainly with pious meditations, but they form an important source of information as to the literary and social conditions of the time and are the most reliable authority for the history of humanism during the Carolingian age. Alcuin trained the numerous monks of the abbey in piety, and it was in the midst of these pursuits that he died. Alcuin is the most prominent figure of the Carolingian Renaissance, in which three main periods have been distinguished: in the first of these, up to the arrival of Alcuin at the court, the Italians occupy a central place; in the second, Alcuin and the Anglo-Saxons are dominant; in the third (from 804), the influence of Theodulf, the Visigoth is preponderant. Alcuin also developed manuals used in his educational work – a grammar and works on rhetoric and dialectics. These are written in the form of dialogues, and in two of them the interlocutors are Charlemagne and Alcuin. He wrote several theological treatises: a De fide Trinitatis, and commentaries on the Bible. Alcuin is credited with inventing the first known question mark, though it didn't resemble the modern symbol. Alcuin transmitted to the Franks the knowledge of Latin culture which had existed in Anglo-Saxon England. A number of his works still exist. Besides some graceful epistles in the style of Venantius Fortunatus, he wrote some long poems, and notably he is the author of a history (in verse) of the church at York, Versus de patribus, regibus et sanctis Eboracensis ecclesiae.   === Use of homo-erotic languageEdit === Passages in Alcuin's writings have been seen to exhibit homosocial desire, possibly even homoerotic imagery. David Clark suggests it is not possible to determine whether Alcuin's homosocial desires were the result of an outward expression of erotic feelings. Historian John Boswell cited this as a personal outpouring of Alcuin's internalized homosexual feelings. Others agree that Alcuin at times "comes perilously close to communicating openly his same sex desires", and this reflects the erotic subculture of the Carolingian monastic school, but also perhaps a 'queer space' where "erotic attachment and affections may be safely articulated”. Erotic and religious love are intertwined in Alcuin's writings, and he frequently "eroticizes his personal relationships to his beloved friends”. Alcuin's friendships also extended to the ladies of the court, especially the queen mother and the king's daughters, though his relationships with these women never reached the intense level of those of the men around him. However, the interpretation of homosexual desire has been disputed by Allen Frantzen who identifies Alcuin's language with that of medieval Christian amicitia or friendship. Karl Liersch, in his 1880 inaugural dissertation, cites several passages from poems by Theodulf of Orleans. In these poems Theodulf reports that Alcuin had a female muse named Delia in the king's court (she was probably Charlemagne's daughter). Delia is also the addresse of several poems by Alcuin. David Dales and Rowan Williams say "the use of language drawn from the Song of Songs transforms apparently erotic language into something within Christian friendship - 'an ordained affection'." Nevertheless, despite inconclusive evidence of Alcuin's personal passions, he was clear in his own writings that the men of Sodom had been punished with fire for "sinning against nature with men". Such sins, argued Alcuin, were more serious than lustful acts with women, for which the earth was cleansed and revivified by the water of the Flood, and merit to be "withered by flames unto eternal barrenness."   == LegacyEdit == In several churches of the Anglican Communion, Alcuin is celebrated on 20 May, the first available day after the day of his death (as Dunstan is celebrated on 19 May). Alcuin College, one of the colleges of the University of York, England, is named after him.   == QuotationsEdit ==  "O quam dulcis vita fuit dum sedebamus in quieti ... inter librorum copias." 'Oh how sweet life was when we sat quietly ... midst all these books.' "potius animam curare memento, quam carnem, quoniam haec manet, illa perit." 'Remember to care for the soul more than the body, since the former remains, the latter perishes.' "Nec audiendi qui solent dicere, Vox populi, vox Dei, quum tumultuositas vulgi semper insaniae proxima sit." 'And do not listen to those who keep saying, 'The voice of the people is the voice of God.' because the tumult of the crowd is always close to madness.'   == Selected worksEdit == For a complete census of Alcuin's works, see Marie-Hélène Jullien and Françoise Perelman, eds., Clavis scriptorum latinorum medii aevi: Auctores Galliae 735–987. Tomus II: Alcuinus. Turnhout: Brepols, 1999. Poetry Carmina, ed. Ernst Dümmler, MGH Poetae Latini aevi Carolini I. Berlin: Weidmann, 1881. 160–351. Godman, Peter, tr., Poetry of the Carolingian Renaissance. Norman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1985. 118–49. Stella, Francesco, tr., comm., La poesia carolingia, Firenze: Le Lettere, 1995, pp. 94–96, 152–161, 266–267, 302–307, 364–371, 399–404, 455–457, 474–477, 503–507. Isbell, Harold, tr.. The Last Poets of Imperial Rome. Baltimore: Penguin, 1971.  Poem on York, Versus de patribus, regibus et sanctis Eboracensis ecclesiae, ed. and tr. Peter Godman, De pontificibus et sanctis Ecclesiae Eboracensis, The Bishops, Kings, and Saints of York. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982. De clade Lindisfarnensis monasterii, "On the destruction of the monastery of Lindisfarne" (Carmen 9, ed. Dümmler, pp. 229–35.) Epistolae (Letters) Of Alcuin's letters, just over 310 have survived. Epistolae, ed. Ernst Dümmler, MGH Epistolae IV.2. Berlin: Weidmann, 1895. 1–493. Jaffé, Philipp, Ernst Dümmler, and W. Wattenbach, eds. Monumenta Alcuiniana. Berlin: Weidmann, 1873. 132–897. Chase, Colin, ed. Two Alcuin Letter-books. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975. Allott, Stephen, tr. Alcuin of York, c. AD 732 to 804. His life and letters. York: William Sessions, 1974. Sturgeon, Thomas G., tr. The Letters of Alcuin: Part One, the Aachen Period (762–796). Harvard University Ph.D. Thesis, 1953.  Didactic works Ars grammatica. PL 101: 854–902. De orthographia, ed. H. Keil, Grammatici Latini VII, 1880. 295–312; ed. Sandra Bruni, Alcuino de orthographia. Florence: SISMEL, 1997. De dialectica. PL 101: 950–76. Disputatio regalis et nobilissimi juvenis Pippini cum Albino scholastico "Dialogue of Pepin, the Most Noble and Royal Youth, with the Teacher Albinus", ed. L.W. Daly and W. Suchier, Altercatio Hadriani Augusti et Epicteti Philosophi. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1939. 134–46; ed. Wilhelm Wilmanns, "Disputatio regalis et nobilissimi juvenis Pippini cum Albino scholastico." Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum 14 (1869): 530–55, 562. Disputatio de rhetorica et de virtutibus sapientissimi regis Carli et Albini magistri, ed. and tr. Wilbur Samuel Howell, The Rhetoric of Alcuin and Charlemagne. New York: Russell and Russell, 1965 (1941); ed. C. Halm, Rhetorici Latini Minores. Leipzig: Teubner, 1863. 523–50. De virtutibus et vitiis (moral treatise dedicated to Count Wido of Brittany, 799 x 800). PL 101: 613–639 (transcript available online). A new critical edition is being prepared for the Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Medievalis. De animae ratione (ad Eulaliam virginem) (written for Gundrada, Charlemagne's cousin). PL 101: 639–50. De Cursu et Saltu Lunae ac Bissexto, astronomical treatise. PL 101: 979–1002. (?) Propositiones ad acuendos iuvenes, ed. Menso Folkerts, "Die alteste mathematische Aufgabensammlung in lateinischer Sprache: Die Alkuin zugeschriebenen Propositiones ad acuendos iuvenes; Überlieferung, Inhalt, Kritische Edition," in idem, Essays on Early Medieval Mathematics: The Latin Tradition. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003. Theology Compendium in Canticum Canticorum: Alcuino, Commento al Cantico dei cantici - con i commenti anonimi Vox ecclesie e Vox antique ecclesie, ed. Rossana Guglielmetti, Firenze, SISMEL 2004 Quaestiones in Genesim. PL 100: 515–66. De Fide Sanctae Trinitatis et de Incarnatione Christi; Quaestiones de Sancta Trinitate ed. E. Knibbs & E. Ann Matter (Corpus Christianorum - Continuatio Mediaevalis 249: Brepols, 2012) Hagiography Vita II Vedastis episcopi Atrebatensis. Revision of the earlier Vita Vedastis by Jonas of Bobbio. Patrologia Latina 101: 663–82. Vita Richarii confessoris Centulensis. Revision of an earlier anonymous life. MGH Scriptores Rerum Merovingicarum 4: 381–401. Vita Willibrordi archiepiscopi Traiectensis, ed. W. Levison, Passiones vitaeque sanctorum aevi Merovingici. MGH Scriptores Rerum Merovingicarum 7: 81–141.   == See alsoEdit ==  Propositiones ad Acuendos Juvenes Carolingian art Carolingian Empire Category: Carolingian period Correctory   == NotesEdit ==   == Secondary sourcesEdit == Bullough, Donald (2003). Alcuin: Achievement and Reputation. =Leiden.    == Further readingEdit == Browne, G. F. (1908). Alcuin of York. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.  Bullough, Donald (May 2010) [2004]. "Alcuin (c.740–804)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/298.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) Frederick Lorenz. The life of Alcuin (Thomas Hurst, 1837). Murphy, Richard E., Alcuin of York: De Virtutibus et Vitiis, Virtues and Vices. ISBN 978-0-9966967-0-8 Rolph Barlow Page. The Letters of Alcuin (New York: Forest Press, 1909). E. M. Wilmot-Buxton. Alcuin (P J Kennedy, 1922). Stephen Allot. Alcuin of York, his life and letters ISBN 0-900657-21-9 Andrew Fleming West. Alcuin and the Rise of the Christian Schools (C. Sscribner's Sons, 1912) ISBN 0-8371-1635-X Eleanor Shipley Duckett. Alcuin, Friend of Charlemagne, (1951) Eleanor Shipley Duckett. Carolingian Portraits, (1962) F. L. Ganshof. The Carolingians and the Frankish Monarchy ISBN 0-582-48227-5 Brian P. McGuire. Friendship, and Community: The Monastic Experience ISBN 0-87907-895-2 Thomas Stehling. Medieval Latin Love Poems of Male Love and Friendship, Peter Godman. Poetry of the Carolingian Renaissance ISBN 0-7156-1768-0 Stella, Francesco, "Alkuins Dichtung" in Alkuin von York und die geistige Grundlegung Europas , Sankt Gallen, Verlag am Klosterhof, 2010, pp. 107 – 128. Throop, Priscilla, trans. Alcuin: His Life; On Virtues and Vices; Dialogue with Pepin (Charlotte, VT: MedievalMS, 2011) Bullough, D. A, 'Alcuin - Achievement and Reputation (Brill, 2004) Dales, Douglas J, 'Alcuin - His Life and Legacy' (James Clarke & Co., Cambridge, UK, 2012) Dales, Douglas J, 'Alcuin - Theology and Thought' (James Clarke & Co., Cambridge, UK, 2013)  Texts on Wikisource: "Alcuin". Encyclopædia Britannica 1 (11th ed.). 1911.  "Alcuin". Catholic Encyclopedia 1. 1907.  "Alcuin". The New Student's Reference Work 1. 1914.  "Alcuin or Ealhwine". A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. Wikisource. 1910  Stephen, Leslie, ed. (1885). "Alcuin". Dictionary of National Biography 1. London: Smith, Elder & Co.    == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Alcuin", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Alcuin's book, Problems for the Quickening of the Minds of the Young Introduction to Alcuin's writings by Robert Levine and Whitney Bolton The Alcuin Society Anglo-Saxon York on History of York site Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Mediaevalis: new critical editions in preparation Corpus Grammaticorum Latinorum: complete texts and full bibliography THE LIFE OF ALCUIN BY DR. FREDERICK LORENZ in BTM Format Works by or about Alcuin at Internet Archive Works by Alcuin at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Alcuin, inventor of Christianity

This is a redirect from a page that has been moved (renamed). This page was kept as a redirect to avoid breaking links, both internal and external, that may have been made to the old page name. For more information follow the bold category link.

Alexander Bain (11 June 1818 – 18 September 1903) was a Scottish philosopher and educationalist in the British school of empiricism and a prominent and innovative figure in the fields of psychology, linguistics, logic, moral philosophy and education reform. He founded Mind, the first ever journal of psychology and analytical philosophy, and was the leading figure in establishing and applying the scientific method to psychology. Bain was the inaugural Regius Chair in Logic and Professor of Logic at the University of Aberdeen, where he also held Professorships in Moral Philosophy and English Literature and was twice elected Lord Rector.   == Early life and educationEdit == Alexander Bain was born in Aberdeen to George Bain, a weaver and veteran soldier, and Margaret Paul. At age eleven he left school to work as a weaver hence the description of him as Weevir, rex philosophorum. He also took to lectures at the Mechanics' Institutes of Aberdeen and the Aberdeen Public Library. In 1836 he entered Marischal College where he came under the influence of Professor of Mathematics John Cruickshank, Professor of Chemistry Thomas Clark and Professor of Natural Philosophy William Knight. Towards the end of his undergraduate degree he became a contributor to the Westminster Review with his first article entitled "Electrotype and Daguerreotype," published in September 1840. This was the beginning of his connection with John Stuart Mill, which led to a lifelong friendship. He was awarded the Blue Ribbon and also the Gray Mathematical Bursary. His college career and studies was distinguished especially in mental philosophy, mathematics and physics and he graduated with a Master of Arts with Highest Honours. In 1841, Bain substituted for Dr. Glennie the Professor of Moral Philosophy, who, due to ill-health, was unable to discharge his academic duties. He continued to do this three successive terms, during which he continued writing for the Westminster, and also helped John Stuart Mill with the revision of the manuscript of his System of Logic (1842). In 1843 he contributed the first review of the book to the London and Westminster.   == Academic careerEdit ==  In 1845 he was appointed Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy at Anderson's University in Glasgow. A year later, preferring a wider field, he resigned the position and devoted himself to writing. In 1848 he moved to London to fill a post in the Board of Health under Sir Edwin Chadwick where he worked for social reform and became a prominent member of the intellectual circle which included George Grote and John Stuart Mill. In 1855 he published his first major work, The Senses and the Intellect, followed in 1859 by The Emotions and the Will. These treatises won him a position among independent thinkers. Bain was also Examiner in Logic and Moral Philosophy from 1857–1862 and 1864–1869 for the University of London and also an Instructor in moral science for the Indian Civil Service examinations. In 1860 he was appointed by the British Crown to the inaugural Regius Chair of Logic and the Regius Chair of English Literature at the University of Aberdeen, which was newly formed after the amalgamation of King's College, Aberdeen and Marischal College by the Scottish Universities Commission of 1858.   === LinguisticsEdit === Until 1858 neither logic nor English had received adequate attention in Aberdeen, and Bain devoted himself to supplying these deficiencies. He succeeded not only in raising the standard of education generally in the North of Scotland, but also in establishing a School of Philosophy at the University of Aberdeen, and in widely influencing the teaching of English grammar and composition in the United Kingdom. His efforts were first directed to the preparation of textbooks: Higher English Grammar and An English Grammar were both published in 1863, followed in 1866 by the Manual of Rhetoric, in 1872 by A First English Grammar, and in 1874 by the Companion to the Higher Grammar. These works were wide-ranging and their original views and methods met with wide acceptance.   === PhilosophyEdit === Bain's philosophical writings already published, especially The Senses and the Intellect to which was added in 1861 The Study of Character including an Estimate of Phrenology, were too large for effective use in the classroom. Accordingly in 1868, he published his Manual of Mental and Moral Science, mainly a condensed form of his treatises, with the doctrines re-stated, and in many instances freshly illustrated, and with many important additions. The year 1870 saw the publication of the Logic. This, too, was a work designed for the use of students; it was based on John Stuart Mill, but differed from him in many particulars, and was distinctive for its treatment of the doctrine of the conservation of energy in connection with causation and the detailed application of the principles of logic to the various sciences with a section on the classification of the all sciences. Next came two publications in the "International Scientific Series", namely, Mind and Body (1872), and Education as a Science (1879). All these works, from the Higher English Grammar downwards, were written by Bain during his twenty years as a Professor at the University of Aberdeen. He also started the philosophical journal, Mind; the first number appeared in January 1876, under the editorship of a former pupil, George Croom Robertson, of University College London. To this journal Bain contributed many important articles and discussions; and in fact he bore the whole expenses of it till Robertson, owing to ill-health, resigned the editorship in 1891 and George Stout took up the baton.   === PsychologyEdit === Although his influence as a logician and linguist in grammar and rhetoric was considerable, his reputation rests on his works in psychology. At one with the German physiologist and comparative anatomist Johannes Peter Müller in the conviction psychologus nemo nisi physiologus (one is not a psychologist who is not also a physiologist), he was the first in Great Britain during the 19th century to apply physiology in a thoroughgoing fashion to the elucidation of mental states. In discussing the will, he favoured physiological over metaphysical explanations, pointing to reflexes as evidence that a form of will, independent of consciousness, inheres in a person's limbs. He sought to chart physiological correlates of mental states but refused to make any materialistic assumptions. He was the originator of the theory of psychophysical parallelism which is used so widely as a working basis by modern psychologists. His idea of applying the scientific method of classification to psychical phenomena gave scientific character to his work, the value of which was enhanced by his methodical exposition and his command of illustration. In line with this, too, is his demand that psychology should be cleared of metaphysics; and to his lead is no doubt due in great measure the position that psychology has now acquired as a distinct positive science. Bain established psychology, as influenced by David Hume and Auguste Comte, as a more distinct discipline of science through application of the scientific method. Bain proposed that physiological and psychological processes were linked, and that traditional psychology could be explained in terms of this association. Moreover he proposed that all knowledge and all mental processes had to be based on actual physical sensations, and not on spontaneous thoughts and ideas, and attempted to identify the link between the mind and the body and to discover the correlations between mental and behavioural phenomena. William James calls his work the "last word" of the earlier stage of psychology, but he was in reality the pioneer of the new. Subsequent psycho-physical investigations "have all been in" the spirit of his work; and although he consistently advocated the introspective method in psychological investigation, he was among the first to appreciate the help that may be given to it by social psychology, comparative psychology and developmental psychology. He may justly claim the merit of having guided the awakened psychological interest of British thinkers of the second half of the 19th century into fruitful channels. Bain emphasised the importance of our active experiences of movement and effort, and though his theory of a central innervation sense is no longer held as he propounded it, its value as a suggestion to later psychologists is great. His thought that a belief is but a preparation for action is respected by both pragmatism and functionalism.   === Other worksEdit === Bain's autobiography, published in 1904, contains a full list of his works, and also the history of the last thirteen years of his life by Professor W. L. Davidson of the University of Aberdeen, who further contributed to Mind (April 1904) a review of Bain's services to philosophy. Further works include editions with notes of Paley's Moral Philosophy (1852); Education as a Science (1879); Dissertations on leading philosophical topics (1903, mainly reprints of papers in Mind); he collaborated with JS Mill and Grote in editing James Mill's Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (1869), and assisted in editing Grote's Aristotle and Minor Works; he also wrote a memoir prefixed to G Croom Robertson's Philosophical Remains (1894).   == Social ReformEdit == Bain took a keen interest in social justice and development and was frequently an active part in the political and social movements of the day; after his retirement from the Chair of Logic, he was twice elected Lord Rector of the University of Aberdeen each term of office extending over three years. He was a strenuous advocate of reform, especially in the teaching of sciences, and supported the claims of modern languages to a place in the curriculum. Moreover, he as an avid supporter for Student rights and in 1884 the Aberdeen University Debating Society took the first steps towards the introduction of a Students' Representative Council and later Aberdeen University Students' Association under his support. Bain was a member of the Committee of the Aberdeen Public Library throughout his life as well as the School Board of Aberdeen. Furthermore, Professor Bain gave lectures and wrote papers for the Mechanics' Institutes of Aberdeen and served as the Secretary of its Committee. His services to education and social reform in Scotland were recognised by the conferment of the honorary degree of Doctor of law by the University of Edinburgh in 1871. A marble bust of him stands in the Aberdeen Public Library and his portrait hangs in Marischal College.   == Later life and deathEdit == Bain retired from his Chair and Professorship from the University of Aberdeen and was succeeded by William Minto, one of his most brilliant pupils. Nevertheless his interest in thought, and his desire to complete the scheme of work mapped out in earlier years, remained as keen as ever. Accordingly, in 1882 appeared the Biography of James Mill, and accompanying it John Stuart Mill: a Criticism, with Personal Recollections. Next came (1884) a collection of articles and papers, most of which had appeared in magazines, under the title of Practical Essays. This was succeeded (1887, 1888) by a new edition of the Rhetoric, and along with it, a book On Teaching English, being an exhaustive application of the principles of rhetoric to the criticism of style, for the use of teachers; and in 1894 he published a revised edition of The Senses and the Intellect, which contain his last word on psychology. In 1894 also appeared his last contribution to Mind. His last years were spent in privacy at Aberdeen, where he died on 18 September 1903. He married twice but left no children. His last request was that "no stone should be placed upon his grave: his books, he said, would be his monument." The University of Aberdeen Philosophy Department established the Bain Medal in 1883. It is awarded annually to the best candidate who gains First Class Honours in Mental Philosophy. As Professor William L. Davidson wrote in Bain's obituary in Mind "In Dr. Bain's death, psychology has sustained a great loss; but so too has education and practical reform. It is rare to find a philosopher who combines philosophical with educational and practical interests, and who is also an active force in the community in which he dwells. Such a combination was here. Let us not fail to appreciate it."   == BibliographyEdit == "Early Life of James Mill", from Mind, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876). Review of Herbert Spencer's Principles of Sociology, from Mind, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876). "Mr. G. H. Lewes and the Postulates of Experience", from Mind, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876). Education as a Science, New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1884 Practical Essays Dissertations on Leading Philosophical Topics Autobiography by Alexander Bain, LL.D., London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1904 Elements of chemistry and electricity: in two parts Astronomy James Mill, A Biography (1 ed.), London: Logmans, Green & Co., 1882, retrieved 11 December 2012  John Stuart Mill: A Criticism: With Personal Recollections, London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1882 The Art of Study Is There Such a Thing As Pure Malevolence? The Classical Controversy The University Ideal: Past and Present On Teaching English: With Detailed Examples and an Enquiry Into the Definition of Poetry English Composition and Rhetoric: Emotional qualities of style English Composition and Rhetoric: Intellectual elements of style English grammar as bearing upon composition First English Grammar A Higher English Grammar An English grammar English composition and rhetoric: A manual Logic: Induction Logic: Volume 1 Deduction Some Points in Ethics Fragments on ethical subjects The Moral Philosophy of Paley The emotions and the will 1859 The senses and the intellect Mind And Body: The Theories Of Their Relation Physiological Expression in Psychology Analysis of the phenomena of the human mind: Volume 1 How to study character; or, The true basis for the science of mind The emergence of neuroscience in the nineteenth century: Mind and body : the theories of their relation Pleasure and Pain On the study of character: including an estimate of phrenology Mental science: a compendium of psychology, and the history of philosophy, designed as a text-book for high-schools and colleges Moral science: a compendium of ethics Mental and moral science: A compendium of psychology and ethics, London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1868 Mental and Moral Science: Psychology and history of philosophy Mental and Moral Science: Theory of ethics and ehtical systems   == See alsoEdit == Association of Ideas Psychophysical parallelism Mind   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Bain, Alexander, English Composition and Rhetoric, 1871 (facsimile ed., 1996, Scholars' Facsimiles & Reprints, ISBN 978-0-8201-1497-2). Hattiangadi, Jagdish N. (1970). "Bain, Alexander". Dictionary of Scientific Biography 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 403–404. ISBN 0-684-10114-9.  B. R. Hergenhahn, An Introduction to the History of Psychology, Sixth Edition Kunitz, Stanley, and Howard Haycraft. "Bain, Alexander." British Authors of the Nineteenth Century. H. W. Wilson Company, New York, 1936.   == External linksEdit ==  "Bain, Alexander". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  William L. Davidson, Professor Bain, an obituary from Mind (Jan. 1904) Moral Science: A Compendium of Ethics by Alexander Bain Works by Alexander Bain at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Alexander Bain at Internet Archive Works by Alexander Bain at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  " Bain, Alexander". A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. Wikisource. 1910  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Alexander Bain

Alexander Sergeyevich Esenin-Volpin (also written Ésénine-Volpine and Yessenin-Volpin in his French and English publications; Russian: Алекса́ндр Серге́евич Есе́нин-Во́льпин; born May 12, 1924) is a prominent Russian-American poet and mathematician. A notable dissident, political prisoner and a leader of the Soviet human rights movement, he spent a total of fourteen years incarcerated and repressed by the Soviet authorities in prisons, psikhushkas and exile.   == Life == Alexander Volpin was born on May 12, 1924 in the Soviet Union. His mother, Nadezhda Volpin, was a poet and translator from French and English. His father was Sergei Yesenin, a celebrated Russian poet, who never knew his son. Alexander and his mother moved from Leningrad to Moscow in 1933. Esenin-Volpin was free from conscription due to "psychiatric" reasons. His psychiatric imprisonments took place in 1949 for "anti-Soviet poetry", in 1959 for smuggling abroad samizdat, including his Свободный философский трактат (Free Philosophical Tractate), and again in 1968. Esenin-Volpin graduated from Moscow State University with a “candidate” dissertation in the spring of 1949. After graduation, Volpin was sent to the Ukrainian city of Chernovtsy to teach mathematics at the local state university. Less than a month after his arrival in Chernovtsy he was arrested by the MGB, sent on a plane back to Moscow, and incarcerated in the Lubyanka prison. He was charged with "systematically conducting anti-Soviet agitation, writing anti-Soviet poems, and reading them to acquaintances." Apprehensive about the prospect of prison and labor camp, Volpin faked a suicide attempt in order to initiate a psychiatric evaluation. Psychiatrists at Moscow's Serbsky Institute declared Volpin mentally incompetent, and in October 1949 he was transferred to the Leningrad Psychiatric Prison Hospital for an indefinite stay. A year later he was abruptly released from the prison hospital, and sentenced to five years exile in the Kazakh town of Karaganda as a "socially dangerous element." In Karagada, he found employment as a teacher of evening and correspondence courses in mathematics. After the death of Joseph Stalin, Volpin was released due to a general amnesty in March 1953. Soon he became a known mathematician specializing in the fields of ultrafinitism and intuitionism. In 1968, Esenin-Volpin was again hospitalized. After his 1968 psychiatric confinement, 99 Soviet mathematicians sent a letter to the Soviet authorities asking for his release. This fact became public and the Voice of America conducted a broadcast on the topic; Esenin-Volpin was released almost immediately thereafter. Vladimir Bukovsky was quoted as saying that Volpin's diagnosis was "pathological honesty". In 1969, Esenin-Volpin signed An Appeal to The UN Committee for Human Rights. Esenin-Volpin was the first dissident in the history of the Soviet Union who took on a "legalist" strategy of dissent. He proclaimed that it is possible and necessary to defend human rights by strictly observing the law, and in turn demand that the authorities observe the formally guaranteed rights. Fellow dissident and one of the founders of the Moscow Helsinki Group Lyudmila Alexeyeva remembers:  He would explain to anyone who cared to listen a simple but unfamiliar idea: all laws ought to be understood in exactly the way they are written and not as they are interpreted by the government and the government ought to fulfill those laws to the letter [...]. What would happen if citizens acted on the assumption that they have rights? If one person did it, he would become a martyr; if two people did it, they would be labeled an enemy organization; if thousands of people did it, the state would have to become less oppressive.  On December 5, 1965, the Soviet Constitution Day, Esenin-Volpin organized a legendary Glasnost Meeting ("митинг гласности"), a demonstration at the Pushkin Square in the center of Moscow. Western journalists were invited to provide press coverage. The leaflets written by Volpin and distributed by samizdat method, asserted that recent arrest of writers Andrei Sinyavsky and Yuli Daniel violated Article 3 of the Soviet constitution and Article 18 of RSFSR Criminal Code. The meeting was attended by about 200 people, many of whom turned out to be KGB operatives. The slogans read: "Требуем гласности суда над Синявским и Даниэлем" (We demand an open trial for Sinyavski and Daniel) and "Уважайте советскую конституцию" (Respect the Soviet constitution). The demonstrators were promptly arrested. In 1968 Esenin-Volpin circulated his famous "Памятка для тех, кому предстоят допросы" (Memo for those who expect to be interrogated) widely used by fellow dissidents. In 1970, Volpin joined the Committee on Human Rights in the USSR and worked with Yuri Orlov, Andrei Sakharov and other activists. In May 1972, he emigrated to the United States, but his Soviet citizenship was not revoked as was customary at the time. He worked at Boston University. In 1973 he was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto. In 2005, Esenin-Volpin participated in "They Chose Freedom", a four-part television documentary on the history of the Soviet dissident movement.   == Mathematical work ==  His early work was in general topology, where he introduced Esenin-Volpin's theorem. Most of his later work was on the foundations of mathematics, where he introduced ultrafinitism, an extreme form of constructive mathematics that casts doubt on the existence of not only infinite sets, but even of large integers such as 1012. He sketched a program for proving the consistency of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory using ultrafinitistic techniques in (Ésénine-Volpine 1961), (Yessenin-Volpin 1970) and (Yessenin-Volpin 1981).   == Mathematical publications == Ésénine-Volpine, A. S. (1961), "Le programme ultra-intuitionniste des fondements des mathématiques", Infinitistic Methods (Proc. Sympos. Foundations of Math., Warsaw, 1959), Oxford: Pergamon, pp. 201–223, MR 0147389  Reviewed by Kreisel, G.; Ehrenfeucht, A. (1967), "Le Programme Ultra-Intuitionniste des Fondements des Mathematiques by A. S. Ésénine-Volpine", The Journal of Symbolic Logic (Association for Symbolic Logic) 32 (4): 517, doi:10.2307/2270182, JSTOR 2270182  Yessenin-Volpin, A. S. (1970), "The ultra-intuitionistic criticism and the antitraditional program for foundations of mathematics", in Kino, A.; Myhill, J.; Vesley, R. E., Intuitionism and proof theory (Proc. Conf., Buffalo, N.Y., 1968), Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3–45, MR 0295876  Reviewed by Geiser, James R. (1975), "The Ultra-Intuitionistic Criticism and the Antitraditional Program for Foundations of Mathematics. by A. S. Yessenin-Volpin", The Journal of Symbolic Logic (Association for Symbolic Logic) 40 (1): 95–97, doi:10.2307/2272294, JSTOR 2272294  Yessenin-Volpin, A. S. (1981), "About infinity, finiteness and finitization (in connection with the foundations of mathematics)", in Richman, Fred, Constructive mathematics (Las Cruces, N.M., 1980), Lecture Notes in Math. 873, Berlin-New York: Springer, pp. 274–313, doi:10.1007/BFb0090740, ISBN 3-540-10850-5, MR 0644507    == References ==   == External links == Great Russian Poet's Son Comes Home at MN Turzański, Marian (1992), "Strong sequences, binary families and Esenin-Volpin's theorem", Comment.Math.Univ.Carolinae 33 (3): 563–569, MR 1209298  Nathans, Benjamin (Winter 2007). "The Dictatorship of Reason: Aleksandr Vol’pin and the Idea of Rights under ‘Developed Socialism’". Slavic Review 66 (4): 630–663. JSTOR 20060376.  [1] Robert Horvath, The Legacy of Soviet Dissent: Dissidents, Democratisation and Radical Nationalism in Russia, Taylor & Francis, 2005, ISBN 0-415-33320-2; pp. 55, 85, 155 Russian language links Bio & Bibliography Bio & writings at Anthology of Samizdat Poetry "Интервью с философом Александром Есениным-Вольпиным и его ученицей Кристор Хенникс". Radio Liberty. 11 July 2007. Retrieved 19 April 2012.  "Александр Есенин-Вольпин". Radio Liberty. 18 February 2005. Retrieved 19 April 2012.  "Александр Есенин-Вольпин". Radio Liberty. 12 May 2004. Retrieved 19 April 2012.  "Памятка для не ожидающих допроса: Беседа с Александром Есениным-Вольпиным от 4 декабря 1998 года". Неприкосновенный запас № 1 (21). 2002. Retrieved 19 April 2012.

Alexander (Alekos) Sotirios Kechris (Greek: Αλέξανδρος Σωτήριος Κεχρής; born 1946, Greece) is a descriptive set theorist and ergodic theorist at Caltech. He has made major contributions to the theory of Borel equivalence relations and the theory of automorphism groups of uncountable structures. Kechris earned his Ph.D. in 1972 under the direction of Yiannis N. Moschovakis, with a dissertation titled Projective Ordinals and Countable Analytic Sets. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == Selected publications == A. S. Kechris, "Classical Descriptive Set Theory", Springer-Verlag, 1995. H. Becker, A. S. Kechris, "The descriptive set theory of Polish group actions" (London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series), University of Cambridge, 1996. A.S. Kechris, V.G. Pestov and S. Todorcevic, "Fraïssé limits, Ramsey theory and topological dynamics of automorphism groups", Geometric and Functional Analysis 15 (1) (2005), 106-189. A.S. Kechris, "Global Aspects of Ergodic Group Actions", Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, 160, American Mathematical Society, 2010.   == References ==   == External links == Kechris's web page at Caltech

Alfred Horn (February 17, 1918 – April 16, 2001) was an American mathematician notable for his work in lattice theory and universal algebra. His 1951 paper "On sentences which are true of direct unions of algebras" described Horn clauses and Horn sentences, which later would form the foundation of logic programming. Horn was born on Lower East Side, Manhattan. His parents were both deaf, and his father died when Horn was three years old. At this point, the children moved in with their grandparents on the mother's side. They would later move to Brooklyn where Horn spent most of his childhood, raised by his extended family. Horn attended the City College of New York, and later, New York University where he earned a Master's degree in mathematics. He went on to earn his Ph.D. at University of California, Berkeley in 1946. A year later, he started work at the University of California, where he stayed until his retirement in 1988. He died in 2001 in Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles after eight years of battling prostate cancer.   == ReferencesEdit == Alfred Horn, Palisadian Since 1954 and Noted UCLA Math Professor – obituary from UCLA Publications of Alfred Horn – a list compiled by Dimiter Skordev Alfred Horn – the information about him in the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Alfred North Whitehead, OM FRS (15 February 1861 – 30 December 1947) was an English mathematician and philosopher. He is best known as the defining figure of the philosophical school known as process philosophy, which today has found application to a wide variety of disciplines, including ecology, theology, education, physics, biology, economics, and psychology, among other areas. In his early career Whitehead wrote primarily on mathematics, logic, and physics. His most notable work in these fields is the three-volume Principia Mathematica (1910–13), which he co-wrote with former student Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica is considered one of the twentieth century's most important works in mathematical logic, and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library. Beginning in the late 1910s and early 1920s, Whitehead gradually turned his attention from mathematics to philosophy of science, and finally to metaphysics. He developed a comprehensive metaphysical system which radically departed from most of western philosophy. Whitehead argued that reality consists of processes rather than material objects, and that processes are best defined by their relations with other processes, thus rejecting the theory that reality is fundamentally constructed by bits of matter that exist independently of one another. Today Whitehead's philosophical works – particularly Process and Reality – are regarded as the foundational texts of process philosophy. Whitehead's process philosophy argues that "there is urgency in coming to see the world as a web of interrelated processes of which we are integral parts, so that all of our choices and actions have consequences for the world around us." For this reason, one of the most promising applications of Whitehead's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization and environmental ethics pioneered by John B. Cobb, Jr.   == LifeEdit ==  Alfred North Whitehead was born in Ramsgate, Kent, England, in 1861. His father, Alfred Whitehead, was a minister and schoolmaster of Chatham House Academy, a successful school for boys established by Thomas Whitehead, Alfred North's grandfather. Whitehead himself recalled both of them as being very successful schoolmasters, but that his grandfather was the more extraordinary man. Whitehead's mother was Maria Sarah Whitehead, formerly Maria Sarah Buckmaster. Whitehead was apparently not particularly close with his mother, as he never mentioned her in any of his writings, and there is evidence that Whitehead's wife, Evelyn, had a low opinion of her. Whitehead was educated at Sherborne School, Dorset, then considered one of the best public schools in the country. His childhood was described as over-protected, but when at school he excelled in sports and mathematics and was head prefect of his class. In 1880, Whitehead began attending Trinity College, Cambridge, and studied mathematics. He earned his BA from Trinity in 1884, and graduated as fourth wrangler. Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1884, Whitehead would teach and write on mathematics and physics at the college until 1910, spending the 1890s writing his Treatise on Universal Algebra (1898), and the 1900s collaborating with his former pupil, Bertrand Russell, on the first edition of Principia Mathematica. He was a Cambridge Apostle. In 1890, Whitehead married Evelyn Wade, an Irish woman raised in France; they had a daughter, Jessie Whitehead, and two sons, Thomas North Whitehead and Eric Whitehead. Eric Whitehead died in action while serving in the Royal Flying Corps during World War I at the age of 19.  In 1910, Whitehead resigned his Senior Lectureship in Mathematics at Trinity and moved to London without first lining up another job. After being unemployed for a year, Whitehead accepted a position as Lecturer in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics at University College London, but was passed over a year later for the Goldsmid Chair of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, a position for which he had hoped to be seriously considered. In 1914 Whitehead accepted a position as Professor of Applied Mathematics at the newly chartered Imperial College London, where his old friend Andrew Forsyth had recently been appointed Chief Professor of Mathematics. In 1918 Whitehead's academic responsibilities began to seriously expand as he accepted a number of high administrative positions within the University of London system, of which Imperial College London was a member at the time. He was elected Dean of the Faculty of Science at the University of London in late 1918 (a post he held for four years), a member of the University of London's Senate in 1919, and chairman of the Senate's Academic (leadership) Council in 1920, a post which he held until he departed for America in 1924. Whitehead was able to exert his newfound influence to successfully lobby for a new history of science department, help establish a Bachelor of Science degree (previously only Bachelor of Arts degrees had been offered), and make the school more accessible to less wealthy students. Toward the end of his time in England, Whitehead turned his attention to philosophy. Though he had no advanced training in philosophy, his philosophical work soon became highly regarded. After publishing The Concept of Nature in 1920, he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923. In 1924, Henry Osborn Taylor invited the 63-year-old Whitehead to join the faculty at Harvard University as a professor of philosophy. During his time at Harvard, Whitehead produced his most important philosophical contributions. In 1925, he wrote Science and the Modern World, which was immediately hailed as an alternative to the Cartesian dualism that plagued popular science. A few years later, he published his seminal work Process and Reality, which has been compared (both in importance and difficulty) to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. The Whiteheads spent the rest of their lives in the United States. Alfred North retired from Harvard in 1937 and remained in Cambridge, Massachusetts until his death on December 30, 1947. The two volume biography of Whitehead by Victor Lowe is the most definitive presentation of the life of Whitehead. However, many details of Whitehead's life remain obscure because he left no Nachlass; his family carried out his instructions that all of his papers be destroyed after his death. Additionally, Whitehead was known for his "almost fanatical belief in the right to privacy", and for writing very few personal letters of the kind that would help to gain insight on his life. This led to Lowe himself remarking on the first page of Whitehead's biography, "No professional biographer in his right mind would touch him." Currently, there is also no critical edition of Whitehead's writings, though the Whitehead Research Project of the Center for Process Studies is currently working on one such edition.   == Mathematics and logicEdit == In addition to numerous articles on mathematics, Whitehead wrote three major books on the subject: A Treatise on Universal Algebra (1898), Principia Mathematica (co-written with Bertrand Russell and published in three volumes between 1910 and 1913), and An Introduction to Mathematics (1911). The former two books were aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians, while the latter book was intended for a larger audience, covering the history of mathematics and its philosophical foundations. Principia Mathematica in particular is regarded as one of the most important works in mathematical logic of the 20th century. In addition to his legacy as a co-writer of Principia Mathematica, Whitehead's theory of "extensive abstraction" is considered foundational for the branch of ontology and computer science known as "mereotopology", a theory describing spatial relations among wholes, parts, parts of parts, and the boundaries between parts.   === A Treatise on Universal AlgebraEdit === In A Treatise on Universal Algebra (1898) the term "universal algebra" had essentially the same meaning that it has today: the study of algebraic structures themselves, rather than examples ("models") of algebraic structures. Whitehead credits William Rowan Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan as originators of the subject matter, and James Joseph Sylvester with coining the term itself. At the time structures such as Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions drew attention to the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the associatively multiplicative class. In a review Alexander Macfarlane wrote: "The main idea of the work is not unification of the several methods, nor generalization of ordinary algebra so as to include them, but rather the comparative study of their several structures." In a separate review, G. B. Mathews wrote, "It possesses a unity of design which is really remarkable, considering the variety of its themes." A Treatise on Universal Algebra sought to examine Hermann Grassmann's theory of extension ("Ausdehnungslehre"), Boole's algebra of logic, and Hamilton's quaternions (this last number system was to be taken up in Volume II, which was never finished due to Whitehead's work on Principia Mathematica). Whitehead wrote in the preface:  "Such algebras have an intrinsic value for separate detailed study; also they are worthy of comparative study, for the sake of the light thereby thrown on the general theory of symbolic reasoning, and on algebraic symbolism in particular ... The idea of a generalized conception of space has been made prominent, in the belief that the properties and operations involved in it can be made to form a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras."  Whitehead, however, had no results of a general nature. His hope of "form[ing] a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras" presumably would have been developed in Volume II, had Whitehead completed it. Further work on the subject was minimal until the early 1930s, when Garrett Birkhoff and Øystein Ore began publishing on universal algebras.   === Principia MathematicaEdit ===  Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) is Whitehead's most famous mathematical work. Co-written with former student Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica is considered one of the twentieth century's most important works in mathematics, and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library. Principia Mathematica‍ '​s purpose was to describe a set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic from which all mathematical truths could in principle be proven. Whitehead and Russell were working on such a foundational level of mathematics and logic that it took them until page 86 of Volume II to prove that 1+1=2, a proof humorously accompanied by the comment, "The above proposition is occasionally useful." Whitehead and Russell had thought originally that Principia Mathematica would take a year to complete; it ended up taking them ten years. To add insult to injury, when it came time for publication, the three-volume work was so massive (more than 2,000 pages) and its audience so narrow (professional mathematicians) that it was initially published at a loss of 600 pounds, 300 of which was paid by Cambridge University Press, 200 by the Royal Society of London, and 50 apiece by Whitehead and Russell themselves. Despite the initial loss, today there is likely no major academic library in the world which does not hold a copy of Principia Mathematica. The ultimate substantive legacy of Principia Mathematica is mixed. It is generally accepted that Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorem of 1931 definitively demonstrated that for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics, there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them, and hence that Principia Mathematica could never achieve its aims. However, Gödel could not have come to this conclusion without Whitehead and Russell's book. In this way, Principia Mathematica's legacy might be described as its key role in disproving the possibility of achieving its own stated goals. But beyond this somewhat ironic legacy, the book popularized modern mathematical logic and drew important connections between logic, epistemology, and metaphysics.   === An Introduction to MathematicsEdit === Unlike Whitehead's previous two books on mathematics, An Introduction to Mathematics (1911) was not aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians, but was intended for a larger audience. The book covered the nature of mathematics, its unity and internal structure, and its applicability to nature. Whitehead wrote in the opening chapter:  "The object of the following Chapters is not to teach mathematics, but to enable students from the very beginning of their course to know what the science is about, and why it is necessarily the foundation of exact thought as applied to natural phenomena."  The book can be seen as an attempt to understand the growth in unity and interconnection of mathematics as a whole, as well as an examination of the mutual influence of mathematics and philosophy, language, and physics. Although the book is little-read, in some ways it prefigures certain points of Whitehead's later work in philosophy and metaphysics.   == Views on educationEdit == Whitehead showed a deep concern for educational reform at all levels. In addition to his numerous individually written works on the subject, Whitehead was appointed by Britain's Prime Minister as part of a 20-person committee to investigate the educational systems and practices of the UK in 1921 and recommend reform. Whitehead's most complete work on education is the 1929 book The Aims of Education and Other Essays, which collected numerous essays and addresses by Whitehead on the subject published between 1912 and 1927. The essay from which Aims of Education derived its name was delivered as an address in 1916 when Whitehead was president of the London Branch of the Mathematical Association. In it, he cautioned against the teaching of what he called "inert ideas" – ideas that are disconnected scraps of information, with no application to real life or culture. He opined that "education with inert ideas is not only useless: it is, above all things, harmful." Rather than teach small parts of a large number of subjects, Whitehead advocated teaching a relatively few important concepts that the student could organically link to many different areas of knowledge, discovering their application in actual life. For Whitehead, education should be the exact opposite of the multidisciplinary, value-free school model – it should be transdisciplinary, and laden with values and general principles that provide students with a bedrock of wisdom and help them to make connections between areas of knowledge that are usually regarded as separate. In order to make this sort of teaching a reality, however, Whitehead pointed to the need to minimize the importance of (or radically alter) standard examinations for school entrance. Whitehead writes:  "Every school is bound on pain of extinction to train its boys for a small set of definite examinations. No headmaster has a free hand to develop his general education or his specialist studies in accordance with the opportunities of his school, which are created by its staff, its environment, its class of boys, and its endowments. I suggest that no system of external tests which aims primarily at examining individual scholars can result in anything but educational waste."  Whitehead argued that curriculum should be developed specifically for its own students by its own staff, or else risk total stagnation, interrupted only by occasional movements from one group of inert ideas to another. Above all else in his educational writings, Whitehead emphasized the importance of imagination and the free play of ideas. In his essay "Universities and Their Function", Whitehead writes provocatively on imagination:  "Imagination is not to be divorced from the facts: it is a way of illuminating the facts. It works by eliciting the general principles which apply to the facts, as they exist, and then by an intellectual survey of alternative possibilities which are consistent with those principles. It enables men to construct an intellectual vision of a new world."  Whitehead's philosophy of education might adequately be summarized in his statement that "knowledge does not keep any better than fish." In other words, bits of disconnected knowledge are meaningless; all knowledge must find some imaginative application to the students' own lives, or else it becomes so much useless trivia, and the students themselves become good at parroting facts but not thinking for themselves.   == Philosophy and metaphysicsEdit ==  Whitehead did not begin his career as a philosopher. In fact, he never had any formal training in philosophy beyond his undergraduate education. Early in his life he showed great interest in and respect for philosophy and metaphysics, but it is evident that he considered himself a rank amateur. In one letter to his friend and former student Bertrand Russell, after discussing whether science aimed to be explanatory or merely descriptive, he wrote: "This further question lands us in the ocean of metaphysic, onto which my profound ignorance of that science forbids me to enter." Ironically, in later life Whitehead would become one of the 20th century's foremost metaphysicians. However, interest in metaphysics – the philosophical investigation of the nature of the universe and existence – had become unfashionable by the time Whitehead began writing in earnest about it in the 1920s. The ever-more impressive accomplishments of empirical science had led to a general consensus in academia that the development of comprehensive metaphysical systems was a waste of time because they were not subject to empirical testing. Whitehead was unimpressed by this objection. In the notes of one his students for a 1927 class, Whitehead was quoted as saying: "Every scientific man in order to preserve his reputation has to say he dislikes metaphysics. What he means is he dislikes having his metaphysics criticized." In Whitehead's view, scientists and philosophers make metaphysical assumptions about how the universe works all the time, but such assumptions are not easily seen precisely because they remain unexamined and unquestioned. While Whitehead acknowledged that "philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical first principles," he argued that people need to continually re-imagine their basic assumptions about how the universe works if philosophy and science are to make any real progress, even if that progress remains permanently asymptotic. For this reason Whitehead regarded metaphysical investigations as essential to both good science and good philosophy. Perhaps foremost among what Whitehead considered faulty metaphysical assumptions was the Cartesian idea that reality is fundamentally constructed of bits of matter that exist totally independently of one another, which he rejected in favor of an event-based or "process" ontology in which events are primary and are fundamentally interrelated and dependent on one another. He also argued that the most basic elements of reality can all be regarded as experiential, indeed that everything is constituted by its experience. He used the term "experience" very broadly, so that even inanimate processes such as electron collisions are said to manifest some degree of experience. In this, he went against Descartes' separation of two different kinds of real existence, either exclusively material or else exclusively mental. Whitehead referred to his metaphysical system as "philosophy of organism", but it would become known more widely as "process philosophy." Whitehead's philosophy was highly original, and soon garnered interest in philosophical circles. After publishing The Concept of Nature in 1920, he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923, and Henri Bergson was quoted as saying that Whitehead was "the best philosopher writing in English." So impressive and different was Whitehead's philosophy that in 1924 he was invited to join the faculty at Harvard University as a professor of philosophy at 63 years of age.  This is not to say that Whitehead's thought was widely accepted or even well-understood. His philosophical work is generally considered to be among the most difficult to understand in all of the western canon. Even professional philosophers struggled to follow Whitehead's writings. One famous story illustrating the level of difficulty of Whitehead's philosophy centers around the delivery of Whitehead's Gifford lectures in 1927–28 – following Arthur Eddington's lectures of the year previous – which Whitehead would later publish as Process and Reality:  Eddington was a marvellous popular lecturer who had enthralled an audience of 600 for his entire course. The same audience turned up to Whitehead's first lecture but it was completely unintelligible, not merely to the world at large but to the elect. My father remarked to me afterwards that if he had not known Whitehead well he would have suspected that it was an imposter making it up as he went along ... The audience at subsequent lectures was only about half a dozen in all.  Indeed, it may not be inappropriate to speculate that some fair portion of the respect generally shown to Whitehead by his philosophical peers at the time arose from their sheer bafflement. Distinguished University of Chicago Divinity School theologian Shailer Mathews once remarked of Whitehead's 1926 book Religion in the Making: "It is infuriating, and I must say embarrassing as well, to read page after page of relatively familiar words without understanding a single sentence." However, Mathews' frustration with Whitehead's books did not negatively affect his interest. In fact, there were numerous philosophers and theologians at Chicago's Divinity School that perceived the importance of what Whitehead was doing without fully grasping all of the details and implications. In 1927 they invited one of America's only Whitehead experts – Henry Nelson Wieman – to Chicago to give a lecture explaining Whitehead's thought. Wieman's lecture was so brilliant that he was promptly hired to the faculty and taught there for twenty years, and for at least thirty years afterward Chicago's Divinity School was closely associated with Whitehead's thought. Shortly after Whitehead's book Process and Reality appeared in 1929, Wieman famously wrote in his 1930 review:  "Not many people will read Whitehead's recent book in this generation; not many will read it in any generation. But its influence will radiate through concentric circles of popularization until the common man will think and work in the light of it, not knowing whence the light came. After a few decades of discussion and analysis one will be able to understand it more readily than can now be done."  Wieman's words proved prophetic. Though Process and Reality has been called "arguably the most impressive single metaphysical text of the twentieth century," it has been little-read and little-understood, partly because it demands – as Isabelle Stengers puts it – "that its readers accept the adventure of the questions that will separate them from every consensus." Whitehead questioned western philosophy's most dearly held assumptions about how the universe works, but in doing so he managed to anticipate a number of 21st century scientific and philosophical problems and provide novel solutions.   === Whitehead's conception of realityEdit === Whitehead was convinced that the scientific notion of matter was misleading as a way of describing the ultimate nature of things. In his 1925 book Science and the Modern World, he wrote that  "There persists ... [a] fixed scientific cosmology which presupposes the ultimate fact of an irreducible brute matter, or material, spread through space in a flux of configurations. In itself such a material is senseless, valueless, purposeless. It just does what it does do, following a fixed routine imposed by external relations which do not spring from the nature of its being. It is this assumption that I call 'scientific materialism.' Also it is an assumption which I shall challenge as being entirely unsuited to the scientific situation at which we have now arrived."  In Whitehead's view, there are a number of problems with this notion of "irreducible brute matter." First, it obscures and minimizes the importance of change. By thinking of any material thing (like a rock, or a person) as being fundamentally the same thing throughout time, with any changes to it being secondary to its "nature", scientific materialism hides the fact that nothing ever stays the same. For Whitehead, change is fundamental and inescapable; he emphasizes that "all things flow." In Whitehead's view, then, concepts such as "quality", "matter", and "form" are problematic. These "classical" concepts fail to adequately account for change, and overlook the active and experiential nature of the most basic elements of the world. They are useful abstractions, but are not the world's basic building blocks. What is ordinarily conceived of as a single person, for instance, is philosophically described as a continuum of overlapping events. After all, people change all the time, if only because they have aged by another second and had some further experience. These occasions of experience are logically distinct, but are progressively connected in what Whitehead calls a "society" of events. By assuming that enduring objects are the most real and fundamental things in the universe, materialists have mistaken the abstract for the concrete (what Whitehead calls the "fallacy of misplaced concreteness"). To put it another way, a thing or person is often seen as having a "defining essence" or a "core identity" that is unchanging, and describes what the thing or person really is. In this way of thinking, things and people are seen as fundamentally the same through time, with any changes being qualitative and secondary to their core identity (e.g. "Mark's hair has turned gray as he has gotten older, but he is still the same person"). But in Whitehead's cosmology, the only fundamentally existent things are discrete "occasions of experience" that overlap one another in time and space, and jointly make up the enduring person or thing. On the other hand, what ordinary thinking often regards as "the essence of a thing" or "the identity/core of a person" is an abstract generalization of what is regarded as that person or thing's most important or salient features across time. Identities do not define people, people define identities. Everything changes from moment to moment, and to think of anything as having an "enduring essence" misses the fact that "all things flow", though it is often a useful way of speaking. Whitehead pointed to the limitations of language as one of the main culprits in maintaining a materialistic way of thinking, and acknowledged that it may be difficult to ever wholly move past such ideas in everyday speech. After all, each moment of each person's life can hardly be given a different proper name, and it is easy and convenient to think of people and objects as remaining fundamentally the same things, rather than constantly keeping in mind that each thing is a different thing from what it was a moment ago. Yet the limitations of everyday living and everyday speech should not prevent people from realizing that "material substances" or "essences" are a convenient generalized description of a continuum of particular, concrete processes. No one questions that a ten-year-old person is quite different by the time he or she turns thirty years old, and in many ways is not the same person at all; Whitehead points out that it is not philosophically or ontologically sound to think that a person is the same from one second to the next.  A second problem with materialism is that it obscures the importance of relations. It sees every object as distinct and discrete from all other objects. Each object is simply an inert clump of matter that is only externally related to other things. The idea of matter as primary makes people think of objects as being fundamentally separate in time and space, and not necessarily related to anything. But in Whitehead's view, relations take a primary role, perhaps even more important than the relata themselves. A student taking notes in one of Whitehead's fall 1924 classes wrote that:  "Reality applies to connections, and only relatively to the things connected. (A) is real for (B), and (B) is real for (A), but [they are] not absolutely real independent of each other."  In fact, Whitehead describes any entity as in some sense nothing more and nothing less than the sum of its relations to other entities – its synthesis of and reaction to the world around it. A real thing is just that which forces the rest of the universe to in some way conform to it; that is to say, if theoretically a thing made strictly no difference to any other entity (i.e. it was not related to any other entity), it could not be said to really exist. Relations are not secondary to what a thing is, they are what the thing is. It must be emphasized, however, that an entity is not merely a sum of its relations, but also a valuation of them and reaction to them. For Whitehead, creativity is the absolute principle of existence, and every entity (whether it is a human being, a tree, or an electron) has some degree of novelty in how it responds to other entities, and is not fully determined by causal or mechanistic laws. Of course, most entities do not have consciousness. As a human being's actions cannot always be predicted, the same can be said of where a tree's roots will grow, or how an electron will move, or whether it will rain tomorrow. Moreover, inability to predict an electron's movement (for instance) is not due to faulty understanding or inadequate technology; rather, the fundamental creativity/freedom of all entities means that there will always remain phenomena that are unpredictable. The other side of creativity/freedom as the absolute principle is that every entity is constrained by the social structure of existence (i.e., its relations) – each actual entity must conform to the settled conditions of the world around it. Freedom always exists within limits. But an entity's uniqueness and individuality arise from its own self-determination as to just how it will take account of the world within the limits that have been set for it. In summary, Whitehead rejects the idea of separate and unchanging bits of matter as the most basic building blocks of reality, in favor of the idea of reality as interrelated events in process. He conceives of reality as composed of processes of dynamic "becoming" rather than static "being", emphasizing that all physical things change and evolve, and that changeless "essences" such as matter are mere abstractions from the interrelated events that are the final real things that make up the world.   === Theory of perceptionEdit === Since Whitehead's metaphysics described a universe in which all entities experience, he needed a new way of describing perception that was not limited to living, self-conscious beings. The term he coined was "prehension", which comes from the Latin prehensio, meaning "to seize." The term is meant to indicate a kind of perception that can be conscious or unconscious, applying to people as well as electrons. It is also intended to make clear Whitehead's rejection of the theory of representative perception, in which the mind only has private ideas about other entities. For Whitehead, the term "prehension" indicates that the perceiver actually incorporates aspects of the perceived thing into itself. In this way, entities are constituted by their perceptions and relations, rather than being independent of them. Further, Whitehead regards perception as occurring in two modes, causal efficacy (or "physical prehension") and presentational immediacy (or "conceptual prehension"). Whitehead describes causal efficacy as "the experience dominating the primitive living organisms, which have a sense for the fate from which they have emerged, and the fate towards which they go." It is, in other words, the sense of causal relations between entities, a feeling of being influenced and affected by the surrounding environment, unmediated by the senses. Presentational immediacy, on the other hand, is what is usually referred to as "pure sense perception", unmediated by any causal or symbolic interpretation, even unconscious interpretation. In other words, it is pure appearance, which may or may not be delusive (e.g. mistaking an image in a mirror for "the real thing"). In higher organisms (like people), these two modes of perception combine into what Whitehead terms "symbolic reference", which links appearance with causation in a process that is so automatic that both people and animals have difficulty refraining from it. By way of illustration, Whitehead uses the example of a person's encounter with a chair. An ordinary person looks up, sees a colored shape, and immediately infers that it is a chair. However, an artist, Whitehead supposes, "might not have jumped to the notion of a chair", but instead "might have stopped at the mere contemplation of a beautiful color and a beautiful shape." This is not the normal human reaction; most people place objects in categories by habit and instinct, without even thinking about it. Moreover, animals do the same thing. Using the same example, Whitehead points out that a dog "would have acted immediately on the hypothesis of a chair and would have jumped onto it by way of using it as such." In this way symbolic reference is a fusion of pure sense perceptions on the one hand and causal relations on the other, and that it is in fact the causal relationships that dominate the more basic mentality (as the dog illustrates), while it is the sense perceptions which indicate a higher grade mentality (as the artist illustrates).   === Evolution and valueEdit === Whitehead believed that when asking questions about the basic facts of existence, questions about value and purpose can never be fully escaped. This is borne out in his thoughts on abiogenesis, or the hypothetical natural process by which life arises from simple organic compounds. Whitehead makes the startling observation that "life is comparatively deficient in survival value." If humans can only exist for about a hundred years, and rocks for eight hundred million, then one is forced to ask why complex organisms ever evolved in the first place; as Whitehead humorously notes, "they certainly did not appear because they were better at that game than the rocks around them." He then observes that the mark of higher forms of life is that they are actively engaged in modifying their environment, an activity which he theorizes is directed toward the three-fold goal of living, living well, and living better. In other words, Whitehead sees life as directed toward the purpose of increasing its own satisfaction. Without such a goal, he sees the rise of life as totally unintelligible. For Whitehead, there is no such thing as wholly inert matter. Instead, all things have some measure of freedom or creativity, however small, which allows them to be at least partly self-directed. Process philosopher David Ray Griffin coined the term "panexperientialism" (the idea that all entities experience) to describe Whitehead's view, and to distinguish it from panpsychism (the idea that all matter has consciousness).   === GodEdit ===  Whitehead's idea of God differs from traditional monotheistic notions. Perhaps his most famous and pointed criticism of the Christian conception of God is that "the Church gave unto God the attributes which belonged exclusively to Caesar." Here Whitehead is criticizing Christianity for defining God as primarily a divine king who imposes his will on the world, and whose most important attribute is power. As opposed to the most widely accepted forms of Christianity, Whitehead emphasized an idea of God that he called "the brief Galilean vision of humility":  "It does not emphasize the ruling Caesar, or the ruthless moralist, or the unmoved mover. It dwells upon the tender elements in the world, which slowly and in quietness operates by love; and it finds purpose in the present immediacy of a kingdom not of this world. Love neither rules, nor is it unmoved; also it is a little oblivious as to morals. It does not look to the future; for it finds its own reward in the immediate present."  It should be emphasized, however, that for Whitehead God is not necessarily tied to religion. Rather than springing primarily from religious faith, Whitehead saw God as necessary for his metaphysical system. His system required that an order exist among possibilities, an order that allowed for novelty in the world and provided an aim to all entities. Whitehead posited that these ordered potentials exist in what he called the primordial nature of God. However, Whitehead was also interested in religious experience. This led him to reflect more intensively on what he saw as the second nature of God, the consequent nature. Whitehead's conception of God as a "dipolar" entity has called for fresh theological thinking. The primordial nature he described as "the unlimited conceptual realization of the absolute wealth of potentiality," i.e., the unlimited possibility of the universe. This primordial nature is eternal and unchanging, providing entities in the universe with possibilities for realization. Whitehead also calls this primordial aspect "the lure for feeling, the eternal urge of desire," pulling the entities in the universe toward as-yet unrealized possibilities. God's consequent nature, on the other hand, is anything but unchanging – it is God's reception of the world's activity. As Whitehead puts it, "[God] saves the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life. It is the judgment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved." In other words, God saves and cherishes all experiences forever, and those experiences go on to change the way God interacts with the world. In this way, God is really changed by what happens in the world and the wider universe, lending the actions of finite creatures an eternal significance. Whitehead thus sees God and the world as fulfilling one another. He sees entities in the world as fluent and changing things that yearn for a permanence which only God can provide by taking them into God's self, thereafter changing God and affecting the rest of the universe throughout time. On the other hand, he sees God as permanent but as deficient in actuality and change: alone, God is merely eternally unrealized possibilities, and requires the world to actualize them. God gives creatures permanence, while the creatures give God actuality and change. Here it is worthwhile to quote Whitehead at length:  "In this way God is completed by the individual, fluent satisfactions of finite fact, and the temporal occasions are completed by their everlasting union with their transformed selves, purged into conformation with the eternal order which is the final absolute 'wisdom.' The final summary can only be expressed in terms of a group of antitheses, whose apparent self-contradictions depend on neglect of the diverse categories of existence. In each antithesis there is a shift of meaning which converts the opposition into a contrast. "It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that the World is permanent and God is fluent. "It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the World is one and God many. "It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual eminently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual eminently. "It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is immanent in the World. "It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World transcends God. "It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World creates God ... "What is done in the world is transformed into a reality in heaven, and the reality in heaven passes back into the world ... In this sense, God is the great companion – the fellow-sufferer who understands." The above is some of Whitehead's most evocative writing about God, and was powerful enough to inspire the movement known as process theology, a vibrant theological school of thought that continues to thrive today.   === ReligionEdit === For Whitehead the core of religion was individual. While he acknowledged that individuals cannot ever be fully separated from their society, he argued that life is an internal fact for its own sake before it is an external fact relating to others. His most famous remark on religion is that "religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness ... and if you are never solitary, you are never religious." Whitehead saw religion as a system of general truths that transformed a person's character. He took special care to note that while religion is often a good influence, it is not necessarily good – an idea which he called a "dangerous delusion" (e.g., a religion might encourage the violent extermination of a rival religion's adherents). However, while Whitehead saw religion as beginning in solitariness, he also saw religion as necessarily expanding beyond the individual. In keeping with his process metaphysics in which relations are primary, he wrote that religion necessitates the realization of "the value of the objective world which is a community derivative from the interrelations of its component individuals." In other words, the universe is a community which makes itself whole through the relatedness of each individual entity to all the others – meaning and value do not exist for the individual alone, but only in the context of the universal community. Whitehead writes further that each entity "can find no such value till it has merged its individual claim with that of the objective universe. Religion is world-loyalty. The spirit at once surrenders itself to this universal claim and appropriates it for itself." In this way the individual and universal/social aspects of religion are mutually dependent. Whitehead also described religion more technically as "an ultimate craving to infuse into the insistent particularity of emotion that non-temporal generality which primarily belongs to conceptual thought alone." In other words, religion takes deeply felt emotions and contextualizes them within a system of general truths about the world, helping people to identify their wider meaning and significance. For Whitehead, religion served as a kind of bridge between philosophy and the emotions and purposes of a particular society. It is the task of religion to make philosophy applicable to the everyday lives of ordinary people.   == Influence and legacyEdit == Isabelle Stengers wrote that "Whiteheadians are recruited among both philosophers and theologians, and the palette has been enriched by practitioners from the most diverse horizons, from ecology to feminism, practices that unite political struggle and spirituality with the sciences of education." Indeed, in recent decades attention to Whitehead's work has become more widespread, with interest extending to intellectuals in Europe and China, and coming from such diverse fields as ecology, physics, biology, education, economics, and psychology. One of the first theologians to attempt to interact with Whitehead's thought was the future Archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple. In Temple's Gifford Lectures of 1932-1934 (subsequently published as "Nature, Man and God"), Whitehead is one of a number of philosophers of the emergent evolution approach Temple interacts with. However, it was not until the 1970s and 1980s that Whitehead's thought drew much attention outside of a small group of philosophers and theologians, primarily Americans, and even today he is not considered especially influential outside of relatively specialized circles. Early followers of Whitehead were found primarily at the University of Chicago's Divinity School, where Henry Nelson Wieman initiated an interest in Whitehead's work that would last for about thirty years. Professors such as Wieman, Charles Hartshorne, Bernard Loomer, Bernard Meland, and Daniel Day Williams made Whitehead's philosophy arguably the most important intellectual thread running through the Divinity School. They taught generations of Whitehead scholars, the most notable of which is John B. Cobb, Jr. Although interest in Whitehead has since faded at Chicago's Divinity School, Cobb effectively grabbed the torch and planted it firmly in Claremont, California, where he began teaching at Claremont School of Theology in 1958 and founded the Center for Process Studies with David Ray Griffin in 1973. Largely due to Cobb's influence, today Claremont remains strongly identified with Whitehead's process thought. But while Claremont remains the most concentrated hub of Whiteheadian activity, the place where Whitehead's thought currently seems to be growing the most quickly is in China. In order to address the challenges of modernization and industrialization, China has begun to blend traditions of Taoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism with Whitehead's "constructive post-modern" philosophy in order to create an "ecological civilization." To date, the Chinese government has encouraged the building of twenty-three university-based centers for the study of Whitehead's philosophy, and books by process philosophers John Cobb and David Ray Griffin are becoming required reading for Chinese graduate students. Cobb has attributed China's interest in process philosophy partly to Whitehead's stress on the mutual interdependence of humanity and nature, as well as his emphasis on an educational system that includes the teaching of values rather than simply bare facts. Overall, however, Whitehead's influence is very difficult to characterize. In English-speaking countries, his primary works are little-studied outside of Claremont and a select number of liberal graduate-level theology and philosophy programs. Outside of these circles his influence is relatively small and diffuse, and has tended to come chiefly through the work of his students and admirers rather than Whitehead himself. For instance, Whitehead was a teacher and long-time friend and collaborator of Bertrand Russell, and he also taught and supervised the dissertation of Willard Van Orman Quine, both of whom are important figures in analytic philosophy – the dominant strain of philosophy in English-speaking countries in the 20th century. Whitehead has also had high-profile admirers in the continental tradition, such as French post-structuralist philosopher Gilles Deleuze, who once dryly remarked of Whitehead that "he stands provisionally as the last great Anglo-American philosopher before Wittgenstein's disciples spread their misty confusion, sufficiency, and terror." French sociologist and anthropologist Bruno Latour even went so far as to call Whitehead "the greatest philosopher of the 20th century." Deleuze's and Latour's opinions, however, are minority ones, as Whitehead has not been recognized as particularly influential within the most dominant philosophical schools. It is impossible to say exactly why Whitehead's influence has not been more widespread, but it may be partly due to his metaphysical ideas seeming somewhat counter-intuitive (such as his assertion that matter is an abstraction), or his inclusion of theistic elements in his philosophy, or the perception of metaphysics itself as passé, or simply the sheer difficulty and density of his prose.   === Process philosophy and theologyEdit ===  Historically Whitehead's work has been most influential in the field of American progressive theology. The most important early proponent of Whitehead's thought in a theological context was Charles Hartshorne, who spent a semester at Harvard as Whitehead's teaching assistant in 1925, and is widely credited with developing Whitehead's process philosophy into a full-blown process theology. Other notable process theologians include John B. Cobb, Jr., David Ray Griffin, Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki, C. Robert Mesle, Roland Faber, and Catherine Keller. Process theology typically stresses God's relational nature. Rather than seeing God as impassible (unchanging), process theologians view God as "the fellow sufferer who understands", and as the being who is supremely affected by temporal events. Hartshorne points out that people would not praise a human ruler who was unaffected by either the joys or sorrows of his followers – so why would this be a praise-worthy quality in God? Instead, as the being who is most affected by the world, God is the being who can most appropriately respond to the world. However, process theology has been formulated in a wide variety of ways. C. Robert Mesle, for instance, advocates a "process naturalism", i.e. a process theology without God. In fact, process theology is difficult to define because process theologians are so diverse and transdisciplinary in their views and interests. John B. Cobb, Jr. is a process theologian who has also written books on biology and economics. Roland Faber and Catherine Keller integrate Whitehead with poststructuralist, postcolonialist, and feminist theory. Charles Birch was both a theologian and a geneticist. Franklin I. Gamwell writes on theology and political theory. Process philosophy is even more difficult to pin down than process theology. In practice, the two fields cannot be neatly separated. The 32-volume State University of New York series in constructive postmodern thought edited by process philosopher and theologian David Ray Griffin displays the range of areas in which different process philosophers work, including physics, ecology, medicine, public policy, nonviolence, politics, and psychology. One philosophical school which has historically had a close relationship with process philosophy is American pragmatism. Whitehead himself thought highly of William James and John Dewey, and acknowledged his indebtedness to them in the preface to Process and Reality. Charles Hartshorne (along with Paul Weiss) edited the collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, one of the founders of pragmatism. Noted neopragmatist Richard Rorty was in turn a student of Hartshorne. Today, Nicholas Rescher is one example of a philosopher who advocates both process philosophy and pragmatism. In addition, while they might not properly be called process philosophers, Whitehead has been influential in the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze, Milič Čapek, Isabelle Stengers, Bruno Latour, Susanne Langer, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.   === ScienceEdit ===  In recent years, Whiteheadian thought has become a stimulating influence in scientific research. Timothy E. Eastman and Hank Keeton's Physics and Whitehead (2004) and Michael Epperson's Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead (2004) are recent examples of Whiteheadian approaches to physics, while Brian G. Henning, Adam Scarfe, and Dorion Sagan's Beyond Mechanism (2013) and Rupert Sheldrake's Science Set Free (2012) are recent examples of Whiteheadian approaches to biology. In physics, Whitehead's thought has had some influence. He articulated a view that can perhaps be regarded as dual to Einstein's general relativity. It has been severely criticized but perhaps the matter is still unsettled. Yutaka Tanaka, who suggests that the gravitational constant disagrees with experimental findings, proposes that Einstein's work does not actually refute Whitehead's formulation. Also, although Whitehead himself gave only secondary consideration to quantum theory, his metaphysics of processes has proved attractive to some physicists in that field. Henry Stapp and David Bohm are among those whose work has been influenced by Whitehead. Other scientists for whom Whitehead's work has been influential include physical chemist Ilya Prigogine, biologist Conrad Hal Waddington, and geneticists Charles Birch and Sewall Wright.   === Ecology, economy, and sustainabilityEdit ===  One of the most promising applications of Whitehead's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization, sustainability, and environmental ethics. "Because Whitehead's holistic metaphysics of value lends itself so readily to an ecological point of view, many see his work as a promising alternative to the traditional mechanistic worldview, providing a detailed metaphysical picture of a world constituted by a web of interdependent relations." This work has been pioneered by John B. Cobb, Jr., whose book Is It Too Late? A Theology of Ecology (1971) was the first single-authored book in environmental ethics. Cobb also co-authored a book with economist Herman Daly entitled For the Common Good: Redirecting the Economy toward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future (1989), which applied Whitehead's thought to economics, and received the Grawemeyer Award for Ideas Improving World Order. Cobb followed this with a second book, Sustaining the Common Good: A Christian Perspective on the Global Economy (1994), which aimed to challenge "economists' zealous faith in the great god of growth."   === EducationEdit === Whitehead is widely known for his influence in education theory. His philosophy inspired the formation of the Association for Process Philosophy of Education (APPE), which published eleven volumes of a journal titled Process Papers on process philosophy and education from 1996 to 2008. Whitehead's theories on education also led to the formation of new modes of learning and new models of teaching. One such model is the ANISA model developed by Daniel C. Jordan, which sought to address a lack of understanding of the nature of people in current education systems. As Jordan and Raymond P. Shepard put it: "Because it has not defined the nature of man, education is in the untenable position of having to devote its energies to the development of curricula without any coherent ideas about the nature of the creature for whom they are intended." Another model is the FEELS model developed by Xie Bangxiu and deployed successfully in China. "FEELS" stands for five things in curriculum and education: Flexible-goals, Engaged-learner, Embodied-knowledge, Learning-through-interactions, and Supportive-teacher. It is used for understanding and evaluating educational curriculum under the assumption that the purpose of education is to "help a person become whole." This work is in part the product of cooperation between Chinese government organizations and the Institute for the Postmodern Development of China. Whitehead's philosophy of education has also found institutional support in Canada, where the University of Saskatchewan created a Process Philosophy Research Unit and sponsored several conferences on process philosophy and education. Dr. Howard Woodhouse at the University of Saskatchewan remains a strong proponent of Whiteheadian education. Two recent books which further develop Whitehead's philosophy of education include: Modes of Learning: Whitehead's Metaphysics and the Stages of Education (2012) by George Allan; and The Adventure of Education: Process Philosophers on Learning, Teaching, and Research (2009) by Adam Scarfe.   === Business administrationEdit === Whitehead has had some influence on philosophy of business administration and organizational theory. This has led in part to a focus on identifying and investigating the effect of temporal events (as opposed to static things) within organizations through an “organization studies” discourse that accommodates a variety of 'weak' and 'strong' process perspectives from a number of philosophers. One of the leading figures having an explicitly Whiteheadian and panexperientialist stance towards management is Mark Dibben, who works in what he calls "applied process thought" to articulate a philosophy of management and business administration as part of a wider examination of the social sciences through the lens of process metaphysics. For Dibben, this allows "a comprehensive exploration of life as perpetually active experiencing, as opposed to occasional – and thoroughly passive – happening." Dibben has published two books on applied process thought, Applied Process Thought I: Initial Explorations in Theory and Research (2008), and Applied Process Thought II: Following a Trail Ablaze (2009), as well as other papers in this vein in the fields of philosophy of management and business ethics. Margaret Stout and Carrie M. Staton have also written recently on the mutual influence of Whitehead and Mary Parker Follett, a pioneer in the fields of organizational theory and organizational behavior. Stout and Staton see both Whitehead and Follett as sharing an ontology that "understands becoming as a relational process; difference as being related, yet unique; and the purpose of becoming as harmonizing difference." This connection is further analyzed by Stout and Jeannine M. Love in Integrative Process: Follettian Thinking from Ontology to Administration    == See alsoEdit == Relationalism   == Primary worksEdit == Books written by Whitehead, listed by date of publication. A Treatise on Universal Algebra. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1898. ISBN 1-4297-0032-7. Available online at http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.chmm/1263316509. The Axioms of Descriptive Geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1907. Available online at http://quod.lib.umich.edu/u/umhistmath/ABN2643.0001.001. with Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, Volume I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1910. Available online at http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/b/bib/bibperm?q1=AAT3201.0001.001. Vol. 1 to *56 is available as a CUP paperback. An Introduction to Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1911. Available online at http://quod.lib.umich.edu/u/umhistmath/AAW5995.0001.001. Vol. 56 of the Great Books of the Western World series. with Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, Volume II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1912. Available online at http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/b/bib/bibperm?q1=AAT3201.0002.001. with Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, Volume III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1913. Available online at http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/b/bib/bibperm?q1=AAT3201.0003.001. The Organization of Thought Educational and Scientific. London: Williams & Norgate, 1917. Available online at https://archive.org/details/organisationofth00whit. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1919. Available online at https://archive.org/details/enquiryconcernpr00whitrich. The Concept of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920. Based on the November 1919 Tarner Lectures delivered at Trinity College. Available online at https://archive.org/details/cu31924012068593. The Principle of Relativity with Applications to Physical Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922. Available online at https://archive.org/details/theprincipleofre00whituoft. Science and the Modern World. New York: Macmillan Company, 1925. Vol. 55 of the Great Books of the Western World series. Religion in the Making. New York: Macmillan Company, 1926. Based on the 1926 Lowell Lectures. Symbolism, Its Meaning and Effect. New York: Macmillan Co., 1927. Based on the 1927 Barbour-Page Lectures delivered at the University of Virginia. Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. New York: Macmillan Company, 1929. Based on the 1927–28 Gifford Lectures delivered at the University of Edinburgh. The 1978 Free Press "corrected edition" edited by David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne corrects many errors in both the British and American editions, and also provides a comprehensive index. The Aims of Education and Other Essays. New York: Macmillan Company, 1929. The Function of Reason. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1929. Based on the March 1929 Louis Clark Vanuxem Foundation Lectures delivered at Princeton University. Adventures of Ideas. New York: Macmillan Company, 1933. Also published by Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1933. Nature and Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934. Modes of Thought. New York: MacMillan Company, 1938. "Mathematics and the Good." In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 666–681. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. "Immortality." In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 682–700. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. Essays in Science and Philosophy. London: Philosophical Library, 1947. with Allison Heartz Johnson, ed. The Wit and Wisdom of Whitehead. Boston: Beacon Press, 1947.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == For the most comprehensive list of resources related to Whitehead, see the thematic bibliography of the Center for Process Studies. Casati, Roberto, and Achille C. Varzi. Parts and Places: The Structures of Spatial Representation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1999. Ford, Lewis. Emergence of Whitehead's Metaphysics, 1925–1929. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1985. Hartshorne, Charles. Whitehead's Philosophy: Selected Essays, 1935–1970. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1972. Henning, Brian G. The Ethics of Creativity: Beauty, Morality, and Nature in a Processive Cosmos. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2005. Holtz, Harald and Ernest Wolf-Gazo, eds. Whitehead und der Prozeßbegriff / Whitehead and The Idea of Process. Proceedings of The First International Whitehead-Symposion. Verlag Karl Alber, Freiburg i. B. / München, 1984. ISBN 3-495-47517-6 Jones, Judith A. Intensity: An Essay in Whiteheadian Ontology. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1998. Kraus, Elizabeth M. The Metaphysics of Experience. New York: Fordham University Press, 1979. McDaniel, Jay. What is Process Thought?: Seven Answers to Seven Questions. Claremont: P&F Press, 2008. McHenry, Leemon. The Event Universe: The Revisionary Metaphysics of Alfred North Whitehead. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2015. Nobo, Jorge L. Whitehead's Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986. Price, Lucien. Dialogues of Alfred North Whitehead. New York: Mentor Books, 1956. Quine, Willard Van Orman. "Whitehead and the rise of modern logic." In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 125–163. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. Rapp, Friedrich and Reiner Wiehl, eds. Whiteheads Metaphysik der Kreativität. Internationales Whitehead-Symposium Bad Homburg 1983. Verlag Karl Alber, Freiburg i. B. / München, 1986. ISBN 3-495-47612-1 Rescher, Nicholas. Process Metaphysics. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995. Rescher, Nicholas. Process Philosophy: A Survey of Basic Issues. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2001. Schilpp, Paul Arthur, ed. The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. Part of the Library of Living Philosophers series. Siebers, Johan. The Method of Speculative Philosophy: An Essay on the Foundations of Whitehead's Metaphysics. Kassel: Kassel University Press GmbH, 2002. ISBN 3-933146-79-8 Smith, Olav Bryant. Myths of the Self: Narrative Identity and Postmodern Metaphysics. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2004. ISBN 0-7391-0843-3 – Contains a section called "Alfred North Whitehead: Toward a More Fundamental Ontology" that is an overview of Whitehead's metaphysics. Weber, Michel. Whitehead's Pancreativism — The Basics. Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag, 2006. Weber, Michel. Whitehead’s Pancreativism — Jamesian Applications, Frankfurt / Paris: Ontos Verlag, 2011. Weber, Michel and Will Desmond (eds.). Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought, Frankfurt / Lancaster: Ontos Verlag, 2008. Alan Van Wyk and Michel Weber (eds.). Creativity and Its Discontents. The Response to Whitehead's Process and Reality, Frankfurt / Lancaster: Ontos Verlag, 2009. Will, Clifford. Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.   == External linksEdit == Summary of Whitehead's Philosophy A Brief Introduction to Whitehead's Metaphysics Center for Process Studies in Claremont, California. A faculty research center of Claremont Lincoln University, in association with Claremont School of Theology and Claremont Graduate University. The Center organizes conferences and events and publishes materials pertaining to Whitehead and process thought. It also maintains extensive Whitehead-related bibliographies. Society for the Study of Process Philosophies, a scholarly society that holds periodic meetings in conjunction with each of the divisional meetings of the American Philosophical Association, as well as at the annual meeting of the Society for the Advancement of American Philosophy. "Alfred North Whitehead" in the MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, by John J. O'Connor and Edmund F. Robertson. "Alfred North Whitehead: New World Philosopher" at the Harvard Square Library. Jesus, Jazz, and Buddhism: Process Thinking for a More Hospitable World "What is Process Thought?" an introductory video series to process thought by Jay McDaniel. Centre de philosophie pratique « Chromatiques whiteheadiennes » "Whitehead's Principle of Relativity" by John Lighton Synge on arXiv.org Works by Alfred North Whitehead at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Alfred North Whitehead at Internet Archive Works by Alfred North Whitehead at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)

Alfred Tarski (/ˈtɑrski/; January 14, 1901 – October 26, 1983) was a Polish logician, mathematician and philosopher. Educated at the University of Warsaw and a member of the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic and the Warsaw school of mathematics and philosophy, he emigrated to the USA in 1939 where he became a naturalized citizen in 1945, and taught and carried out research in mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley from 1942 until his death. A prolific author best known for his work on model theory, metamathematics, and algebraic logic, he also contributed to abstract algebra, topology, geometry, measure theory, mathematical logic, set theory, and analytic philosophy. His biographers Anita and Solomon Feferman state that, "Along with his contemporary, Kurt Gödel, he changed the face of logic in the twentieth century, especially through his work on the concept of truth and the theory of models."   == LifeEdit == Alfred Tarski was born Alfred Teitelbaum (Polish spelling: "Tajtelbaum"), to parents who were Polish Jews in comfortable circumstances. He first manifested his mathematical abilities while in secondary school, at Warsaw's Szkoła Mazowiecka. Nevertheless, he entered the University of Warsaw in 1918 intending to study biology. After Poland regained independence in 1918, Warsaw University came under the leadership of Jan Łukasiewicz, Stanisław Leśniewski and Wacław Sierpiński and quickly became a world-leading research institution in logic, foundational mathematics, and the philosophy of mathematics. Leśniewski recognized Tarski's potential as a mathematician and encouraged him to abandon biology. Henceforth Tarski attended courses taught by Łukasiewicz, Sierpiński, Stefan Mazurkiewicz and Tadeusz Kotarbiński, and became the only person ever to complete a doctorate under Leśniewski's supervision. Tarski and Leśniewski soon grew cool to each other. However, in later life, Tarski reserved his warmest praise for Kotarbiński, as was mutual. In 1923, Alfred Teitelbaum and his brother Wacław changed their surname to "Tarski." (Years later, Alfred met another Alfred Tarski in northern California.) The Tarski brothers also converted to Roman Catholicism, Poland's dominant religion. Alfred did so even though he was an avowed atheist. Tarski was a Polish nationalist who saw himself as a Pole and wished to be fully accepted as such — later, in America, he spoke Polish at home. After becoming the youngest person ever to complete a doctorate at Warsaw University, Tarski taught logic at the Polish Pedagogical Institute, mathematics and logic at the University, and served as Łukasiewicz's assistant. Because these positions were poorly paid, Tarski also taught mathematics at a Warsaw secondary school; before World War II, it was not uncommon for European intellectuals of research caliber to teach high school. Hence between 1923 and his departure for the United States in 1939, Tarski not only wrote several textbooks and many papers, a number of them ground-breaking, but also did so while supporting himself primarily by teaching high-school mathematics. In 1929 Tarski married fellow teacher Maria Witkowska, a Pole of Catholic background. She had worked as a courier for the army in the Polish-Soviet War. They had two children; a son Jan who became a physicist, and a daughter Ina who married the mathematician Andrzej Ehrenfeucht. Tarski applied for a chair of philosophy at Lwów University, but on Bertrand Russell's recommendation it was awarded to Leon Chwistek. In 1930, Tarski visited the University of Vienna, lectured to Karl Menger's colloquium, and met Kurt Gödel. Thanks to a fellowship, he was able to return to Vienna during the first half of 1935 to work with Menger's research group. From Vienna he traveled to Paris to present his ideas on truth at the first meeting of the Unity of Science movement, an outgrowth of the Vienna Circle. In 1937, Tarski applied for a chair at Poznań University but the chair was abolished. Tarski's ties to the Unity of Science movement likely saved his life, because they resulted in his being invited to address the Unity of Science Congress held in September 1939 at Harvard University. Thus he left Poland in August 1939, on the last ship to sail from Poland for the United States before the German and Soviet invasion of Poland and the outbreak of World War II. Tarski left reluctantly, because Leśniewski had died a few months before, creating a vacancy which Tarski hoped to fill. Oblivious to the Nazi threat, he left his wife and children in Warsaw. He did not see them again until 1946. During the war, nearly all his extended family died at the hands of the German occupying authorities. Once in the United States, Tarski held a number of temporary teaching and research positions: Harvard University (1939), City College of New York (1940), and thanks to a Guggenheim Fellowship, the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (1942), where he again met Gödel. In 1942, Tarski joined the Mathematics Department at the University of California, Berkeley, where he spent the rest of his career. Tarski became an American citizen in 1945. Although emeritus from 1968, he taught until 1973 and supervised Ph.D. candidates until his death. At Berkeley, Tarski acquired a reputation as an awesome and demanding teacher, a fact noted by many observers:  His seminars at Berkeley quickly became famous in the world of mathematical logic. His students, many of whom became distinguished mathematicians, noted the awesome energy with which he would coax and cajole their best work out of them, always demanding the highest standards of clarity and precision.  Tarski was extroverted, quick-witted, strong-willed, energetic, and sharp-tongued. He preferred his research to be collaborative — sometimes working all night with a colleague — and was very fastidious about priority.  A charismatic leader and teacher, known for his brilliantly precise yet suspenseful expository style, Tarski had intimidatingly high standards for students, but at the same time he could be very encouraging, and particularly so to women — in contrast to the general trend. Some students were frightened away, but a circle of disciples remained, many of whom became world-renowned leaders in the field.  Tarski supervised twenty-four Ph.D. dissertations including (in chronological order) those of Andrzej Mostowski, Bjarni Jónsson, Julia Robinson, Robert Vaught, Solomon Feferman, Richard Montague, James Donald Monk, Haim Gaifman, Donald Pigozzi and Roger Maddux, as well as Chen Chung Chang and Jerome Keisler, authors of Model Theory (1973), a classic text in the field. He also strongly influenced the dissertations of Alfred Lindenbaum, Dana Scott, and Steven Givant. Five of Tarski's students were women, a remarkable fact given that men represented an overwhelming majority of graduate students at the time. Tarski lectured at University College, London (1950, 1966), the Institut Henri Poincaré in Paris (1955), the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science in Berkeley (1958–60), the University of California at Los Angeles (1967), and the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile (1974–75). Among many distinctions garnered over the course of his career, Tarski was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences, the British Academy and the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1958, received honorary degrees from the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile in 1975, from Marseilles' Paul Cézanne University in 1977 and from the University of Calgary, as well as the Berkeley Citation in 1981. Tarski presided over the Association for Symbolic Logic, 1944–46, and the International Union for the History and Philosophy of Science, 1956–57. He was also an honorary editor of Algebra Universalis.   == MathematicianEdit == Tarski's mathematical interests were exceptionally broad. His collected papers run to about 2,500 pages, most of them on mathematics, not logic. For a concise survey of Tarski's mathematical and logical accomplishments by his former student Solomon Feferman, see "Interludes I–VI" in Feferman and Feferman. Tarski's first paper, published when he was 19 years old, was on set theory, a subject to which he returned throughout his life. In 1924, he and Stefan Banach proved that, if one accepts the Axiom of Choice, a ball can be cut into a finite number of pieces, and then reassembled into a ball of larger size, or alternatively it can be reassembled into two balls whose sizes each equal that of the original one. This result is now called the Banach–Tarski paradox. In A decision method for elementary algebra and geometry, Tarski showed, by the method of quantifier elimination, that the first-order theory of the real numbers under addition and multiplication is decidable. (While this result appeared only in 1948, it dates back to 1930 and was mentioned in Tarski (1931).) This is a very curious result, because Alonzo Church proved in 1936 that Peano arithmetic (the theory of natural numbers) is not decidable. Peano arithmetic is also incomplete by Gödel's incompleteness theorem. In his 1953 Undecidable theories, Tarski et al. showed that many mathematical systems, including lattice theory, abstract projective geometry, and closure algebras, are all undecidable. The theory of Abelian groups is decidable, but that of non-Abelian groups is not. In the 1920s and 30s, Tarski often taught high school geometry. Using some ideas of Mario Pieri, in 1926 Tarski devised an original axiomatization for plane Euclidean geometry, one considerably more concise than Hilbert's. Tarski's axioms form a first-order theory devoid of set theory, whose individuals are points, and having only two primitive relations. In 1930, he proved this theory decidable because it can be mapped into another theory he had already proved decidable, namely his first-order theory of the real numbers. In 1929 he showed that much of Euclidean solid geometry could be recast as a first-order theory whose individuals are spheres (a primitive notion), a single primitive binary relation "is contained in", and two axioms that, among other things, imply that containment partially orders the spheres. Relaxing the requirement that all individuals be spheres yields a formalization of mereology far easier to exposit than Lesniewski's variant. Near the end of his life, Tarski wrote a very long letter, published as Tarski and Givant (1999), summarizing his work on geometry. Cardinal Algebras studied algebras whose models include the arithmetic of cardinal numbers. Ordinal Algebras sets out an algebra for the additive theory of order types. Cardinal, but not ordinal, addition commutes. In 1941, Tarski published an important paper on binary relations, which began the work on relation algebra and its metamathematics that occupied Tarski and his students for much of the balance of his life. While that exploration (and the closely related work of Roger Lyndon) uncovered some important limitations of relation algebra, Tarski also showed (Tarski and Givant 1987) that relation algebra can express most axiomatic set theory and Peano arithmetic. For an introduction to relation algebra, see Maddux (2006). In the late 1940s, Tarski and his students devised cylindric algebras, which are to first-order logic what the two-element Boolean algebra is to classical sentential logic. This work culminated in the two monographs by Tarski, Henkin, and Monk (1971, 1985).   == LogicianEdit == Tarski's student, Vaught, has ranked Tarski as one of the four greatest logicians of all time — along with Aristotle, Gottlob Frege, and Kurt Gödel. However, Tarski often expressed great admiration for Charles Sanders Peirce, particularly for his pioneering work in the logic of relations. Tarski produced axioms for logical consequence, and worked on deductive systems, the algebra of logic, and the theory of definability. His semantic methods, which culminated in the model theory he and a number of his Berkeley students developed in the 1950s and 60s, radically transformed Hilbert's proof-theoretic metamathematics.  In [Tarski's] view, metamathematics became similar to any mathematical discipline. Not only its concepts and results can be mathematized, but they actually can be integrated into mathematics. ... Tarski destroyed the borderline between metamathematics and mathematics. He objected to restricting the role of metamathematics to the foundations of mathematics.  Tarski's 1936 article "On the concept of logical consequence" argued that the conclusion of an argument will follow logically from its premises if and only if every model of the premises is a model of the conclusion. In 1937, he published a paper presenting clearly his views on the nature and purpose of the deductive method, and the role of logic in scientific studies. His high school and undergraduate teaching on logic and axiomatics culminated in a classic short text, published first in Polish, then in German translation, and finally in a 1941 English translation as Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of Deductive Sciences. Tarski's 1969 "Truth and proof" considered both Gödel's incompleteness theorems and Tarski's undefinability theorem, and mulled over their consequences for the axiomatic method in mathematics.   == Truth in formalized languagesEdit == In 1933, Tarski published a very long paper in Polish, titled "Pojęcie prawdy w językach nauk dedukcyjnych", setting out a mathematical definition of truth for formal languages. The 1935 German translation was titled "Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen", "The concept of truth in formalized languages", sometimes shortened to "Wahrheitsbegriff". An English translation appeared in the 1956 first edition of the volume Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. This collection of papers from 1923 to 1938 is an event in 20th-century analytic philosophy, a contribution to symbolic logic, semantics, and the philosophy of language. For a brief discussion of its content, see Convention T (and also T-schema). Some recent philosophical debate examines the extent to which Tarski's theory of truth for formalized languages can be seen as a correspondence theory of truth. The debate centers on how to read Tarski's condition of material adequacy for a truth definition. That condition requires that the truth theory have the following as theorems for all sentences p of the language for which truth is being defined: "p" is true if and only if p. (where p is the proposition expressed by "p") The debate amounts to whether to read sentences of this form, such as "Snow is white" is true if and only if snow is white as expressing merely a deflationary theory of truth or as embodying truth as a more substantial property (see Kirkham 1992). It is important to realize that Tarski's theory of truth is for formalized languages, so examples in natural language are not illustrations of the use of Tarski's theory of truth.   == Logical consequenceEdit == In 1936, Tarski published Polish and German versions of a lecture he had given the preceding year at the International Congress of Scientific Philosophy in Paris. A new English translation of this paper, Tarski (2002), highlights the many differences between the German and Polish versions of the paper, and corrects a number of mistranslations in Tarski (1983). This publication set out the modern model-theoretic definition of (semantic) logical consequence, or at least the basis for it. Whether Tarski's notion was entirely the modern one turns on whether he intended to admit models with varying domains (and in particular, models with domains of different cardinalities). This question is a matter of some debate in the current philosophical literature. John Etchemendy stimulated much of the recent discussion about Tarski's treatment of varying domains. Tarski ends by pointing out that his definition of logical consequence depends upon a division of terms into the logical and the extra-logical and he expresses some skepticism that any such objective division will be forthcoming. "What are Logical Notions?" can thus be viewed as continuing "On the Concept of Logical Consequence".   == What are logical notions?Edit == Another theory of Tarski's attracting attention in the recent philosophical literature is that outlined in his "What are Logical Notions?" (Tarski 1986). This is the published version of a talk that he gave originally in 1966 in London and later in 1973 in Buffalo; it was edited without his direct involvement by John Corcoran. It became the most cited paper in the journal History and Philosophy of Logic. In the talk, Tarski proposed a demarcation of the logical operations (which he calls "notions") from the non-logical. The suggested criteria were derived from the Erlangen programme of the German 19th century Mathematician, Felix Klein. Mautner, in 1946, and possibly an article by the Portuguese mathematician Sebastiao e Silva, anticipated Tarski in applying the Erlangen Program to logic. That program classified the various types of geometry (Euclidean geometry, affine geometry, topology, etc.) by the type of one-one transformation of space onto itself that left the objects of that geometrical theory invariant. (A one-to-one transformation is a functional map of the space onto itself so that every point of the space is associated with or mapped to one other point of the space. So, "rotate 30 degrees" and "magnify by a factor of 2" are intuitive descriptions of simple uniform one-one transformations.) Continuous transformations give rise to the objects of topology, similarity transformations to those of Euclidean geometry, and so on. As the range of permissible transformations becomes broader, the range of objects one is able to distinguish as preserved by the application of the transformations becomes narrower. Similarity transformations are fairly narrow (they preserve the relative distance between points) and thus allow us to distinguish relatively many things (e.g., equilateral triangles from non-equilateral triangles). Continuous transformations (which can intuitively be thought of as transformations which allow non-uniform stretching, compression, bending, and twisting, but no ripping or glueing) allow us to distinguish a polygon from an annulus (ring with a hole in the centre), but do not allow us to distinguish two polygons from each other. Tarski's proposal was to demarcate the logical notions by considering all possible one-to-one transformations (automorphisms) of a domain onto itself. By domain is meant the universe of discourse of a model for the semantic theory of a logic. If one identifies the truth value True with the domain set and the truth-value False with the empty set, then the following operations are counted as logical under the proposal: Truth-functions: All truth-functions are admitted by the proposal. This includes, but is not limited to, all n-ary truth-functions for finite n. (It also admits of truth-functions with any infinite number of places.) Individuals: No individuals, provided the domain has at least two members. Predicates: the one-place total and null predicates, the former having all members of the domain in its extension and the latter having no members of the domain in its extension two-place total and null predicates, the former having the set of all ordered pairs of domain members as its extension and the latter with the empty set as extension the two-place identity predicate, with the set of all order-pairs <a,a> in its extension, where a is a member of the domain the two-place diversity predicate, with the set of all order pairs <a,b> where a and b are distinct members of the domain n-ary predicates in general: all predicates definable from the identity predicate together with conjunction, disjunction and negation (up to any ordinality, finite or infinite)  Quantifiers: Tarski explicitly discusses only monadic quantifiers and points out that all such numerical quantifiers are admitted under his proposal. These include the standard universal and existential quantifiers as well as numerical quantifiers such as "Exactly four", "Finitely many", "Uncountably many", and "Between four and 9 million", for example. While Tarski does not enter into the issue, it is also clear that polyadic quantifiers are admitted under the proposal. These are quantifiers like, given two predicates Fx and Gy, "More(x, y)", which says "More things have F than have G." Set-Theoretic relations: Relations such as inclusion, intersection and union applied to subsets of the domain are logical in the present sense. Set membership: Tarski ended his lecture with a discussion of whether the set membership relation counted as logical in his sense. (Given the reduction of (most of) mathematics to set theory, this was, in effect, the question of whether most or all of mathematics is a part of logic.) He pointed out that set membership is logical if set theory is developed along the lines of type theory, but is extralogical if set theory is set out axiomatically, as in the canonical Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Logical notions of higher order: While Tarski confined his discussion to operations of first-order logic, there is nothing about his proposal that necessarily restricts it to first-order logic. (Tarski likely restricted his attention to first-order notions as the talk was given to a non-technical audience.) So, higher-order quantifiers and predicates are admitted as well. In some ways the present proposal is the obverse of that of Lindenbaum and Tarski (1936), who proved that all the logical operations of Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica are invariant under one-to-one transformations of the domain onto itself. The present proposal is also employed in Tarski and Givant (1987). Solomon Feferman and Vann McGee further discussed Tarski's proposal in work published after his death. Feferman (1999) raises problems for the proposal and suggests a cure: replacing Tarski's preservation by automorphisms with preservation by arbitrary homomorphisms. In essence, this suggestion circumvents the difficulty Tarski's proposal has in dealing with sameness of logical operation across distinct domains of a given cardinality and across domains of distinct cardinalities. Feferman's proposal results in a radical restriction of logical terms as compared to Tarski's original proposal. In particular, it ends up counting as logical only those operators of standard first-order logic without identity. McGee (1996) provides a precise account of what operations are logical in the sense of Tarski's proposal in terms of expressibility in a language that extends first-order logic by allowing arbitrarily long conjunctions and disjunctions, and quantification over arbitrarily many variables. "Arbitrarily" includes a countable infinity.   == WorksEdit == Anthologies and collections 1986. The Collected Papers of Alfred Tarski, 4 vols. Givant, S. R., and McKenzie, R. N., eds. Birkhäuser. Givant, Steven, 1986. "Bibliography of Alfred Tarski", Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 913-41. 1983 (1956). Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938 by Alfred Tarski, Corcoran, J., ed. Hackett. 1st edition edited and translated by J. H. Woodger, Oxford Uni. Press. This collection contains translations from Polish of some of Tarski's most important papers of his early career, including The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages and On the Concept of Logical Consequence discussed above. Original publications of Tarski 1930 Une contribution a la theorie de la mesure. Fund Math 15 (1930), 42-50. 1930. (with Jan Łukasiewicz). "Untersuchungen uber den Aussagenkalkul" ["Investigations into the Sentential Calculus"], Comptes Rendus des seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Vol, 23 (1930) Cl. III, pp. 31–32 in Tarski (1983): 38-59. 1931. "Sur les ensembles définissables de nombres réels I", Fundamenta Mathematica 17: 210-239 in Tarski (1983): 110-142. 1936. "Grundlegung der wissenschaftlichen Semantik", Actes du Congrès international de philosophie scientifique, Sorbonne, Paris 1935, vol. III, Language et pseudo-problèmes, Paris, Hermann, 1936, pp. 1–8 in Tarski (1983): 401-408. 1936. "Über den Begriff der logischen Folgerung", Actes du Congrès international de philosophie scientifique, Sorbonne, Paris 1935, vol. VII, Logique, Paris: Hermann, pp. 1–11 in Tarski (1983): 409-420. 1936 (with Adolf Lindenbaum). "On the Limitations of Deductive Theories" in Tarski (1983): 384-92. 1994 (1941). Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of Deductive Sciences. Dover. 1941. "On the calculus of relations", Journal of Symbolic Logic 6: 73-89. 1944. "The Semantical Concept of Truth and the Foundations of Semantics," Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 4: 341-75. 1948. A decision method for elementary algebra and geometry. Santa Monica CA: RAND Corp. 1949. Cardinal Algebras. Oxford Univ. Press. 1953 (with Mostowski and Raphael Robinson). Undecidable theories. North Holland. 1956. Ordinal algebras. North-Holland. 1965. "A simplified formalization of predicate logic with identity", Archiv für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 7: 61-79 1969. "Truth and Proof", Scientific American 220: 63-77. 1971 (with Leon Henkin and Donald Monk). Cylindric Algebras: Part I. North-Holland. 1985 (with Leon Henkin and Donald Monk). Cylindric Algebras: Part II. North-Holland. 1986. "What are Logical Notions?", Corcoran, J., ed., History and Philosophy of Logic 7: 143-54. 1987 (with Steven Givant). A Formalization of Set Theory Without Variables. Vol.41 of American Mathematical Society colloquium publications. Providence RI: American Mathematical Society. ISBN 978-0821810415. Review 1999 (with Steven Givant). "Tarski's system of geometry", Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5: 175-214. 2002. "On the Concept of Following Logically" (Magda Stroińska and David Hitchcock, trans.) History and Philosophy of Logic 23: 155-96.   == See alsoEdit ==  List of things named after Alfred Tarski   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Biographical references Feferman, Anita Burdman (1999). "Alfred Tarski". American National Biography 21. Oxford University Press. pp. 330–332. ISBN 978-0-19-512800-0.  Feferman, Anita Burdman; Feferman, Solomon (2004). Alfred Tarski: Life and Logic. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80240-6. OCLC 54691904.  Givant, Steven, 1991. "A portrait of Alfred Tarski", Mathematical Intelligencer 13: 16-32. Patterson, Douglas. Alfred Tarski: Philosophy of Language and Logic (Palgrave Macmillan; 2012) 262 pages; biography focused on his work from the late-1920s to the mid-1930s, with particular attention to influences from his teachers Stanislaw Lesniewski and Tadeusz Kotarbinski. Logic literature The December 1986 issue of the Journal of Symbolic Logic surveys Tarski's work on model theory (Robert Vaught), algebra (Jonsson), undecidable theories (McNulty), algebraic logic (Donald Monk), and geometry (Szczerba). The March 1988 issue of the same journal surveys his work on axiomatic set theory (Azriel Levy), real closed fields (Lou Van Den Dries), decidable theory (Doner and Wilfrid Hodges), metamathematics (Blok and Pigozzi), truth and logical consequence (John Etchemendy), and general philosophy (Patrick Suppes). Blok, W. J.; Pigozzi, Don, "Alfred Tarski's Work on General Metamathematics", The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 53, No. 1 (Mar., 1988), pp. 36–50  Chang, C.C., and Keisler, H.J., 1973. Model Theory. North-Holland, Amsterdam. American Elsevier, New York. Corcoran, John, and Sagüillo, José Miguel, 2011. "The Absence of Multiple Universes of Discourse in the 1936 Tarski Consequence-Definition Paper", History and Philosophy of Logic 32: 359–80. [1] Corcoran, John, and Weber, Leonardo, 2015. "Tarski’s convention T: condition beta", South American Journal of Logic. 1, 3–32. Etchemendy, John, 1999. The Concept of Logical Consequence. Stanford CA: CSLI Publications. ISBN 1-57586-194-1 Feferman, Solomon, 1999. "Logic, Logics, and Logicism," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 40: 31-54. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Uni. Press. Kirkham, Richard, 1992. Theories of Truth. MIT Press. Maddux, Roger D., 2006. Relation Algebras, vol. 150 in "Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics", Elsevier Science. Mautner, F. I., 1946. "An Extension of Klein's Erlanger Program: Logic as Invariant-Theory", American Journal of Mathematics 68: 345-84. McGee, Van, 1996. "Logical Operations", Journal of Philosophical Logic 25: 567-80. Popper, Karl R., 1972, Rev. Ed. 1979, "Philosophical Comments on Tarski's Theory of Truth", with Addendum, Objective Knowledge, Oxford: 319-340. Sinaceur, H., 2001. "Alfred Tarski: Semantic shift, heuristic shift in metamathematics", Synthese 126: 49-65. Smith, James T., 2010. "Definitions and Nondefinability in Geometry", American Mathematical Monthly 117:475–89. Wolenski, Jan, 1989. Logic and Philosophy in the Lvov–Warsaw School. Reidel/Kluwer.   == External linksEdit ==  Media related to Alfred Tarski at Wikimedia Commons Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Tarski's Truth Definitions by Wilfred Hodges. Alfred Tarski by Mario Gómez-Torrente. Propositional Consequence Relations and Algebraic Logic by Ramon Jansana. Includes a fairly detailed discussion of Tarski's work on these topics.  Tarski's Semantic Theory on the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Alonzo Church (June 14, 1903 – August 11, 1995) was an American mathematician and logician who made major contributions to mathematical logic and the foundations of theoretical computer science. He is best known for the lambda calculus, Church–Turing thesis, proving the undecidability of the Entscheidungsproblem, Frege–Church ontology, and the Church–Rosser theorem.   == LifeEdit == Alonzo Church was born on June 14, 1903, in Washington, D.C., where his father, Samuel Robbins Church, was the judge of the Municipal Court for the District of Columbia. The family later moved to Virginia after his father lost this position because of failing eyesight. With help from his uncle, also named Alonzo Church, he was able to attend the Ridgefield School for Boys in Ridgefield, Connecticut. After graduating from Ridgefield in 1920, Church attended Princeton University where he was an exceptional student, publishing his first paper, on Lorentz transformations, and graduating in 1924 with a degree in mathematics. He stayed at Princeton, earning a Ph.D. in mathematics in three years under Oswald Veblen. He married Mary Julia Kuczinski in 1925 and the couple had three children, Alonzo Church, Jr. (1929), Mary Ann (1933) and Mildred (1938). After receiving his Ph.D. he taught briefly as an instructor at the University of Chicago and then received a two-year National Research Fellowship. This allowed him to attend Harvard University in 1927–1928 and then both University of Göttingen and University of Amsterdam the following year. He taught philosophy and mathematics at Princeton, 1929–1967, and at the University of California, Los Angeles, 1967–1990. He received honorary Doctor of Science degrees from Case Western Reserve University in 1969, Princeton University in 1985, and the University at Buffalo, The State University of New York in 1990 in connection with an international symposium in his honor organized by John Corcoran. A deeply religious person, he was a lifelong member of the Presbyterian church. He died in 1995 and was buried in Princeton Cemetery.   == Mathematical workEdit == Church is known for the following accomplishments: His proof that the Entscheidungsproblem, which asks for a decision procedure to determine the truth of arbitrary propositions in a mathematical theory, is undecidable for the theory of Peano arithmetic. This is known as Church's theorem. His articulation of what has come to be known as the Church–Turing thesis. He was the founding editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic, editing its reviews section until 1979. His creation of the lambda calculus. The lambda calculus emerged in his 1936 paper showing the unsolvability of the Entscheidungsproblem. This result preceded Alan Turing's work on the halting problem, which also demonstrated the existence of a problem unsolvable by mechanical means. Church and Turing then showed that the lambda calculus and the Turing machine used in Turing's halting problem were equivalent in capabilities, and subsequently demonstrated a variety of alternative "mechanical processes for computation." This resulted in the Church–Turing thesis. The lambda calculus influenced the design of the LISP programming language and functional programming languages in general. The Church encoding is named in his honor.   == StudentsEdit == Many of Church's doctoral students have led distinguished careers, including C. Anthony Anderson, Peter B. Andrews, George A. Barnard, David Berlinski, William W. Boone, Martin Davis, Alfred L. Foster, Leon Henkin, John G. Kemeny, Stephen C. Kleene, Simon B. Kochen, Maurice L'Abbé, Isaac Malitz, Gary R. Mar, Michael O. Rabin, Nicholas Rescher, Hartley Rogers, Jr., J. Barkley Rosser, Dana Scott, Raymond Smullyan, and Alan Turing. A more complete list of Church's students is available via Mathematics Genealogy Project.   == BooksEdit == Alonzo Church, Introduction to Mathematical Logic (ISBN 978-0-691-02906-1) Alonzo Church, The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion (ISBN 978-0-691-08394-0) Alonzo Church, A Bibliography of Symbolic Logic, 1666–1935 (ISBN 978-0-8218-0084-3) C. Anthony Anderson and Michael Zelëny, editors, Logic, Meaning and Computation: Essays in Memory of Alonzo Church (ISBN 978-1-4020-0141-3)   == See alsoEdit ==  Church–Turing–Deutsch principle Higher-order logic Universal set   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Enderton, Herbert B., Alonzo Church: Life and Work. Introduction to the Collected Works of Alonzo Church, MIT Press, not yet published. Enderton, Herbert B., In memoriam: Alonzo Church, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 1, no. 4 (Dec. 1995), pp. 486–488. Wade, Nicholas, Alonzo Church, 92, Theorist of the Limits of Mathematics (obituary), The New York Times, September 5, 1995, p. B6. Hodges, Wilfred, Obituary: Alonzo Church, The Independent (London), September 14, 1995. Alonzo Church interviewed by William Aspray on 17 May 1984. The Princeton Mathematics Community in the 1930s: An Oral-History Project, transcript number 5. Rota, Gian-Carlo, Fine Hall in its golden age: Remembrances of Princeton in the early fifties. In A Century of Mathematics in America, Part II, edited by Peter Duren, AMS History of Mathematics, vol 2, American Mathematical Society, 1989, pp. 223–226. Also available here.   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Alonzo Church", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Alonzo Church at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Princeton University Library, Manuscripts Division, The Alonzo Church Papers, 1924–1995: finding aid. A bibliography of Church's reviews for The Journal of Symbolic Logic, with a link to each

'Andrea Bonomi (Rome, 1940-) is an Italian philosopher and logician. Born in Rome in 1940, he studied with Enzo Paci. After an initial interest in phenomenology (Existence and structure: Essay on Merleau-Ponty, 1967), he decided to dedicate himself wholeheartedly to the study of analytic philosophy, particularly the philosophy of language. He was probably among the first, groundbreaking Italian philosophers to make serious contributions to this field. His major contributions have been concentrated in the area of formal semantics, especially in the field of the logic of epistemic, modal and temporal sentences. In particular, in Mental Events (1983), he proposed an original solution to the problem of the intentionality of propositional attitude attributions, based on the idea of perspectivity: the systematic ambiguity of interpretation which characterizes propositional attitude sentences is explained by way of the contrast between the point of view of the attributor and the point of view of the person who entertains the attitude attributed. Also of notable importance is his semantic analysis of fictitious contexts of language use (Universes of Discourse, 1979; The spirit of narration, 1994). The figure of Bonomi has had a decisive role in the development of analytic philosophy in Italy, both through his popular introductions and editions of the works of the classics in that tradition (The Logical Structure of Language, 1973) as well as through his teaching: many Italian philosophers of language went through their period of formation at his school.   == Selected bibliography ==   === Books === Sintassi e Semantica nella Grammatica Trasformazionale (with G. Usberti), Il Saggiatore, Milano. 1971. La Struttura Logica Del Linguaggio, Bompiani, Milano. 1973. Le Vie Del Riferimento, Bompiani, Milano. 1975 Universi Di Discorso, Feltrinelli, Milano. 1979 Eventi Mentali, Il Saggiatore, Milano. 1983. Le Immagini Dei Nomi, Garzanti, Milano. 1987. Lo Spirito Della Narrazione, Bompiani, Milano 1994 Tempo e Linguaggio. Introduzione Alla Semantica Del Tempo e Dell'Aspetto Verbale(with A. Zucchi), Bruno Mondadori, Milano 2001   === Articles === Articles in Italian: "Linguistica e Logica", in Intorno alla linguistica, a cura di C. Segre, Feltrinelli, Milano 1983 "Determinismo e Semantiche per le Logiche Temporali", in Atti del Convegno Nazionale di Logica, 1-5 ottobre 1979", Bibliopolis, Napoli. 1980 "Sul Cogito Cartesiano: Natura Inferenziale e Criteri di Giustificabilità", in Problemi fondazionali nella teoria del significato, a cura di G. Usberti, Olschki Editore, Firenze 1991 Articles in English: “The Problem of Language in Husserl”. TELOS 06 (Fall 1970). New York: Telos Press "On the Concept of Logical Form in Fregre, in H. Parret (ed.), History of Linguistic Thought and Contemporary Linguistics W. de Gruyter, Berlin-NewYork 1976 (pp.719–732) "Existence, Presupposition and Anaphoric Space,in Journal of Philosophical Logic, 6, 1977 (pp. 239–267) "A Problem About Intentionality", Topoi, 5, 1986 (pp. 91–100) "Relevant Situations", Synthese, 73, 1987 (pp. 623–636) "Persistent Truths", Intellectica, 1/2, 1992, (pp. 79–103) "Only:Association With Focus in Event Semantics" (with P. Casalegno), Natural Language Semantics 2, 1993 (pp. 1–45) "Tense, Reference and Temporal Anaphora", in Lingua e Stile, 30, 3, 1995 (pp. 483–500) "Transparency and Specificity in Intentional Contexts", in P. Leonardi and M. Santambrogio (eds.), On Quine, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995 (pp. 164–185) "Aspect and Quantification", in P. M. Bertinetto, V. Bianchi, H. Higginbotham, M. Squartini (eds), Temporal Reference, Aspect and Actionality, vol. I, Rosenberg & Sellier, Torino 1995 (pp. 93–110) "Aspect, Quantification and When-Clauses in Italian", Linguistics and Philosophy, 20, 1997 (pp. 469–514) "The Progressive and the Structure of Events", in Journal of Semantics, 14, 1997 (pp. 173–205) "Indices and Contexts of Discourse, in Lingua e Stile, 33.3, 1998 (pp. 471–485) "Book Review: P. Ludlow, Semantic, Tense and Time, Linguistics and Philosophy, 25, 2002, (pp. 81–95) "A Pragmatic Framework for Truth in Fiction (with S. Zucchi), Dialectica, 57, 2003, (pp. 103–120)   == External links == Collection of on-line texts by Andrea Bonomì

Andrzej Mostowski (1 November 1913 – 22 August 1975) was a Polish mathematician. He is perhaps best remembered for the Mostowski collapse lemma. Born in Lemberg, Austria-Hungary, Mostowski entered University of Warsaw in 1931. He was influenced by Kuratowski, Lindenbaum and Tarski. His Ph.D. came in 1939, officially directed by Kuratowski but in practice directed by Tarski who was a young lecturer at that time. He became an accountant after the German invasion of Poland but continued working in the Underground Warsaw University. After the Warsaw uprising of 1944 the Nazis tried to put him in a concentration camp. With the help of some Polish nurses he escaped to a hospital, choosing to take bread with him rather than his notebook containing his research. Some of this research he reconstructed after the War, however much of it remained lost. This work was largely on recursion theory and undecidability. From 1946 until his death in Vancouver, Canada, he worked at the University of Warsaw. Much of work during that time was on first order logic and model theory. His son Tadeusz is also a mathematician working on differential geometry. With Krzysztof Kurdyka and Adam Parusinski, Tadeusz Mostowski solved René Thom's gradient conjecture in 2000.   == See also == List of Polish People Mostowski model   == References ==   == Bibliography ==   === Books by Mostowski === Andrzej Mostowski, Sentences Undecidable in Formalized Arithmetic: An Exposition of the Theory of Kurt Godel, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1952, ISBN 978-0313231513 Andrezj Mostowski, Constructible Sets with Applications, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969.   === Papers by Mostowski === Andrzej Mostowski, "Über die Unabhängigkeit des Wohlordnungssatzes von Ordnungsprinzip." Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 32, No.1, ss. 201-252, (1939). Andrzej Mostowski, "On definable sets of positive integers", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 34, No. 1, ss. 81-112, (1947). Andrzej Mostowski, "Un théorème sur les nombres cos 2πk/n", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 1, No. 3, ss. 195-196, (1948). Casimir Kuratowski, Andrzej Mostowski, "Sur un problème de la théorie des groupes et son rapport à la topologie", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 2, No. 3-4, ss. 212-215, (1951). Andrzej Mostowski, "Groups connected with Boolean algebras. (Partial solution of the problem P92)", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 2, No. 3-4, ss. 216-219, (1951). Andrzej Mostowski, "On direct products of theories", Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 17, No. 1, ss. 1-31, (1952). Andrzej Mostowski, "Models of axiomatic systems", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 39, No. 1, ss. 133-158, (1952). Andrzej Mostowski, "On a system of axioms which has no recursively enumerable arithmetic model", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 40, No. 1, ss. 56-61, (1953). Andrzej Mostowski, "A formula with no recursively enumerable model", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 42, No. 1, ss. 125-140, (1955). Andrzej Mostowski, "Examples of sets definable by means of two and three quantifiers", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 42, No. 2, ss. 259-270, (1955). Andrzej Mostowski, "Contributions to the theory of definable sets and functions", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 42, No. 2, ss. 271-275, (1955). Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, Andrzej Mostowski, "Models of Axiomatic Theories Admitting Automorphisms", Fundamenta Mathematicae, Vol. 43, No. 1, ss. 50-68 (1956). Andrzej Mostowski, "L'oeuvre scientifique de Jan Łukasiewicz dans le domaine de la logique mathématique", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 44, No. 1, ss. 1-11, (1957). Andrzej Mostowski, "On a generalization of quantifiers", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 44, No. 1, ss. 12-36, (1957). Andrzej Mostowski, "On computable sequences", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 44, No. 1, ss. 37-51, (1957). Andrzej Grzegorczyk, Andrzej Mostowski and Czesław Ryll-Nardzewski, "The classical and ω-complete arithmetic", Journal of Symbolic Logic Vol. 23, No. 2, ss. 188-206, (1958). Andrzej Mostowski, "On a problem of W. Kinna and K. Wagner", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 6, No. 1, ss. 207-208, (1958). Andrzej Mostowski, "A generalization of the incompleteness theorem", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 49, No. 2, ss. 205-232, (1961). Andrzej Mostowski, "Axiomatizability of some many valued predicate calculi", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 50, No. 2, ss. 165-190, (1961). Yoshindo Suzuki, Andrzej Mostowski, "On ω-models which are not β-models", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 65, No. 1, ss. 83-93, (1969).   == References ==   == External links == Andrzej Mostowski at the Mathematics Genealogy Project O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Andrzej Mostowski", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Anne Sjerp Troelstra (born 10 August 1939) is Emeritus professor of pure mathematics and foundations of mathematics at the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC) of the University of Amsterdam. He is a constructivist logician, who has been influential in the development of intuitionistic logic. With Georg Kreisel, he was a developer of the theory of choice sequences. He also wrote one of the first texts on linear logic, and with H. Schwichtenberg he co-wrote an important book on proof theory.   == Notes == ^ Daimiposten – Oktober 2001 ^ MARTIN LÖB (1921–2006) ^ Marion, Mathieu (1998), Wittgenstein, Finitism, and the Foundations of Mathematics, New York: Oxford University Press, p. 205, ISBN 0-19-823516-X . ^ Jervell, Herman Ruge (1996), "Review: Lectures on Linear Logic by A. S. Troelstra", Journal of Symbolic Logic 61 (1): 336–338, doi:10.2307/2275616 . ^ Dyckhoff, Roy (1998), "Review: Basic Proof Theory by A. S. Troelstra; H. Schwichtenberg", Journal of Symbolic Logic 63 (4): 1605–1606, doi:10.2307/2586674 .   == External links == Homepage of A. S. Troelstra Anne Sjerp Troelstra at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Arend Heyting (Dutch: [ˈɦɛi̯tɪŋ]; 9 May 1898 – 9 July 1980) was a Dutch mathematician and logician. He was a student of Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer at the University of Amsterdam, and did much to put intuitionistic logic on a footing where it could become part of mathematical logic. Heyting gave the first formal development of intuitionistic logic in order to codify Brouwer's way of doing mathematics. The inclusion of Brouwer's name in the Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov interpretation is largely honorific, as Brouwer was opposed in principle to the formalisation of certain intuitionistic principles (and went as far as calling Heyting's work a "sterile exercise"). In 1942 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Heyting was born in Amsterdam, Netherlands, and died in Lugano, Switzerland.   == Selected publications == Heyting, A. (1930) Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik. (German) 3 parts, In: Sitzungsberichte der preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. phys.-math. Klasse, 1930, 42–65, 57-71, 158-169. Heyting, A. (1941) Untersuchungen der intuitionistische Algebra. (German) Verh. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Afd. Natuurk. Sect. 1. 18. no. 2, 36 pp. Heyting, A. (1956) Intuitionism. An introduction. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1959) Axioms for intuitionistic plane affine geometry. The axiomatic method. With special reference to geometry and physics. Proceedings of an International Symposium held at the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley, Dec. 26, 1957–Jan 4, 1958 (edited by L. Henkin, P. Suppes and A. Tarski) pp. 160–173 Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1962) After thirty years. 1962 Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Proc. 1960 Internat. Congr.) pp. 194–197 Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif. Heyting, A. (1963) Axiomatic projective geometry. Bibliotheca Mathematica, Vol. V. Interscience Publishers John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; P. Noordhoff N.V., Groningen; North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1966) Intuitionism: An introduction. Second revised edition North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1973) Address to Professor A. Robinson. At the occasion of the Brouwer memorial lecture given by Prof. A.Robinson on the 26th April 1973. Nieuw Arch. Wisk. (3) 21, pp. 134–137. Heyting, A. (1974) Mathematische Grundlagenforschung, Intuitionismus, Beweistheorie. (German) Reprint. Springer-Verlag, Berlin–New York. Heyting, A. (1980) Axiomatic projective geometry. Second edition. Bibliotheca Mathematica [Mathematics Library], V. Wolters-Noordhoff Scientific Publications, Ltd., Groningen; North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam–New York.   == See also == Heyting algebra Heyting arithmetic   == References == ^ Walter P. van Stigt (1990). Brouwer's Intuitionism. Amsterdam: North Holland. ^ "Arend Heyting (1898 - 1980)". Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved 28 July 2015.    == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Arend Heyting", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Arend Heyting at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Aristotle (/ˈærɪˌstɒtəl/; Greek: Ἀριστοτέλης [aristotélɛːs], Aristotélēs; 384 – 322 BC) was a Greek philosopher and scientist born in the Macedonian city of Stagira, Chalkidice, on the northern periphery of Classical Greece. His father, Nicomachus, died when Aristotle was a child, whereafter Proxenus of Atarneus became his guardian. At eighteen, he joined Plato's Academy in Athens and remained there until the age of thirty-seven (c. 347 BC). His writings cover many subjects – including physics, biology, zoology, metaphysics, logic, ethics, aesthetics, poetry, theater, music, rhetoric, linguistics, politics and government – and constitute the first comprehensive system of Western philosophy. Shortly after Plato died, Aristotle left Athens and, at the request of Philip of Macedon, tutored Alexander the Great starting from 343 BC. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, "Aristotle was the first genuine scientist in history ... [and] every scientist is in his debt." Teaching Alexander the Great gave Aristotle many opportunities and an abundance of supplies. He established a library in the Lyceum which aided in the production of many of his hundreds of books. The fact that Aristotle was a pupil of Plato contributed to his former views of Platonism, but, following Plato's death, Aristotle immersed himself in empirical studies and shifted from Platonism to empiricism. He believed all peoples' concepts and all of their knowledge was ultimately based on perception. Aristotle's views on natural sciences represent the groundwork underlying many of his works. Aristotle's views on physical science profoundly shaped medieval scholarship. Their influence extended into the Renaissance and were not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics. Some of Aristotle's zoological observations, such as on the hectocotyl (reproductive) arm of the octopus, were not confirmed or refuted until the 19th century. His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, which was incorporated in the late 19th century into modern formal logic. In metaphysics, Aristotelianism profoundly influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophical and theological thought during the Middle Ages and continues to influence Christian theology, especially the scholastic tradition of the Catholic Church. Aristotle was well known among medieval Muslim intellectuals and revered as "The First Teacher" (Arabic: المعلم الأول‎). His ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics. All aspects of Aristotle's philosophy continue to be the object of active academic study today. Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues – Cicero described his literary style as "a river of gold" – it is thought that only around a third of his original output has survived.   == LifeEdit ==  Aristotle, whose name means "the best purpose", was born in 384 BC in Stagira, Chalcidice, about 55 km (34 miles) east of modern-day Thessaloniki. His father Nicomachus was the personal physician to King Amyntas of Macedon. Although there is little information on Aristotle's childhood, he probably spent some time within the Macedonian palace, making his first connections with the Macedonian monarchy. At about the age of eighteen, Aristotle moved to Athens to continue his education at Plato's Academy. He remained there for nearly twenty years before leaving Athens in 348/47 BC. The traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the Academy's direction after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus, although it is possible that he feared anti-Macedonian sentiments and left before Plato died.  Aristotle then accompanied Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor. There, he traveled with Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos, where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island. Aristotle married Pythias, either Hermias's adoptive daughter or niece. She bore him a daughter, whom they also named Pythias. Soon after Hermias' death, Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander in 343 BC. Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon. During that time he gave lessons not only to Alexander, but also to two other future kings: Ptolemy and Cassander. Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest and his attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric. In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be "a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants". By 335 BC, Artistotle had returned to Athens, establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum. Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years. While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira, who bore him a son whom he named after his father, Nicomachus. According to the Suda, he also had an eromenos, Palaephatus of Abydus. This period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, is when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works. He wrote many dialogues of which only fragments have survived. Those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students. His most important treatises include Physics, Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, Politics, De Anima (On the Soul) and Poetics. Aristotle not only studied almost every subject possible at the time, but made significant contributions to most of them. In physical science, Aristotle studied anatomy, astronomy, embryology, geography, geology, meteorology, physics and zoology. In philosophy, he wrote on aesthetics, ethics, government, metaphysics, politics, economics, psychology, rhetoric and theology. He also studied education, foreign customs, literature and poetry. His combined works constitute a virtual encyclopedia of Greek knowledge. Near the end of his life, Alexander and Aristotle became estranged over Alexander's relationship with Persia and Persians. A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death, but there is little evidence. Following Alexander's death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled. In 322 BC, Eurymedon the Hierophant denounced Aristotle for not holding the gods in honor, prompting him to flee to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, explaining: "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy" – a reference to Athens's prior trial and execution of Socrates. He died in Euboea of natural causes later that same year, having named his student Antipater as his chief executor and leaving a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife. Charles Walston argues that the tomb of Aristotle is located on the sacred way between Chalcis and Eretria and to have contained two styluses, a pen, a signet-ring and some terra-cottas as well as what is supposed to be the earthly remains of Aristotle in the form of some skull fragments. In general, the details of the life of Aristotle are not well-established. The biographies of Aristotle written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points.   == ThoughtEdit ==   === LogicEdit ===  With the Prior Analytics, Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th century advances in mathematical logic. Kant stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that Aristotle's theory of logic completely accounted for the core of deductive inference.   ==== HistoryEdit ==== Aristotle "says that 'on the subject of reasoning' he 'had nothing else on an earlier date to speak of'". However, Plato reports that syntax was devised before him, by Prodicus of Ceos, who was concerned by the correct use of words. Logic seems to have emerged from dialectics; the earlier philosophers made frequent use of concepts like reductio ad absurdum in their discussions, but never truly understood the logical implications. Even Plato had difficulties with logic; although he had a reasonable conception of a deductive system, he could never actually construct one, thus he relied instead on his dialectic. Plato believed that deduction would simply follow from premises, hence he focused on maintaining solid premises so that the conclusion would logically follow. Consequently, Plato realized that a method for obtaining conclusions would be most beneficial. He never succeeded in devising such a method, but his best attempt was published in his book Sophist, where he introduced his division method.   ==== Analytics and the OrganonEdit ====  What we today call Aristotelian logic, Aristotle himself would have labeled "analytics". The term "logic" he reserved to mean dialectics. Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers. The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into six books in about the early 1st century CE: Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics On Sophistical Refutations The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings. It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the Categories, the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation, to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms (in the Analytics) and dialectics (in the Topics and Sophistical Refutations). The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu: the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning. There is one volume of Aristotle's concerning logic not found in the Organon, namely the fourth book of Metaphysics.   === Aristotle's epistemologyEdit ===  Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal. Aristotle's ontology, however, finds the universal in particular things, which he calls the essence of things, while in Plato's ontology, the universal exists apart from particular things, and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar. For Aristotle, therefore, epistemology is based on the study of particular phenomena and rises to the knowledge of essences, while for Plato epistemology begins with knowledge of universal Forms (or ideas) and descends to knowledge of particular imitations of these. For Aristotle, "form" still refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but is "instantiated" in a particular substance (see Universals and particulars, below). In a certain sense, Aristotle's method is both inductive and deductive, while Plato's is essentially deductive from a priori principles. In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences. In modern times, the scope of philosophy has become limited to more generic or abstract inquiries, such as ethics and metaphysics, in which logic plays a major role. Today's philosophy tends to exclude empirical study of the natural world by means of the scientific method. In contrast, Aristotle's philosophical endeavors encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry. In the larger sense of the word, Aristotle makes philosophy coextensive with reasoning, which he also would describe as "science". Note, however, that his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the term "scientific method". For Aristotle, "all science (dianoia) is either practical, poetical or theoretical" (Metaphysics 1025b25). By practical science, he means ethics and politics; by poetical science, he means the study of poetry and the other fine arts; by theoretical science, he means physics, mathematics and metaphysics. If logic (or "analytics") is regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy, the divisions of Aristotelian philosophy would consist of: (1) Logic; (2) Theoretical Philosophy, including Metaphysics, Physics and Mathematics; (3) Practical Philosophy and (4) Poetical Philosophy. In the period between his two stays in Athens, between his times at the Academy and the Lyceum, Aristotle conducted most of the scientific thinking and research for which he is renowned today. In fact, most of Aristotle's life was devoted to the study of the objects of natural science. Aristotle's metaphysics contains observations on the nature of numbers but he made no original contributions to mathematics. He did, however, perform original research in the natural sciences, e.g., botany, zoology, physics, astronomy, chemistry, meteorology, and several other sciences. Aristotle's writings on science are largely qualitative, as opposed to quantitative. Beginning in the 16th century, scientists began applying mathematics to the physical sciences, and Aristotle's work in this area was deemed hopelessly inadequate. His failings were largely due to the absence of concepts like mass, velocity, force and temperature. He had a conception of speed and temperature, but no quantitative understanding of them, which was partly due to the absence of basic experimental devices, like clocks and thermometers. His writings provide an account of many scientific observations, a mixture of precocious accuracy and curious errors. For example, in his History of Animals he claimed that human males have more teeth than females. In a similar vein, John Philoponus, and later Galileo, showed by simple experiments that Aristotle's theory that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect. On the other hand, Aristotle refuted Democritus's claim that the Milky Way was made up of "those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays," pointing out (correctly, even if such reasoning was bound to be dismissed for a long time) that, given "current astronomical demonstrations" that "the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun, then ... the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them." In places, Aristotle goes too far in deriving 'laws of the universe' from simple observation and over-stretched reason. Today's scientific method assumes that such thinking without sufficient facts is ineffective, and that discerning the validity of one's hypothesis requires far more rigorous experimentation than that which Aristotle used to support his laws. Aristotle also had some scientific blind spots. He posited a geocentric cosmology that we may discern in selections of the Metaphysics, which was widely accepted up until the 16th century. From the 3rd century to the 16th century, the dominant view held that the Earth was the rotational center of the universe. Because he was perhaps the philosopher most respected by European thinkers during and after the Renaissance, these thinkers often took Aristotle's erroneous positions as given, which held back science in this epoch. However, Aristotle's scientific shortcomings should not mislead one into forgetting his great advances in the many scientific fields. For instance, he founded logic as a formal science and created foundations to biology that were not superseded for two millennia. Moreover, he introduced the fundamental notion that nature is composed of things that change and that studying such changes can provide useful knowledge of underlying constants.   === GeologyEdit === As quoted from Charles Lyell's Principles of Geology:  He [Aristotle] refers to many examples of changes now constantly going on, and insists emphatically on the great results which they must produce in the lapse of ages. He instances particular cases of lakes that had dried up, and deserts that had at length become watered by rivers and fertilized. He points to the growth of the Nilotic delta since the time of Homer, to the shallowing of the Palus Maeotis within sixty years from his own time ... He alludes ... to the upheaving of one of the Eolian islands, previous to a volcanic eruption. The changes of the earth, he says, are so slow in comparison to the duration of our lives, that they are overlooked; and the migrations of people after great catastrophes, and their removal to other regions, cause the event to be forgotten. He says [12th chapter of his Meteorics] 'the distribution of land and sea in particular regions does not endure throughout all time, but it becomes sea in those parts where it was land, and again it becomes land where it was sea, and there is reason for thinking that these changes take place according to a certain system, and within a certain period.' The concluding observation is as follows: 'As time never fails, and the universe is eternal, neither the Tanais, nor the Nile, can have flowed for ever. The places where they rise were once dry, and there is a limit to their operations, but there is none to time. So also of all other rivers; they spring up and they perish; and the sea also continually deserts some lands and invades others The same tracts, therefore, of the earth are not some always sea, and others always continents, but every thing changes in the course of time.'   === PhysicsEdit ===   ==== Five elementsEdit ====  Aristotle proposed a fifth element, aether, in addition to the four proposed earlier by Empedocles. Earth, which is cold and dry; this corresponds to the modern idea of a solid. Water, which is cold and wet; this corresponds to the modern idea of a liquid. Air, which is hot and wet; this corresponds to the modern idea of a gas. Fire, which is hot and dry; this corresponds to the modern ideas of plasma and heat. Aether, which is the divine substance that makes up the heavenly spheres and heavenly bodies (stars and planets). Each of the four earthly elements has its natural place. All that is earthly tends toward the center of the universe, i.e., the center of the Earth. Water tends toward a sphere surrounding the center. Air tends toward a sphere surrounding the water sphere. Fire tends toward the lunar sphere (in which the Moon orbits). When elements are moved out of their natural place, they naturally move back towards it. This is "natural motion"—motion requiring no extrinsic cause. So, for example, in water, earthy bodies sink while air bubbles rise up; in air, rain falls and flame rises. Outside all the other spheres, the heavenly, fifth element, manifested in the stars and planets, moves in the perfection of circles.   ==== MotionEdit ====  Aristotle defined motion as the actuality of a potentiality as such. Aquinas suggested that the passage be understood literally; that motion can indeed be understood as the active fulfillment of a potential, as a transition toward a potentially possible state. Because actuality and potentiality are normally opposites in Aristotle, other commentators either suggest that the wording which has come down to us is erroneous, or that the addition of the "as such" to the definition is critical to understanding it.   ==== Causality, the four causesEdit ====  Aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active causal factors: Material cause describes the material out of which something is composed. Thus the material cause of a table is wood, and the material cause of a car is rubber and steel. It is not about action. It does not mean one domino knocks over another domino. The formal cause is its form, i.e., the arrangement of that matter. It tells us what a thing is, that any thing is determined by the definition, form, pattern, essence, whole, synthesis or archetype. It embraces the account of causes in terms of fundamental principles or general laws, as the whole (i.e., macrostructure) is the cause of its parts, a relationship known as the whole-part causation. Plainly put, the formal cause is the idea existing in the first place as exemplar in the mind of the sculptor, and in the second place as intrinsic, determining cause, embodied in the matter. Formal cause could only refer to the essential quality of causation. A simple example of the formal cause is the mental image or idea that allows an artist, architect, or engineer to create his drawings. The efficient cause is "the primary source", or that from which the change under consideration proceeds. It identifies 'what makes of what is made and what causes change of what is changed' and so suggests all sorts of agents, nonliving or living, acting as the sources of change or movement or rest. Representing the current understanding of causality as the relation of cause and effect, this covers the modern definitions of "cause" as either the agent or agency or particular events or states of affairs. So, take the two dominoes, this time of equal weighting, the first is knocked over causing the second also to fall over. The final cause is its purpose, or that for the sake of which a thing exists or is done, including both purposeful and instrumental actions and activities. The final cause or teleos is the purpose or function that something is supposed to serve. This covers modern ideas of motivating causes, such as volition, need, desire, ethics, or spiritual beliefs. Additionally, things can be causes of one another, causing each other reciprocally, as hard work causes fitness and vice versa, although not in the same way or function, the one is as the beginning of change, the other as the goal. (Thus Aristotle first suggested a reciprocal or circular causality as a relation of mutual dependence or influence of cause upon effect). Moreover, Aristotle indicated that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects; its presence and absence may result in different outcomes. Simply it is the goal or purpose that brings about an event. Our two dominoes require someone or something to intentionally knock over the first domino, because it cannot fall of its own accord. Aristotle marked two modes of causation: proper (prior) causation and accidental (chance) causation. All causes, proper and incidental, can be spoken as potential or as actual, particular or generic. The same language refers to the effects of causes, so that generic effects assigned to generic causes, particular effects to particular causes, operating causes to actual effects. Essentially, causality does not suggest a temporal relation between the cause and the effect.   ==== OpticsEdit ==== Aristotle held more accurate theories on some optical concepts than other philosophers of his day. The second oldest written evidence of a camera obscura (after Mozi c. 400 BC) can be found in Aristotle's documentation of such a device in 350 BC in Problemata. Aristotle's apparatus contained a dark chamber that had a single small hole, or aperture, to allow for sunlight to enter. Aristotle used the device to make observations of the sun and noted that no matter what shape the hole was, the sun would still be correctly displayed as a round object. In modern cameras, this is analogous to the diaphragm. Aristotle also made the observation that when the distance between the aperture and the surface with the image increased, the image was magnified.   ==== Chance and spontaneityEdit ==== According to Aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause. Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things. It is "from what is spontaneous" (but note that what is spontaneous does not come from chance). For a better understanding of Aristotle's conception of "chance" it might be better to think of "coincidence": Something takes place by chance if a person sets out with the intent of having one thing take place, but with the result of another thing (not intended) taking place. For example: A person seeks donations. That person may find another person willing to donate a substantial sum. However, if the person seeking the donations met the person donating, not for the purpose of collecting donations, but for some other purpose, Aristotle would call the collecting of the donation by that particular donator a result of chance. It must be unusual that something happens by chance. In other words, if something happens all or most of the time, we cannot say that it is by chance. There is also more specific kind of chance, which Aristotle names "luck", that can only apply to human beings, because it is in the sphere of moral actions. According to Aristotle, luck must involve choice (and thus deliberation), and only humans are capable of deliberation and choice. "What is not capable of action cannot do anything by chance".   === MetaphysicsEdit ===  Aristotle defines metaphysics as "the knowledge of immaterial being," or of "being in the highest degree of abstraction." He refers to metaphysics as "first philosophy", as well as "the theologic science."   ==== Substance, potentiality and actualityEdit ====  Aristotle examines the concepts of substance and essence (ousia) in his Metaphysics (Book VII), and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form. In book VIII, he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum, or the stuff of which it is composed. For example, the matter of a house is the bricks, stones, timbers etc., or whatever constitutes the potential house, while the form of the substance is the actual house, namely 'covering for bodies and chattels' or any other differentia (see also predicables) that let us define something as a house. The formula that gives the components is the account of the matter, and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form. With regard to the change (kinesis) and its causes now, as he defines in his Physics and On Generation and Corruption 319b–320a, he distinguishes the coming to be from: growth and diminution, which is change in quantity; locomotion, which is change in space; and alteration, which is change in quality. The coming to be is a change where nothing persists of which the resultant is a property. In that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality (dynamis) and actuality (entelecheia) in association with the matter and the form. Referring to potentiality, this is what a thing is capable of doing, or being acted upon, if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else. For example, the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially (dynamei) plant, and if is not prevented by something, it will become a plant. Potentially beings can either 'act' (poiein) or 'be acted upon' (paschein), which can be either innate or learned. For example, the eyes possess the potentiality of sight (innate – being acted upon), while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning (exercise – acting). Actuality is the fulfillment of the end of the potentiality. Because the end (telos) is the principle of every change, and for the sake of the end exists potentiality, therefore actuality is the end. Referring then to our previous example, we could say that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do.  "For that for the sake of which a thing is, is its principle, and the becoming is for the sake of the end; and the actuality is the end, and it is for the sake of this that the potentiality is acquired. For animals do not see in order that they may have sight, but they have sight that they may see."  In summary, the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities, which is also a final cause or end. Then Aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula, in time and in substantiality. With this definition of the particular substance (i.e., matter and form), Aristotle tries to solve the problem of the unity of the beings, for example, "what is it that makes a man one"? Since, according to Plato there are two Ideas: animal and biped, how then is man a unity? However, according to Aristotle, the potential being (matter) and the actual one (form) are one and the same thing.   ==== Universals and particularsEdit ====  Aristotle's predecessor, Plato, argued that all things have a universal form, which could be either a property, or a relation to other things. When we look at an apple, for example, we see an apple, and we can also analyze a form of an apple. In this distinction, there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple. Moreover, we can place an apple next to a book, so that we can speak of both the book and apple as being next to each other. Plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things. For example, it is possible that there is no particular good in existence, but "good" is still a proper universal form. Bertrand Russell is a 20th-century philosopher who agreed with Plato on the existence of "uninstantiated universals". Aristotle disagreed with Plato on this point, arguing that all universals are instantiated. Aristotle argued that there are no universals that are unattached to existing things. According to Aristotle, if a universal exists, either as a particular or a relation, then there must have been, must be currently, or must be in the future, something on which the universal can be predicated. Consequently, according to Aristotle, if it is not the case that some universal can be predicated to an object that exists at some period of time, then it does not exist. In addition, Aristotle disagreed with Plato about the location of universals. As Plato spoke of the world of the forms, a location where all universal forms subsist, Aristotle maintained that universals exist within each thing on which each universal is predicated. So, according to Aristotle, the form of apple exists within each apple, rather than in the world of the forms.   === Biology and medicineEdit === In Aristotelian science, especially in biology, things he saw himself have stood the test of time better than his retelling of the reports of others, which contain error and superstition. He dissected animals but not humans; his ideas on how the human body works have been almost entirely superseded.   ==== Empirical research programEdit ====  Aristotle is the earliest natural historian whose work has survived in some detail. Aristotle certainly did research on the natural history of Lesbos, and the surrounding seas and neighbouring areas. The works that reflect this research, such as History of Animals, Generation of Animals, and Parts of Animals, contain some observations and interpretations, along with sundry myths and mistakes. The most striking passages are about the sea-life visible from observation on Lesbos and available from the catches of fishermen. His observations on catfish, electric fish (Torpedo) and angler-fish are detailed, as is his writing on cephalopods, namely, Octopus, Sepia (cuttlefish) and the paper nautilus (Argonauta argo). His description of the hectocotyl arm, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until its rediscovery in the 19th century. He separated the aquatic mammals from fish, and knew that sharks and rays were part of the group he called Selachē (selachians). Another good example of his methods comes from the Generation of Animals in which Aristotle describes breaking open fertilized chicken eggs at intervals to observe when visible organs were generated. He gave accurate descriptions of ruminants' four-chambered fore-stomachs, and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark Mustelus mustelus.   ==== Classification of living thingsEdit ==== Aristotle distinguished about 500 species of birds, mammals and fishes. His classification of living things contains some elements which still existed in the 19th century. What the modern zoologist would call vertebrates and invertebrates, Aristotle called 'animals with blood' and 'animals without blood' (he did not know that complex invertebrates do make use of hemoglobin, but of a different kind from vertebrates). Animals with blood were divided into live-bearing (mammals), and egg-bearing (birds and fish). Invertebrates ('animals without blood') are insects, crustacea (divided into non-shelled – cephalopods – and shelled) and testacea (molluscs). In some respects, this incomplete classification is better than that of Linnaeus, who crowded the invertebrata together into two groups, Insecta and Vermes (worms). For Charles Singer, "Nothing is more remarkable than [Aristotle's] efforts to [exhibit] the relationships of living things as a scala naturae" Aristotle's History of Animals classified organisms in relation to a hierarchical "Ladder of Life" (scala naturae or Great Chain of Being), placing them according to complexity of structure and function so that higher organisms showed greater vitality and ability to move. Aristotle believed that intellectual purposes, i.e., final causes, guided all natural processes. Such a teleological view gave Aristotle cause to justify his observed data as an expression of formal design. Noting that "no animal has, at the same time, both tusks and horns," and "a single-hooved animal with two horns I have never seen," Aristotle suggested that Nature, giving no animal both horns and tusks, was staving off vanity, and giving creatures faculties only to such a degree as they are necessary. Noting that ruminants had multiple stomachs and weak teeth, he supposed the first was to compensate for the latter, with Nature trying to preserve a type of balance. In a similar fashion, Aristotle believed that creatures were arranged in a graded scale of perfection rising from plants on up to man, the scala naturae. His system had eleven grades, arranged according "to the degree to which they are infected with potentiality", expressed in their form at birth. The highest animals laid warm and wet creatures alive, the lowest bore theirs cold, dry, and in thick eggs. Aristotle also held that the level of a creature's perfection was reflected in its form, but not preordained by that form. Ideas like this, and his ideas about souls, are not regarded as science at all in modern times. He placed emphasis on the type(s) of soul an organism possessed, asserting that plants possess a vegetative soul, responsible for reproduction and growth, animals a vegetative and a sensitive soul, responsible for mobility and sensation, and humans a vegetative, a sensitive, and a rational soul, capable of thought and reflection. Aristotle, in contrast to earlier philosophers, but in accordance with the Egyptians, placed the rational soul in the heart, rather than the brain. Notable is Aristotle's division of sensation and thought, which generally went against previous philosophers, with the exception of Alcmaeon.   ==== Successor: TheophrastusEdit ====  Aristotle's successor at the Lyceum, Theophrastus, wrote a series of books on botany—the History of Plants—which survived as the most important contribution of antiquity to botany, even into the Middle Ages. Many of Theophrastus' names survive into modern times, such as carpos for fruit, and pericarpion for seed vessel. Rather than focus on formal causes, as Aristotle did, Theophrastus suggested a mechanistic scheme, drawing analogies between natural and artificial processes, and relying on Aristotle's concept of the efficient cause. Theophrastus also recognized the role of sex in the reproduction of some higher plants, though this last discovery was lost in later ages.   ==== Influence on Hellenistic medicineEdit ====  After Theophrastus, the Lyceum failed to produce any original work. Though interest in Aristotle's ideas survived, they were generally taken unquestioningly. It is not until the age of Alexandria under the Ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found. The first medical teacher at Alexandria, Herophilus of Chalcedon, corrected Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation. Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse while the former do not. Though a few ancient atomists such as Lucretius challenged the teleological viewpoint of Aristotelian ideas about life, teleology (and after the rise of Christianity, natural theology) would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 18th and 19th centuries. Ernst Mayr claimed that there was "nothing of any real consequence in biology after Lucretius and Galen until the Renaissance." Aristotle's ideas of natural history and medicine survived, but they were generally taken unquestioningly.   === PsychologyEdit === Aristotle's psychology, given in his treatise On the Soul (peri psyche, often known by its Latin title De Anima), posits three kinds of soul ("psyches"): the vegetative soul, the sensitive soul, and the rational soul. Humans have a rational soul. This kind of soul is capable of the same powers as the other kinds: Like the vegetative soul it can grow and nourish itself; like the sensitive soul it can experience sensations and move locally. The unique part of the human, rational soul is its ability to receive forms of other things and compare them. For Aristotle, the soul (psyche) was a simpler concept than it is for us today. By soul he simply meant the form of a living being. Because all beings are composites of form and matter, the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings, e.g. the ability to initiate movement (or in the case of plants, growth and chemical transformations, which Aristotle considers types of movement).   ==== MemoryEdit ==== According to Aristotle, memory is the ability to hold a perceived experience in your mind and to have the ability to distinguish between the internal "appearance" and an occurrence in the past. In other words, a memory is a mental picture (phantasm) in which Aristotle defines in De Anima, as an appearance which is imprinted on the part of the body that forms a memory. Aristotle believed an "imprint" becomes impressed on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes several changes in order to make a memory. A memory occurs when a stimuli is too complex that the nervous system (semi-fluid bodily organ) cannot receive all the impressions at once. These changes are the same as those involved in the operations of sensation, common sense, and thinking . The mental picture imprinted on the bodily organ is the final product of the entire process of sense perception. It does not matter if the experience was seen or heard, every experience ends up as a mental image in memory  Aristotle uses the word "memory" for two basic abilities. First, the actual retaining of the experience in the mnemonic "imprint" that can develop from sensation. Second, the intellectual anxiety that comes with the "imprint" due to being impressed at a particular time and processing specific contents. These abilities can be explained as memory is neither sensation nor thinking because is arises only after a lapse of time. Therefore, memory is of the past,  prediction is of the future, and sensation is of the present. The retrieval of our "imprints" cannot be performed suddenly. A transitional channel is needed and located in our past experiences, both for our previous experience and present experience. Aristotle proposed that slow-witted people have good memory because the fluids in their brain do not wash away their memory organ used to imprint experiences and so the "imprint" can easily continue. However, they cannot be too slow or the hardened surface of the organ will not receive new "imprints". He believed the young and the old do not properly develop an "imprint". Young people undergo rapid changes as they develop, while the elderly's organs are beginning to decay, thus stunting new "imprints". Likewise, people who are too quick-witted are similar to the young and the image cannot be fixed because of the rapid changes of their organ. Because intellectual functions are not involved in memory, memories belong to some animals too, but only those in which have perception of time.   ===== RecollectionEdit ===== Because Aristotle believes people receive all kinds of sense perceptions and people perceive them as images or "imprints", people are continually weaving together new "imprints" of things they experience. In order to search for these "imprints", people search the memory itself. Within the memory, if one experience is offered instead of a specific memory, that person will reject this experience until they find what they are looking for. Recollection occurs when one experience naturally follows another. If the chain of "images" is needed, one memory will stimulate the other. If the chain of "images" is not needed, but expected, then it will only stimulate the other memory in most instances. When people recall experiences, they stimulate certain previous experiences until they have stimulated the one that was needed. Recollection is the self-directed activity of retrieving the information stored in a memory "imprint" after some time has passed. Retrieval of stored information is dependent on the scope of mnemonic capabilities of a being (human or animal) and the abilities the human or animal possesses . Only humans will remember "imprints" of intellectual activity, such as numbers and words. Animals that have perception of time will be able to retrieve memories of their past observations. Remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed. Recollection of an "imprint" is when the present experiences a person remembers are similar with elements corresponding in character and arrangement of past sensory experiences. When an "imprint" is recalled, it may bring forth a large group of related "imprints". Aristotle believed the chain of thought, which ends in recollection of certain "imprints", was connected systematically in three sorts of relationships: similarity, contrast, and contiguity. These three laws make up his Laws of Association. Aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within our mind. A force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience. According to Aristotle, association is the power innate in a mental state, which operates upon the unexpressed remains of former experiences, allowing them to rise and be recalled.   ==== DreamsEdit ====   ===== SleepEdit ===== Before understanding Aristotle's take on dreams, first his idea of sleep must be examined. Aristotle gives an account of his explanation of sleep in On Sleep and Wakefulness. Sleep takes place as a result of overuse of the senses or of digestion, so it is vital to the body, including the senses, so it can be revitalized. While a person is asleep, the critical activities, which include thinking, sensing, recalling and remembering, do not function as they do during wakefulness. Since a person cannot sense during sleep they can also not have a desire, which is the result of a sensation. However, the senses are able to work during sleep, albeit differently than when a person is awake because during sleep a person can still have sensory experiences. Also, all of the senses are not inactive during sleep, only the ones that are weary.   ===== Theory of dreamsEdit ===== Dreams do not involve actually sensing a stimulus because, as discussed, the senses do not work as they normally do during sleep. In dreams, sensation is still involved, but in an altered manner than when awake. Aristotle explains the phenomenon that occurs when a person stares at a moving stimulus such as the waves in a body of water. When they look away from that stimulus, the next thing they look at appears to be moving in a wave like motion. When a person perceives a stimulus and the stimulus is no longer the focus of their attention, it leaves an impression. When the body is awake and the senses are functioning properly, a person constantly encounters new stimuli to sense and so the impressions left from previously perceived stimuli become irrelevant. However, during sleep the impressions stimuli made throughout the day become noticed because there are not new sensory experiences to distract from these impressions that were made. So, dreams result from these lasting impressions. Since impressions are all that are left and not the exact stimuli, dreams will not resemble the actual experience that occurred when awake. During sleep, a person is in an altered state of mind. Aristotle compares a sleeping person to a person who is overtaken by strong feelings toward a stimulus. For example, a person who has a strong infatuation with someone may begin to think they see that person everywhere because they are so overtaken by their feelings. When a person is asleep, their senses are not acting as they do when they are awake and this results in them thinking like a person who is influenced by strong feelings. Since a person sleeping is in this suggestible state, they become easily deceived by what appears in their dreams. When asleep, a person is unable to make judgments as they do when they are awake Due to the senses not functioning normally during sleep, they are unable to help a person judge what is happening in their dream. This in turn leads the person to believe the dream is real. Dreams may be absurd in nature but the senses are not able to discern whether they are real or not. So, the dreamer is left to accept the dream because they lack the choice to judge it. One component of Aristotle's theory of dreams introduces ideas that are contradictory to previously held beliefs. He claimed that dreams are not foretelling and that they are not sent by a divine being. Aristotle reasoned that instances in which dreams do resemble future events are happenstances not divinations. These ideas were contradictory to what had been believed about dreams, but at the time in which he introduced these ideas more thinkers were beginning to give naturalistic as opposed to supernatural explanations to phenomena. Aristotle also includes in his theory of dreams what constitutes a dream and what does not. He claimed that a dream is first established by the fact that the person is asleep when they experience it. If a person had an image appear for a moment after waking up or if they see something in the dark it is not considered a dream because they were awake when it occurred. Secondly, any sensory experience that actually occurs while a person is asleep and is perceived by the person while asleep does not qualify as part of a dream. For example, if, while a person is sleeping, a door shuts and in their dream they hear a door is shut, Aristotle argues that this sensory experience is not part of the dream. The actual sensory experience is perceived by the senses, the fact that it occurred while the person was asleep does not make it part of the dream. Lastly, the images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of sensory experiences had when awake.   === Practical philosophyEdit ===   ==== EthicsEdit ====  Aristotle considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study, i.e., one aimed at becoming good and doing good rather than knowing for its own sake. He wrote several treatises on ethics, including most notably, the Nicomachean Ethics. Aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function (ergon) of a thing. An eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see, because the proper function of an eye is sight. Aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans, and that this function must be an activity of the psuchē (normally translated as soul) in accordance with reason (logos). Aristotle identified such an optimum activity of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action, eudaimonia, generally translated as "happiness" or sometimes "well being". To have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character (ēthikē aretē), often translated as moral (or ethical) virtue (or excellence). Aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated not deliberately, but by teachers, and experience, leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things. When the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom (phronesis) and their intellect (nous) can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue, the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker, or in other words, a philosopher.   ==== PoliticsEdit ====  In addition to his works on ethics, which address the individual, Aristotle addressed the city in his work titled Politics. Aristotle considered the city to be a natural community. Moreover, he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family which in turn is prior to the individual, "for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part". He also famously stated that "man is by nature a political animal" and also arguing that humanity's defining factor among others in the animal kingdom is its rationality. Aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine, and as a collection of parts none of which can exist without the others. Aristotle's conception of the city is organic, and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner. The common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from Aristotle's understanding. Although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires, the natural community according to Aristotle was the city (polis) which functions as a political "community" or "partnership" (koinōnia). The aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability, but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life, and to perform beautiful acts: "The political partnership must be regarded, therefore, as being for the sake of noble actions, not for the sake of living together." This is distinguished from modern approaches, beginning with social contract theory, according to which individuals leave the state of nature because of "fear of violent death" or its "inconveniences." Excerpt from a speech by the character 'Aristotle' in the book Protrepticus (Hutchinson and Johnson, 2015 p. 22) For we all agree that the most excellent man should rule, i.e., the supreme by nature, and that the law rules and alone is authoritative; but the law is a kind of intelligence, i.e. a discourse based on intelligence. And again, what standard do we have, what criterion of good things, that is more precise than the intelligent man? For all that this man will choose, if the choice is based on his knowledge, are good things and their contraries are bad. And since everybody chooses most of all what conforms to their own proper dispositions (a just man choosing to live justly, a man with bravery to live bravely, likewise a self-controlled man to live with self-control), it is clear that the intelligent man will choose most of all to be intelligent; for this is the function of that capacity. Hence it's evident that, according to the most authoritative judgment, intelligence is supreme among goods.   ==== Rhetoric and poeticsEdit ====  Aristotle considered epic poetry, tragedy, comedy, dithyrambic poetry and music to be imitative, each varying in imitation by medium, object, and manner. For example, music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony, whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone, and poetry with language. The forms also differ in their object of imitation. Comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average. Lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation – through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama. Aristotle believed that imitation is natural to mankind and constitutes one of mankind's advantages over animals. While it is believed that Aristotle's Poetics comprised two books – one on comedy and one on tragedy – only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived. Aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements: plot-structure, character, style, thought, spectacle, and lyric poetry. The characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story; and the plot, not the characters, is the chief focus of tragedy. Tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear, and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions. Aristotle concludes Poetics with a discussion on which, if either, is superior: epic or tragic mimesis. He suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic, possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music, is more unified, and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope, it can be considered superior to epic. Aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles, folklore, and proverbs; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the Delphic Oracle and studied the fables of Aesop.   === Views on womenEdit ===  Aristotle's analysis of procreation describes an active, ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert, passive female element. On this ground, feminist metaphysics have accused Aristotle of misogyny and sexism. However, Aristotle gave equal weight to women's happiness as he did to men's, and commented in his Rhetoric that the things that lead to happiness need to be in women as well as men.   == Loss and preservation of his worksEdit ==  Modern scholarship reveals that Aristotle's "lost" works stray considerably in characterization from the surviving Aristotelian corpus. Whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with an intent for subsequent publication, the surviving works do not appear to have been so. Rather the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes unintended for publication. The authenticity of a portion of the surviving works as originally Aristotelian is also today held suspect, with some books duplicating or summarizing each other, the authorship of one book questioned and another book considered to be unlikely Aristotle's at all. Some of the individual works within the corpus, including the Constitution of Athens, are regarded by most scholars as products of Aristotle's "school," perhaps compiled under his direction or supervision. Others, such as On Colors, may have been produced by Aristotle's successors at the Lyceum, e.g., Theophrastus and Straton. Still others acquired Aristotle's name through similarities in doctrine or content, such as the De Plantis, possibly by Nicolaus of Damascus. Other works in the corpus include medieval palmistries and astrological and magical texts whose connections to Aristotle are purely fanciful and self-promotional. According to a distinction that originates with Aristotle himself, his writings are divisible into two groups: the "exoteric" and the "esoteric". Most scholars have understood this as a distinction between works Aristotle intended for the public (exoteric), and the more technical works intended for use within the Lyceum course / school (esoteric). Modern scholars commonly assume these latter to be Aristotle's own (unpolished) lecture notes (or in some cases possible notes by his students). However, one classic scholar offers an alternative interpretation. The 5th century neoplatonist Ammonius Hermiae writes that Aristotle's writing style is deliberately obscurantist so that "good people may for that reason stretch their mind even more, whereas empty minds that are lost through carelessness will be put to flight by the obscurity when they encounter sentences like these." Another common assumption is that none of the exoteric works is extant – that all of Aristotle's extant writings are of the esoteric kind. Current knowledge of what exactly the exoteric writings were like is scant and dubious, though many of them may have been in dialogue form. (Fragments of some of Aristotle's dialogues have survived.) Perhaps it is to these that Cicero refers when he characterized Aristotle's writing style as "a river of gold"; it is hard for many modern readers to accept that one could seriously so admire the style of those works currently available to us. However, some modern scholars have warned that we cannot know for certain that Cicero's praise was reserved specifically for the exoteric works; a few modern scholars have actually admired the concise writing style found in Aristotle's extant works. One major question in the history of Aristotle's works, then, is how were the exoteric writings all lost, and how did the ones we now possess come to us The story of the original manuscripts of the esoteric treatises is described by Strabo in his Geography and Plutarch in his Parallel Lives. The manuscripts were left from Aristotle to his successor Theophrastus, who in turn willed them to Neleus of Scepsis. Neleus supposedly took the writings from Athens to Scepsis, where his heirs let them languish in a cellar until the 1st century BC, when Apellicon of Teos discovered and purchased the manuscripts, bringing them back to Athens. According to the story, Apellicon tried to repair some of the damage that was done during the manuscripts' stay in the basement, introducing a number of errors into the text. When Lucius Cornelius Sulla occupied Athens in 86 BC, he carried off the library of Apellicon to Rome, where they were first published in 60 BC by the grammarian Tyrannion of Amisus and then by the philosopher Andronicus of Rhodes. Carnes Lord attributes the popular belief in this story to the fact that it provides "the most plausible explanation for the rapid eclipse of the Peripatetic school after the middle of the third century, and for the absence of widespread knowledge of the specialized treatises of Aristotle throughout the Hellenistic period, as well as for the sudden reappearance of a flourishing Aristotelianism during the first century B.C." Lord voices a number of reservations concerning this story, however. First, the condition of the texts is far too good for them to have suffered considerable damage followed by Apellicon's inexpert attempt at repair. Second, there is "incontrovertible evidence," Lord says, that the treatises were in circulation during the time in which Strabo and Plutarch suggest they were confined within the cellar in Scepsis. Third, the definitive edition of Aristotle's texts seems to have been made in Athens some fifty years before Andronicus supposedly compiled his. And fourth, ancient library catalogues predating Andronicus' intervention list an Aristotelian corpus quite similar to the one we currently possess. Lord sees a number of post-Aristotelian interpolations in the Politics, for example, but is generally confident that the work has come down to us relatively intact. On the one hand, the surviving texts of Aristotle do not derive from finished literary texts, but rather from working drafts used within Aristotle's school, as opposed, on the other hand, to the dialogues and other "exoteric" texts which Aristotle published more widely during his lifetime. The consensus is that Andronicus of Rhodes collected the esoteric works of Aristotle's school which existed in the form of smaller, separate works, distinguished them from those of Theophrastus and other Peripatetics, edited them, and finally compiled them into the more cohesive, larger works as they are known today.   == LegacyEdit ==  More than 2300 years after his death, Aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived. He contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence, and he was the founder of many new fields. According to the philosopher Bryan Magee, "it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did". Among countless other achievements, Aristotle was the founder of formal logic, pioneered the study of zoology, and left every future scientist and philosopher in his debt through his contributions to the scientific method. Despite these achievements, the influence of Aristotle's errors is considered by some to have held back science considerably. Bertrand Russell notes that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine". Russell also refers to Aristotle's ethics as "repulsive", and calls his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy". Russell notes that these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembers how large of an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.   === Later Greek philosophersEdit === The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school. Aristotle's notable students included Aristoxenus, Dicaearchus, Demetrius of Phalerum, Eudemos of Rhodes, Harpalus, Hephaestion, Meno, Mnason of Phocis, Nicomachus, and Theophrastus. Aristotle's influence over Alexander the Great is seen in the latter's bringing with him on his expedition a host of zoologists, botanists, and researchers. He had also learned a great deal about Persian customs and traditions from his teacher. Although his respect for Aristotle was diminished as his travels made it clear that much of Aristotle's geography was clearly wrong, when the old philosopher released his works to the public, Alexander complained "Thou hast not done well to publish thy acroamatic doctrines; for in what shall I surpass other men if those doctrines wherein I have been trained are to be all men's common property?"   === Influence on Byzantine scholarsEdit === Greek Christian scribes played a crucial role in the preservation of Aristotle by copying all the extant Greek language manuscripts of the corpus. The first Greek Christians to comment extensively on Aristotle were John Philoponus, Elias, and David in the sixth century, and Stephen of Alexandria in the early seventh century. John Philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of Aristotle's views on the eternity of the world, movement, and other elements of Aristotelian thought. After a hiatus of several centuries, formal commentary by Eustratius and Michael of Ephesus reappears in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, apparently sponsored by Anna Comnena.   === Influence on Islamic theologiansEdit === Aristotle was one of the most revered Western thinkers in early Islamic theology. Most of the still extant works of Aristotle, as well as a number of the original Greek commentaries, were translated into Arabic and studied by Muslim philosophers, scientists and scholars. Averroes, Avicenna and Alpharabius, who wrote on Aristotle in great depth, also influenced Thomas Aquinas and other Western Christian scholastic philosophers. Alkindus considered Aristotle as the outstanding and unique representative of philosophy and Averroes spoke of Aristotle as the "exemplar" for all future philosophers. Medieval Muslim scholars regularly described Aristotle as the "First Teacher". The title "teacher" was first given to Aristotle by Muslim scholars, and was later used by Western philosophers (as in the famous poem of Dante) who were influenced by the tradition of Islamic philosophy. In accordance with the Greek theorists, the Muslims considered Aristotle to be a dogmatic philosopher, the author of a closed system, and believed that Aristotle shared with Plato essential tenets of thought. Some went so far as to credit Aristotle himself with neo-Platonic metaphysical ideas.   === Influence on Western Christian theologiansEdit === With the loss of the study of ancient Greek in the early medieval Latin West, Aristotle was practically unknown there from c. AD 600 to c. 1100 except through the Latin translation of the Organon made by Boethius. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, interest in Aristotle revived and Latin Christians had translations made, both from Arabic translations, such as those by Gerard of Cremona, and from the original Greek, such as those by James of Venice and William of Moerbeke. After Thomas Aquinas wrote his theology, working from Moerbeke's translations, the demand for Aristotle's writings grew and the Greek manuscripts returned to the West, stimulating a revival of Aristotelianism in Europe that continued into the Renaissance. Aristotle is referred to as "The Philosopher" by Scholastic thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas. See Summa Theologica, Part I, Question 3, etc. These thinkers blended Aristotelian philosophy with Christianity, bringing the thought of Ancient Greece into the Middle Ages. It required a repudiation of some Aristotelian principles for the sciences and the arts to free themselves for the discovery of modern scientific laws and empirical methods. The medieval English poet Chaucer describes his student as being happy by having                       at his beddes heed Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed, Of aristotle and his philosophie, The Italian poet Dante says of Aristotle in the first circles of hell, I saw the Master there of those who know, Amid the philosophic family, By all admired, and by all reverenced; There Plato too I saw, and Socrates, Who stood beside him closer than the rest.   === Post-Enlightenment thinkersEdit === The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche has been said to have taken nearly all of his political philosophy from Aristotle. However debatable this is, Aristotle rigid separated action from production, and argued for the deserved subservience of some people ("natural slaves"), and the natural superiority (virtue, arete) of others. It is Martin Heidegger, not Nietzsche, who elaborated a new interpretation of Aristotle, intended to warrant his deconstruction of scholastic and philosophical tradition. Ayn Rand accredited Aristotle as "the greatest philosopher in history" and cited him as a major influence on her thinking. More recently, Alasdair MacIntyre has attempted to reform what he calls the Aristotelian tradition in a way that is anti-elitist and capable of disputing the claims of both liberals and Nietzscheans.   == List of worksEdit ==  The works of Aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are collected in the Corpus Aristotelicum. These texts, as opposed to Aristotle's lost works, are technical philosophical treatises from within Aristotle's school. Reference to them is made according to the organization of Immanuel Bekker's Royal Prussian Academy edition (Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica, Berlin, 1831–1870), which in turn is based on ancient classifications of these works.   == EponymsEdit ==  The Aristotle Mountains along the Oscar II Coast of Graham Land, Antarctica, are named after Aristotle. He was the first person known to conjecture, in his book Meteorology, the existence of a landmass in the southern high-latitude region and call it "Antarctica". Aristoteles (crater) is a crater on the Moon bearing the classical form of Aristotle's name.   == See alsoEdit == Aristotelian physics Aristotelian society Aristotelian theology Conimbricenses List of writers influenced by Aristotle Otium Philia Pseudo-Aristotle   == Notes and referencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == The secondary literature on Aristotle is vast. The following references are only a small selection.   == External linksEdit == Aristotle at DMOZ Aristotle at PhilPapers. Aristotle at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project. At the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy:  From the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:  General article at The Catholic Encyclopedia  Diogenes Laërtius, Life of Aristotle, translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925). Works by Aristotle at Open Library. Timeline of Aristotle's life Aristotle at PlanetMath.org.. Collections of works At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (primarily in English). Works by Aristotle at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Aristotle at Internet Archive Works by Aristotle at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  (English) (Greek) Perseus Project at Tufts University. At the University of Adelaide (primarily in English). (Greek) (French) P. Remacle The 11-volume 1837 Bekker edition of Aristotle's Works in Greek (PDF · DJVU) Bekker's Prussian Academy of Sciences edition of the complete works of Aristotle at Archive.org:  (English) Aristotle Collection (translation).

Arthur Norman Prior, also known as A. N. Prior, (1914–1969) was a noted logician and philosopher. Prior (1957) founded tense logic, now also known as temporal logic, and made important contributions to intensional logic, particularly in Prior (1971).   == Biography == Prior was born in Masterton New Zealand, 4 December 1914, the only child of Australian-born parents: Norman Henry Prior (1882-1967) and his wife born Elizabeth Munton Rothesay Teague (1889-1914). His mother died less than 3 weeks after his birth and he was cared for by his father's sister. His father, a medical practitioner in general practice, remarried in 1920 and there were three more children. Prior was educated entirely in New Zealand, where he was fortunate to have come under the influence of John Niemeyer Findlay. Despite knowing only modest mathematics, he began teaching philosophy and logic at Canterbury University College in 1946, filling the vacancy created by Karl Popper's resignation. He became Professor in 1953. Thanks to the good offices of Gilbert Ryle, who had met Prior in New Zealand in 1954, Prior spent the year 1956 on leave at the University of Oxford, where he gave the John Locke lectures in philosophy. These were subsequently published as Time and Modality (1957). This is a seminal contribution to the study of tense logic and the metaphysics of time, in which Prior championed the A-theorist view that the temporal modalities past, present and future are basic ontological categories of fundamental importance for our understanding of time and the world. During his time at Oxford, Prior met Peter Geach and William Kneale, influenced John Lemmon, and corresponded with the adolescent Saul Kripke. Logic in the United Kingdom was then in a rather low state, and Prior's enthusiasm is believed to have contributed materially to its revival. From 1959 to 1966, he was Professor of Philosophy at the University of Manchester, having taught Osmund Lewry. From 1966 until his death he was Fellow and Tutor in philosophy at Balliol College, Oxford. His students include Max Cresswell, Kit Fine, and Robert Bull. Almost entirely self-taught in modern formal logic, Prior published his first paper on logic in 1952, when he was already 38 years of age, shortly after discovering the work of Józef Maria Bocheński and Jan Łukasiewicz, very little of whose work was then translated into English. He went on to employ Polish notation throughout his career. Prior (1955) distills much of his early teaching of logic in New Zealand. Prior's work on tense logic provides a systematic and extended defence of a tensed conception of reality in which material objects are construed as three-dimensional continuants which are wholly present at each moment of their existence. Prior stood out by virtue of his strong interest in the history of logic. He was one of the first English-speaking logicians to appreciate the nature and scope of the logical work of Charles Sanders Peirce, and the distinction between de dicto and de re in modal logic. Prior taught and researched modal logic before Kripke proposed his possible worlds semantics for it, at a time when modality and intentionality commanded little interest in the English speaking world, and had even come under sharp attack by Willard Van Orman Quine. He is now said to be the precursor of hybrid logic. Undertaking (in one section of his book Past, Present, and Future (1967)) the attempt to combine binary (e.g., "until") and unary (e.g., "will always be") temporal operators to one system of temporal logic, Prior—as an incidental result—builds a base for later hybrid languages. His work Time and Modality explored the use of a many-valued logic to explain the problem of non-referring names. Prior's work was both philosophical and formal and provides a productive synergy between formal innovation and linguistic analysis. Natural language, he remarked, can embody folly and confusion as well as the wisdom of our ancestors. He was scrupulous in setting out the views of his adversaries, and provided many constructive suggestions about the formal development of alternative views.   == Publications == The following books were either written by Prior, or are posthumous collections of journal articles and unpublished papers that he wrote: 1949. Logic and the Basis of Ethics. Oxford University Press (ISBN 0-19-824157-7) 1955, 1962. Formal Logic. Oxford University Press. 1957. Time and Modality. Oxford University Press. based on his 1956 John Locke lectures. 1962. "Changes in Events and Changes in Things". University of Kansas. 1967. Past, Present and Future. Oxford University Press. 1968. Papers on Time and Tense. Oxford University Press. 1971. Objects of Thought. Edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny. Oxford University Press. 1976. The Doctrine of Propositions and Terms. Edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny. London: Duckworth. 1976. Papers in Logic and Ethics. Edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny. London: Duckworth. 1977. Worlds, Times and Selves. Edited by Kit Fine. London: Duckworth. 2003. Papers on Time and Tense. Second expanded edition by Per Hasle, Peter Øhrstrøm, Torben Braüner & Jack Copeland. Oxford University Press.   == References ==   == Further reading == The nearest thing to a biography of Prior is: Copeland, B. J., 1996, "Prior's Life and Legacy," in his edited volume Logic and Reality: Essays on the Legacy of Arthur Prior, New York: Oxford University Press (pp. 519–32 of this volume contain a complete bibliography of Prior's known writings as of date). An excellent survey of Prior's life and achievement is: A. J. P. Kenny 1970, 'Arthur Norman Prior (1914–1969)' Proceedings of the British Academy 56: 321–349.   == External links == Arthur Prior entry by B. Jack Copeland in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Foundations of Temporal Logic The WWW-site for Prior-studies On Prior's Tense Logic by Patrick Blackburn Arthur Prior Centenary Conference, Balliol College, Oxford, 21 – 22 August, 2014

Augustus De Morgan (/dɪ ˈmɔrɡən/; 27 June 1806 – 18 March 1871) was a British mathematician and logician. He formulated De Morgan's laws and introduced the term mathematical induction, making its idea rigorous.   == Biography ==   === Childhood === Augustus De Morgan was born in Madurai, Madras Presidency, India in 1806. His father was Lieut.-Colonel John De Morgan (1772-1816), who held various appointments in the service of the East India Company. His mother, Elizabeth Dodson (1776-1856) descended from James Dodson, who computed a table of anti-logarithms, that is, the numbers corresponding to exact logarithms. Augustus De Morgan became blind in one eye a month or two after he was born. The family moved to England when Augustus was seven months old. As his father and grandfather had both been born in India, De Morgan used to say that he was neither English, nor Scottish, nor Irish, but a Briton "unattached", using the technical term applied to an undergraduate of Oxford or Cambridge who is not a member of any one of the Colleges. When De Morgan was ten years old, his father died. Mrs. De Morgan resided at various places in the southwest of England, and her son received his elementary education at various schools of no great account. His mathematical talents went unnoticed until he was fourteen, when a family-friend discovered him making an elaborate drawing of a figure in Euclid with ruler and compasses. She explained the aim of Euclid to Augustus, and gave him an initiation into demonstration. He received his secondary education from Mr. Parsons, a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, who appreciated classics better than mathematics. His mother was an active and ardent member of the Church of England, and desired that her son should become a clergyman; but by this time De Morgan had begun to show his non-conforming disposition.   === University education === In 1823, at the age of sixteen, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he came under the influence of George Peacock and William Whewell, who became his lifelong friends; from the former he derived an interest in the renovation of algebra, and from the latter an interest in the renovation of logic—the two subjects of his future life work. His college tutor was John Philips Higman, FRS (1793–1855). At college he played the flute for recreation and was prominent in the musical clubs. His love of knowledge for its own sake interfered with training for the great mathematical race; as a consequence he came out fourth wrangler. This entitled him to the degree of Bachelor of Arts; but to take the higher degree of Master of Arts and thereby become eligible for a fellowship it was then necessary to pass a theological test. To the signing of any such test De Morgan felt a strong objection, although he had been brought up in the Church of England. In about 1875 theological tests for academic degrees were abolished in the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.   === London University === As no career was open to him at his own university, he decided to go to the Bar, and took up residence in London; but he much preferred teaching mathematics to reading law. About this time the movement for founding London University (now University College London) took shape. The two ancient universities of Oxford and Cambridge were so guarded by theological tests that no Jew or Dissenter outside the Church of England could enter as a student, still less be appointed to any office. A body of liberal-minded men resolved to meet the difficulty by establishing in London a University on the principle of religious neutrality. De Morgan, then 22 years of age, was appointed professor of mathematics. His introductory lecture "On the study of mathematics" is a discourse upon mental education of permanent value, and has been recently reprinted in the United States. The London University was a new institution, and the relations of the Council of management, the Senate of professors and the body of students were not well defined. A dispute arose between the professor of anatomy and his students, and in consequence of the action taken by the Council, several professors resigned, headed by De Morgan. Another professor of mathematics was appointed, who then drowned a few years later. De Morgan had shown himself a prince of teachers: he was invited to return to his chair, which thereafter became the continuous centre of his labours for thirty years. The same body of reformers—headed by Lord Brougham, a Scotsman eminent both in science and politics who had instituted the London University—founded about the same time a Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. Its object was to spread scientific and other knowledge by means of cheap and clearly written treatises by the best writers of the time. One of its most voluminous and effective writers was De Morgan. He wrote a great work on The Differential and Integral Calculus which was published by the Society; and he wrote one-sixth of the articles in the Penny Cyclopedia, published by the Society, and issued in penny numbers. When De Morgan came to reside in London he found a congenial friend in William Frend, notwithstanding his mathematical heresy about negative quantities. Both were arithmeticians and actuaries, and their religious views were somewhat similar. Frend lived in what was then a suburb of London, in a country-house formerly occupied by Daniel Defoe and Isaac Watts. De Morgan with his flute was a welcome visitor. The London University of which De Morgan was a professor was a different institution from the University of London. The University of London was founded about ten years later by the Government for the purpose of granting degrees after examination, without any qualification as to residence. The London University was affiliated as a teaching college with the University of London, and its name was changed to University College. The University of London was not a success as an examining body; a teaching University was demanded. De Morgan was a highly successful teacher of mathematics. It was his plan to lecture for an hour, and at the close of each lecture to give out a number of problems and examples illustrative of the subject lectured on; his students were required to sit down to them and bring him the results, which he looked over and returned revised before the next lecture. In De Morgan's opinion, a thorough comprehension and mental assimilation of great principles far outweighed in importance any merely analytical dexterity in the application of half-understood principles to particular cases. During this period, he also promoted the work of the self-taught Indian mathematician Ramchundra, who has been called De Morgan's Ramanujan. He supervised the publication in London of Ramchundra's book on "Maxima and Minima" in 1859. In the introduction to this book, he acknowledged being aware of the Indian tradition of logic, although it is not known whether this had any influence on his own work.   === Family === Augustus was one of seven children, four of whom survived to adulthood. Eliza (1801-1836) married Lewis Hensley, a surgeon, living in Bath. Augustus (1806-1871) George (1808-1890), a Barrister-at-Law who married Josephine, daughter of Vice Admiral Josiah Coghill, 3rd Baronet Coghill Campbell Greig (1811-1876), a surgeon at the Middlesex Hospital In the autumn of 1837, he married Sophia Elizabeth (1809-1892), eldest daughter of William Frend (1757-1841) and Sarah Blackburne (1779-?), a granddaughter of Francis Blackburne (1705-1787), Archdeacon of Cleveland. De Morgan had three sons and four daughters, including fairytale author Mary de Morgan. His eldest son was the potter William De Morgan. His second son George acquired great distinction in mathematics at University College and the University of London. He and another like-minded alumnus conceived the idea of founding a Mathematical Society in London, where mathematical papers would be not only received (as by the Royal Society) but actually read and discussed. The first meeting was held in University College; De Morgan was the first president, his son the first secretary. It was the beginning of the London Mathematical Society.   === Retirement and death ===  In 1866 the chair of mental philosophy in University College fell vacant. James Martineau, a Unitarian clergyman and professor of mental philosophy, was recommended formally by the Senate to the Council; but in the Council there were some who objected to a Unitarian clergyman, and others who objected to theistic philosophy. A layman of the school of Bain and Spencer was appointed. De Morgan considered that the old standard of religious neutrality had been hauled down, and forthwith resigned. He was now 60 years of age. His pupils secured him a pension of £500 p.a., but misfortunes followed. Two years later his son George — the "younger Bernoulli", as Augustus loved to hear him called, in allusion to the eminent father-and-son mathematicians of that name — died. This blow was followed by the death of a daughter. Five years after his resignation from University College De Morgan died of nervous prostration on 18 March 1871.   == Mathematical work == De Morgan was a brilliant and witty writer, whether as a controversialist or as a correspondent. In his time there flourished two Sir William Hamiltons who have often been conflated. One was Sir William Hamilton, 9th Baronet (that is, his title was inherited), a Scotsman, professor of logic and metaphysics at the University of Edinburgh; the other was a knight (that is, won the title), an Irishman, professor at astronomy in the University of Dublin. The baronet contributed to logic, especially the doctrine of the quantification of the predicate; the knight, whose full name was William Rowan Hamilton, contributed to mathematics, especially geometric algebra, and first described the Quaternions. De Morgan was interested in the work of both, and corresponded with both; but the correspondence with the Scotsman ended in a public controversy, whereas that with the Irishman was marked by friendship and terminated only by death. In one of his letters to Rowan, De Morgan says, Be it known unto you that I have discovered that you and the other Sir W. H. are reciprocal polars with respect to me (intellectually and morally, for the Scottish baronet is a polar bear, and you, I was going to say, are a polar gentleman). When I send a bit of investigation to Edinburgh, the W. H. of that ilk says I took it from him. When I send you one, you take it from me, generalize it at a glance, bestow it thus generalized upon society at large, and make me the second discoverer of a known theorem. The correspondence of De Morgan with Hamilton the mathematician extended over twenty-four years; it contains discussions not only of mathematical matters, but also of subjects of general interest. It is marked by geniality on the part of Hamilton and by wit on the part of De Morgan. The following is a specimen: Hamilton wrote, My copy of Berkeley's work is not mine; like Berkeley, you know, I am an Irishman. De Morgan replied, Your phrase 'my copy is not mine' is not a bull. It is perfectly good English to use the same word in two different senses in one sentence, particularly when there is usage. Incongruity of language is no bull, for it expresses meaning. But incongruity of ideas (as in the case of the Irishman who was pulling up the rope, and finding it did not finish, cried out that somebody had cut off the other end of it) is the genuine bull. De Morgan was full of personal peculiarities. On the occasion of the installation of his friend, Lord Brougham, as Rector of the University of Edinburgh, the Senate offered to confer on him the honorary degree of LL. D.; he declined the honour as a misnomer. He once printed his name: Augustus De Morgan, H - O - M - O - P - A - U - C - A - R - U - M - L - I - T - E - R - A - R - U - M (Latin for "man of few letters"). He disliked the provinces outside London, and while his family enjoyed the seaside, and men of science were having a good time at a meeting of the British Association in the country he remained in the hot and dusty libraries of the metropolis. He said that he felt like Socrates, who declared that the farther he was from Athens the farther was he from happiness. He never sought to become a Fellow of the Royal Society, and he never attended a meeting of the Society; he said that he had no ideas or sympathies in common with the physical philosopher. His attitude was possibly due to his physical infirmity, which prevented him from being either an observer or an experimenter. He never voted at an election, and he never visited the House of Commons, or the Tower of London, or Westminster Abbey. Were the writings of De Morgan published in the form of collected works, they would form a small library, for example his writings for the Useful Knowledge Society. Mainly through the efforts of Peacock and Whewell, a Philosophical Society had been inaugurated at Cambridge; and to its Transactions De Morgan contributed four memoirs on the foundations of algebra, and an equal number on formal logic. The best presentation of his view of algebra is found in a volume, entitled Trigonometry and Double Algebra, published in 1849; and his earlier view of formal logic is found in a volume published in 1847. His most distinctive work is styled A Budget of Paradoxes; it originally appeared as letters in the columns of the Athenæum journal; it was revised and extended by De Morgan in the last years of his life, and was published posthumously by his widow. George Peacock's theory of algebra was much improved by D. F. Gregory, a younger member of the Cambridge School, who laid stress not on the permanence of equivalent forms, but on the permanence of certain formal laws. This new theory of algebra as the science of symbols and of their laws of combination was carried to its logical issue by De Morgan; and his doctrine on the subject is still followed by English algebraists in general. Thus George Chrystal founds his Textbook of Algebra on De Morgan's theory; although an attentive reader may remark that he practically abandons it when he takes up the subject of infinite series. De Morgan's theory is stated in his volume on Trigonometry and Double Algebra, where in Book II, Chapter II, headed "On symbolic algebra", he writes: In abandoning the meanings of symbols, we also abandon those of the words which describe them. Thus >addition is to be, for the present, a sound void of sense. It is a mode of combination represented by ; when  receives its meaning, so also will the word addition. It is most important that the student should bear in mind that, with one exception, no word nor sign of arithmetic or algebra has one atom of meaning throughout this chapter, the object of which is symbols, and their laws of combination, giving a symbolic algebra which may hereafter become the grammar of a hundred distinct significant algebras. If any one were to assert that  and  might mean reward and punishment, and , , , etc. might stand for virtues and vices, the reader might believe him, or contradict him, as he pleases—but not out of this chapter. The one exception above noted, which has some share of meaning, is the sign  placed between two symbols, as in . It indicates that the two symbols have the same resulting meaning, by whatever different steps attained. That  and , if quantities, are the same amount of quantity; that if operations, they are of the same effect, etc.   === Trigonometry and Double Algebra === De Morgan's work entitled Trigonometry and Double Algebra consists of two parts; the former of which is a treatise on trigonometry, and the latter a treatise on generalized algebra which he called "double algebra. The first stage in the development of algebra is arithmetic, where numbers only appear and symbols of operations such as , , etc. The next stage is universal arithmetic, where letters appear instead of numbers, so as to denote numbers universally, and the processes are conducted without knowing the values of the symbols. Let  and  denote any numbers; then such an expression as  may be impossible; so that in universal arithmetic there is always a proviso, provided the operation is possible. The third stage is single algebra, where the symbol may denote a quantity forwards or a quantity backwards, and is adequately represented by segments on a straight line passing through an origin. Negative quantities are then no longer impossible; they are represented by the backward segment. But an impossibility still remains in the latter part of such an expression as  which arises in the solution of the quadratic equation. The fourth stage is double algebra. The algebraic symbol denotes in general a segment of a line in a given plane. It is a double symbol because it involves two specifications, namely, length, and direction; and  is interpreted as denoting a quadrant. The expression  then represents a line in the plane having an abscissa  and an ordinate . Argand and Warren carried double algebra so far—but they were unable to interpret on this theory such an expression as . De Morgan attempted it by reducing such an expression to the form , and he considered that he had shown that it could be always so reduced. The remarkable fact is that this double algebra satisfies all the fundamental laws above enumerated, and as every apparently impossible combination of symbols has been interpreted it looks like the complete form of algebra. In chapter 6 he introduced hyperbolic functions and discussed the connection of common and hyperbolic trigonometry. If the above theory is true, the next stage of development ought to be triple algebra and if  truly represents a line in a given plane, it ought to be possible to find a third term which added to the above would represent a line in space. Argand and some others guessed that it was  although this contradicts the truth established by Euler that . De Morgan and many others worked hard at the problem, but nothing came of it until the problem was taken up by Hamilton. We now see the reason clearly: The symbol of double algebra denotes not a length and a direction; but a multiplier and an angle. In it the angles are confined to one plane. Hence the next stage will be a quadruple algebra, when the axis of the plane is made variable. And this gives the answer to the first question; double algebra is nothing but analytical plane trigonometry, and this is why it has been found to be the natural analysis for alternating currents. But De Morgan never got this far. He died with the belief "that double algebra must remain as the full development of the conceptions of arithmetic, so far as those symbols are concerned which arithmetic immediately suggests". In Book II, Chapter II, following the above quoted passage about the theory of symbolic algebra, De Morgan proceeds to give an inventory of the fundamental symbols of algebra, and also an inventory of the laws of algebra. The symbols are , , , , , , (), and letters; these only, all others are derived. As De Morgan explains, the last of these symbols represents writing a latter expression in superscript over and after a former. His inventory of the fundamental laws is expressed under fourteen heads, but some of them are merely definitions. The preceding list of symbols is the matter under the first of these heads. The laws proper may be reduced to the following, which, as he admits, are not all independent of one another, "but the unsymmetrical character of the exponential operation, and the want of the connecting process of  and  ... renders it necessary to state them separately": Identity laws.          Law of signs.         Commutative law.   Distributive law.     Index laws.      De Morgan professes to give a complete inventory of the laws which the symbols of algebra must obey, for he says, "Any system of symbols which obeys these rules and no others—except they be formed by combination of these rules—and which uses the preceding symbols and no others—except they be new symbols invented in abbreviation of combinations of these symbols—is symbolic algebra." From his point of view, none of the above principles are rules; they are formal laws, that is, arbitrarily chosen relations to which the algebraic symbols must be subject. He does not mention the law, which had already been pointed out by Gregory, namely,  and to which was afterwards given the name Law of association. If the commutative law fails, the associative may hold good; but not vice versa. It is an unfortunate thing for the symbolist or formalist that in universal arithmetic  is not equal to ; for then the commutative law would have full scope. Why does he not give it full scope? Because the foundations of algebra are, after all, real not formal, material not symbolic. To the formalists the index operations are exceedingly refractory, in consequence of which some take no account of them, but relegate them to applied mathematics. To give an inventory of the laws which the symbols of algebra must obey is an impossible task, and reminds one not a little of the task of those philosophers who attempt to give an inventory of the a priori knowledge of the mind.   === Formal Logic === When the study of mathematics revived at the University of Cambridge, so did the study of logic. The moving spirit was Whewell, the Master of Trinity College, whose principal writings were a History of the Inductive Sciences, and Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. Doubtless De Morgan was influenced in his logical investigations by Whewell; but other influential contemporaries were Sir William Rowan Hamilton of Dublin, and Professor Boole of Cork. De Morgan's work on Formal Logic, published in 1847, is principally remarkable for his development of the numerically definite syllogism. The followers of Aristotle say that from two particular propositions such as Some M's are A's , and Some M's are B's nothing follows of necessity about the relation of the A's and B's. But they go further and say in order that any relation about the A's and B's may follow of necessity, the middle term must be taken universally in one of the premises. De Morgan pointed out that from Most M's are A's and Most M's are B's it follows of necessity that some A's are B's and he formulated the numerically definite syllogism which puts this principle in exact quantitative form. Suppose that the number of the M's is , of the M's that are A's is , and of the M's that are B's is ; then there are at least  A's that are B's. Suppose that the number of souls on board a steamer was 1000, that 500 were in the saloon, and 700 were lost. It follows of necessity, that at least 700 + 500 - 1000, that is, 200, saloon passengers were lost. This single principle suffices to prove the validity of all the Aristotelian moods. It is therefore a fundamental principle in necessary reasoning. Here then De Morgan had made a great advance by introducing quantification of the terms. At that time Sir William Hamilton was teaching in Edinburgh a doctrine of the quantification of the predicate, and a correspondence sprang up. However, De Morgan soon perceived that Hamilton's quantification was of a different character; that it meant for example, substituting the two forms The whole of A is the whole of B, and The whole of A is a part of B for the Aristotelian form All A's are B's. Hamilton thought that he had placed the keystone in the Aristotelian arch, as he phrased it. Although it must have been a curious arch which could stand 2000 years without a keystone. As a consequence he had no room for De Morgan's innovations. He accused De Morgan of plagiarism, and the controversy raged for years in the columns of the Athenæum, and in the publications of the two writers. The memoirs on logic which De Morgan contributed to the Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society subsequent to the publication of his book on Formal Logic are by far the most important contributions which he made to the science, especially his fourth memoir, in which he begins work in the broad field of the logic of relatives. This is the true field for the logician of the twentieth century, in which work of the greatest importance is to be done towards improving language and facilitating thinking processes which occur all the time in practical life. Identity and difference are the two relations which have been considered by the logician; but there are many others equally deserving of study, such as equality, equivalence, consanguinity, affinity, etc.   === Budget of Paradoxes === In the introduction to the Budget of Paradoxes De Morgan explains what he means by the word. A great many individuals, ever since the rise of the mathematical method, have, each for himself, attacked its direct and indirect consequences. I shall call each of these persons a paradoxer, and his system a paradox. I use the word in the old sense: a paradox is something which is apart from general opinion, either in subject matter, method, or conclusion. Many of the things brought forward would now be called crotchets, which is the nearest word we have to old paradox. But there is this difference, that by calling a thing a crotchet we mean to speak lightly of it; which was not the necessary sense of paradox. Thus in the 16th century many spoke of the earth's motion as the paradox of Copernicus and held the ingenuity of that theory in very high esteem, and some I think who even inclined towards it. In the seventeenth century the deprivation of meaning took place, in England at least. How can the sound paradoxer be distinguished from the false paradoxer? De Morgan supplies the following test: The manner in which a paradoxer will show himself, as to sense or nonsense, will not depend upon what he maintains, but upon whether he has or has not made a sufficient knowledge of what has been done by others, especially as to the mode of doing it, a preliminary to inventing knowledge for himself... New knowledge, when to any purpose, must come by contemplation of old knowledge, in every matter which concerns thought; mechanical contrivance sometimes, not very often, escapes this rule. All the men who are now called discoverers, in every matter ruled by thought, have been men versed in the minds of their predecessors and learned in what had been before them. There is not one exception. I remember that just before the American Association met at Indianapolis in 1890, the local newspapers heralded a great discovery which was to be laid before the assembled savants — a young man living somewhere in the country had squared the circle. While the meeting was in progress I observed a young man going about with a roll of paper in his hand. He spoke to me, and complained that the paper containing his discovery had not been received. I asked him whether his object in presenting the paper was not to get it read, printed, and published so that everyone might inform himself of the result; to all of which he assented readily. But, said I, many men have worked at this question, and their results have been tested fully, and they are printed for the benefit of anyone who can read; have you informed yourself of their results? To this there was no assent, but the sickly smile of the false paradoxer. The Budget consists of a review of a large collection of paradoxical books which De Morgan had accumulated in his own library, partly by purchase at bookstands, partly from books sent to him for review, partly from books sent to him by the authors. He gives the following classification: squarers of the circle, trisectors of the angle, duplicators of the cube, constructors of perpetual motion, subverters of gravitation, stagnators of the earth, builders of the universe. You will still find specimens of all these classes in the New World and in the new century. De Morgan gives his personal knowledge of paradoxers. I suspect that I know more of the English class than any man in Britain. I never kept any reckoning: but I know that one year with another? — and less of late years than in earlier time? — I have talked to more than five in each year, giving more than a hundred and fifty specimens. Of this I am sure, that it is my own fault if they have not been a thousand. Nobody knows how they swarm, except those to whom they naturally resort. They are in all ranks and occupations, of all ages and characters. They are very earnest people, and their purpose is bona fide, the dissemination of their paradoxes. A great many — the mass, indeed — are illiterate, and a great many waste their means, and are in or approaching penury. These discoverers despise one another. A paradoxer to whom De Morgan paid the compliment which Achilles paid Hector — to drag him round the walls again and again — was James Smith, a successful merchant of Liverpool. He found . His mode of reasoning was a curious caricature of the reductio ad absurdum of Euclid. He said let , and then showed that on that supposition, every other value of  must be absurd. Consequently  is the true value. The following is a specimen of De Morgan's dragging round the walls of Troy:  Mr. Smith continues to write me long letters, to which he hints that I am to answer. In his last of 31 closely written sides of note paper, he informs me, with reference to my obstinate silence, that though I think myself and am thought by others to be a mathematical Goliath, I have resolved to play the mathematical snail, and keep within my shell. A mathematical snail! This cannot be the thing so called which regulates the striking of a clock; for it would mean that I am to make Mr. Smith sound the true time of day, which I would by no means undertake upon a clock that gains 19 seconds odd in every hour by false quadrative value of . But he ventures to tell me that pebbles from the sling of simple truth and common sense will ultimately crack my shell, and put me hors de combat. The confusion of images is amusing: Goliath turning himself into a snail to avoid  and James Smith, Esq., of the Mersey Dock Board: and put hors de combat by pebbles from a sling. If Goliath had crept into a snail shell, David would have cracked the Philistine with his foot. There is something like modesty in the implication that the crack-shell pebble has not yet taken effect; it might have been thought that the slinger would by this time have been singing — And thrice [and one-eighth] I routed all my foes, And thrice [and one-eighth] I slew the slain.  In the region of pure mathematics, De Morgan could detect easily the false from the true paradox; but he was not so proficient in the field of physics. His father-in-law was a paradoxer, and his wife a paradoxer; and in the opinion of the physical philosophers De Morgan himself scarcely escaped. His wife wrote a book describing the phenomena of spiritualism, table-rapping, table-turning, etc.; and De Morgan wrote a preface in which he said that he knew some of the asserted facts, believed others on testimony, but did not pretend to know whether they were caused by spirits, or had some unknown and unimagined origin. From this alternative he left out ordinary material causes. Faraday delivered a lecture on Spiritualism, in which he laid it down that in the investigation we ought to set out with the idea of what is physically possible, or impossible; De Morgan did not believe this.   === Relations === De Morgan discovered relation algebra in his Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic (1966: 208-46), first published in 1860. This algebra was extended by Charles Sanders Peirce (who admired De Morgan and met him shortly before his death), and re-exposited and further extended in vol. 3 of Ernst Schröder's Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik. Relation algebra proved critical to the Principia Mathematica of Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead. In turn, this algebra became the subject of much further work, starting in 1940, by Alfred Tarski and his colleagues and students at the University of California.   == Spiritualism == De Morgan later in his life became interested in the phenomena of Spiritualism. In 1849 he had investigated clairvoyance and was impressed by the subject. He later carried out paranormal investigations in his own home with the medium Maria Hayden. The result of these investigations was later published by his wife Sophia. De Morgan believed that his career as a scientist might have been affected if he had revealed his interest in the study of spiritualism so he helped to publish the book anonymously. The book was published in 1863 titled From Matter to Spirit: The Result of Ten Years Experience in Spirit Manifestations. According to (Oppenheim, 1988) De Morgan's wife Sophia was a convinced spiritualist but De Morgan shared a third way position on spiritualist phenomena which Oppenheim defined as a "wait-and-see position", he was neither a believer nor a skeptic, instead his viewpoint was that the methodology of the physical sciences does not automatically exclude psychic phenomena and that such phenomena may be explainable in time by the possible existence of natural forces which as yet physicists had not identified. In the preface of From Matter to Spirit (1863) De Morgan stated:  Thinking it very likely that the universe may contain a few agencies—say half a million—about which no man knows anything, I can not but suspect that a small proportion of these agencies—say five thousand—may be severally competent to the production of all the [spiritualist] phenomena, or may be quite up to the task among them. The physical explanations which I have seen are easy, but miserably insufficient: the spiritualist hypothesis is sufficient, but ponderously difficult. Time and thought will decide, the second asking the first for more results of trial.  In Parapsychology: A Concise History (1997), John Beloff wrote that De Morgan was the first notable scientist in Britain to take an interest in the study of spiritualism and his studies had influenced the decision of William Crookes to also study spiritualism. He also claims that De Morgan was an atheist and that this debarred him from a position at Oxford or Cambridge.   == Legacy == Beyond his great mathematical legacy, the headquarters of the London Mathematical Society is called De Morgan House and the student society of the Mathematics Department of University College London is called the August De Morgan Society. The crater De Morgan on the Moon is named after him.   == Selected writings == 1836. An Explanation of the Gnomonic Projection of the Sphere. London: Baldwin. 1837. Elements of Trigonometry, and Trigonometrical Analysis. London: Taylor & Walton. 1837. The Elements of Algebra. London: Taylor & Walton. 1838. An Essay on Probabilities. London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green & Longmans. 1840. The Elements of Arithmetic. London: Taylor & Walton. 1840. First Notions of Logic, Preparatory to the Study of Geometry. London: Taylor & Walton. 1842. The Differential and Integral Calculus. London: Baldwin. 1845. The Globes, Celestial and Terrestrial. London: Malby & Co. 1847. Formal Logic or The Calculus of Inference. London: Taylor & Walton. 1849. Trigonometry and Double Algebra. London: Taylor, Walton & Malbery. 1860. Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic. London: Walton & Malbery. 1872. A Budget of Paradoxes. London: Longmans, Green.   == See also == Murphy's law   == Notes and references ==   == Further reading == De Morgan, A., 1966. Logic: On the Syllogism and Other Logical Writings. Heath, P., ed. Routledge. A useful collection of De Morgan's most important writings on logic. De Morgan, Sophia Elizabeth (1882). Memoir of Augustus De Morgan. London: Longmans, Green and Company.  Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (2000). The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton University Press.  Macfarlane, Alexander (1916). Lectures on Ten British Mathematicians of the Nineteenth Century (PDF). New York: John Wiley and Sons.  Merrill, Daniel D. (1990). Augustus De Morgan and the Logic of Relations. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.    == External links == Works by Augustus De Morgan at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Augustus De Morgan at Internet Archive Works by Augustus De Morgan at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Augustus De Morgan", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Papers of Augustus De Morgan held by Senate House Library, University of London Library of Augustus De Morgan Archival material relating to Augustus De Morgan listed at the UK National Archives Portraits of Augustus De Morgan at the National Portrait Gallery, London

This is a redirect from a page name that does not have diacritical marks (accents, umlauts, etc.) to essentially the same page name with diacritical marks. For more information follow the bold category link. Apply this redirect (without piping) when the subject page concerns language translation or foreign language equivalents. Other pages that use this redirect should be updated with a direct link to the redirect target (again, without piping).

Bernhard Placidus Johann Nepomuk Bolzano (Bernard Bolzano in English; 5 October 1781 – 18 December 1848) was a Bohemian mathematician, logician, philosopher, theologian and Catholic priest of Italian extraction, also known for his antimilitarist views. Bolzano wrote in German, his mother tongue. For the most part, his work came to prominence posthumously.   == FamilyEdit == Bolzano was the son of two pious Catholics. His father, Bernard Pompeius Bolzano, was an Italian who had moved to Prague, where he married Maria Cecilia Maurer, daughter of an Italian merchant who had likewise moved to Prague. Only two of their twelve children lived to adulthood.   == CareerEdit == Bolzano entered the University of Prague in 1796 and studied mathematics, philosophy and physics. Starting in 1800, he also began studying theology, becoming a Catholic priest in 1804. He was appointed to the then newly created chair of philosophy of religion at Prague University in 1805. He proved to be a popular lecturer not just in religion but also in philosophy, and was elected Dean of the Philosophical Faculty in 1818. Bolzano alienated many faculty and church leaders with his teachings of the social waste of militarism and the needlessness of war. He urged a total reform of the educational, social, and economic systems that would direct the nation's interests toward peace rather than toward armed conflict between nations. Upon his refusal to recant his beliefs, Bolzano was dismissed from the university in 1819. His political convictions (which he was inclined to share with others with some frequency) eventually proved to be too liberal for the Austrian authorities. He was exiled to the countryside and at that point devoted his energies to his writings on social, religious, philosophical, and mathematical matters. Although forbidden to publish in mainstream journals as a condition of his exile, Bolzano continued to develop his ideas and publish them either on his own or in obscure Eastern European journals. In 1842 he moved back to Prague, where he died in 1848.   == WorksEdit == Bolzano's posthumously published work Paradoxien des Unendlichen (The Paradoxes of the Infinite) (1851) was greatly admired by many of the eminent logicians who came after him, including Charles Sanders Peirce, Georg Cantor, and Richard Dedekind. Bolzano's main claim to fame, however, is his 1837 Wissenschaftslehre (Theory of Science), a work in four volumes that covered not only philosophy of science in the modern sense but also logic, epistemology and scientific pedagogy. The logical theory that Bolzano developed in this work has come to be acknowledged as ground-breaking. Other works are a four-volume Lehrbuch der Religionswissenschaft (Textbook of the Science of Religion) and the metaphysical work Athanasia, a defense of the immortality of the soul. Bolzano also did valuable work in mathematics, which remained virtually unknown until Otto Stolz rediscovered many of his lost journal articles and republished them in 1881.   == Wissenschaftslehre (Theory of Science)Edit == In his 1837 Wissenschaftslehre Bolzano attempted to provide logical foundations for all sciences, building on abstractions like part-relation, abstract objects, attributes, sentence-shapes, ideas and propositions in themselves, sums and sets, collections, substances, adherences, subjective ideas, judgments, and sentence-occurrences. These attempts were basically an extension of his earlier thoughts in the philosophy of mathematics, for example his 1810 Beiträge where he emphasized the distinction between the objective relationship between logical consequences and our subjective recognition of these connections. For Bolzano, it was not enough that we merely have confirmation of natural or mathematical truths, but rather it was the proper role of the sciences (both pure and applied) to seek out justification in terms of the fundamental truths that may or may not appear to be obvious to our intuitions.   === Introduction to WissenschaftslehreEdit === Bolzano begins his work by explaining what he means by theory of science, and the relation between our knowledge, truths and sciences. Human knowledge, he states, is made of all truths (or true propositions) that men know or have known. This is, however, only a very small fraction of all the truths that are out there, although still too much for one human being to comprehend. Therefore, our knowledge is divided into more accessible parts. Such a collection of truths is what Bolzano calls a science (Wissenschaft). It is important to note that not all true propositions of a science have to be known to men; hence, this is how we can make discoveries in a science. To better understand and comprehend the truths of a science, men have created textbooks (Lehrbuch), which of course contain only the true propositions of the science known to men. But how to know where to divide our knowledge, that is, which truths belong together? Bolzano explains that we will ultimately know this through some reflection, but that the resulting rules of how to divide our knowledge into sciences will be a science in itself. This science, that tells us which truths belong together and should be explained in a textbook, is the Theory of Science (Wissenschaftslehre).   === MetaphysicsEdit === In the Wissenschaftslehre, Bolzano is mainly concerned with three realms: (1) The realm of language, consisting in words and sentences. (2) The realm of thought, consisting in subjective ideas and judgements. (3) The realm of logic, consisting in objective ideas (or ideas in themselves) and propositions in themselves. Bolzano devotes a great part of the Wissenschaftslehre to an explanation of these realms and their relations. Two distinctions play a prominent role in his system. Firstly, the distinction between parts and wholes. For instance, words are parts of sentences, subjective ideas are parts of judgments, objective ideas are parts of propositions in themselves. Secondly, all objects divide into those that exist, which means that they are causally connected and located in time and/or space, and those that do not exist. Bolzano's original claim is that the logical realm is populated by objects of the latter kind.   === Satz an Sich (proposition in itself)Edit === Satz an Sich is a basic notion in Bolzano's Wissenschaftslehre. It is introduced at the very beginning, in section 19. Bolzano first introduces the notions of proposition (spoken or written or thought or in itself) and idea (spoken or written or thought or in itself). "The grass is green" is a proposition (Satz): in this connection of words, something is said or asserted. "Grass", however, is only an idea (Vorstellung). Something is represented by it, but it does not assert anything. Bolzano's notion of proposition is fairly broad: "A rectangle is round" is a proposition - even though it is false by virtue of self-contradiction - because it is composed in an intelligible manner out of intelligible parts. Bolzano does not give a complete definition of a Satz an Sich (i.e. proposition in itself) but he gives us just enough information to understand what he means by it. A proposition in itself (i) has no existence (that is: it has no position in time or place), (ii) is either true or false, independent of anyone knowing or thinking that it is true or false, and (iii) is what is 'grasped' by thinking beings. So a written sentence ('Socrates has wisdom') grasps a proposition in itself, namely the proposition [Socrates has wisdom]. The written sentence does have existence (it has a certain location at a certain time, say it is on your computer screen at this very moment) and expresses the proposition in itself which is in the realm of in itself (i.e. an sich). (Bolzano's use of the term an sich differs greatly from that of Kant; for Kant's use of the term see an sich.)   Every proposition in itself is composed out of ideas in themselves (for simplicity, we will use proposition to mean "proposition in itself" and idea to refer to an objective idea or idea in itself. Ideas are negatively defined as those parts of a proposition that are themselves not propositions. A proposition consists of at least three ideas, namely: a subject idea, a predicate idea and the copula (i.e. 'has', or another form of to have). (Though there are propositions which contain propositions, but we won't take them into consideration right now.) Bolzano identifies certain types of ideas. There are simple ideas that have no parts (as an example Bolzano uses [something]), but there are also complex ideas that consist of other ideas (Bolzano uses the example of [nothing], which consists of the ideas [not] and [something]). Complex ideas can have the same content (i.e. the same parts) without being the same - because their components are differently connected. The idea [A black pen with blue ink] is different from the idea [A blue pen with black ink] though the parts of both ideas are the same.    === Ideas and objectsEdit === It is important to understand that an idea does not need to have an object. Bolzano uses object to denote something that is represented by an idea. An idea that has an object, represents that object. But an idea that does not have an object represents nothing. (Don't get confused here by terminology: an objectless idea is an idea without a representation.) Let's consider, for further explanation, an example used by Bolzano. The idea [a round square], does not have an object, because the object that ought to be represented is self-contrary. A different example is the idea [nothing] which certainly does not have an object. However, the proposition [the idea of a round square has complexity] has as its subject-idea [the idea of a round square]. This subject-idea does have an object, namely the idea [a round square]. But, that idea does not have an object. Besides objectless ideas, there are ideas that have only one object, e.g. the idea [the first man on the moon] represents only one object. Bolzano calls these ideas 'singular ideas'. Obviously there are also ideas that have many objects (e.g. [the citizens of Amsterdam]) and even infinitely many objects (e.g. [a prime number]).   === Sensation and simple ideasEdit === Bolzano has a complex theory of how we are able to sense things. He explains sensation by means of the term intuition, in German called Anschauung. An intuition is a simple idea, it has only one object (Einzelvorstellung), but besides that, it is also unique (Bolzano needs this to explain sensation). Intuitions (Anschauungen) are objective ideas, they belong to the an sich realm, which means that they don’t have existence. As said, Bolzano’s argumentation for intuitions is by an explanation of sensation. What happens when you sense a real existing object, for instance a rose, is this: the different aspects of the rose, like its scent and its color, cause in you a change. That change means that before and after sensing the rose, your mind is in a different state. So sensation is in fact a change in your mental state. How is this related to objects and ideas? Bolzano explains that this change, in your mind, is essentially a simple idea (Vorstellung), like, ‘this smell’ (of this particular rose). This idea represents; it has as its object the change. Besides being simple, this change must also be unique. This is because literally you can’t have the same experience twice, nor can two people, who smell the same rose at the same time, have exactly the same experience of that smell (although they will be quite alike). So each single sensation causes a single (new) unique and simple idea with a particular change as its object. Now, this idea in your mind is a subjective idea, meaning that it is in you at a particular time. It has existence. But this subjective idea must correspond to, or has as a content, an objective idea. This is where Bolzano brings in intuitions (Anschauungen); they are the simple, unique and objective ideas that correspond to our subjective ideas of changes caused by sensation. So for each single possible sensation, there is a corresponding objective idea. Schematically the whole process is like this: whenever you smell a rose, its scent causes a change in you. This change is the object of your subjective idea of that particular smell. That subjective idea corresponds to the intuition or Anschauung.   === LogicEdit === According to Bolzano, all propositions are composed out of three (simple or complex) elements: a subject, a predicate and a copula. Instead of the more traditional copulative term 'is', Bolzano prefers 'has'. The reason for this is that 'has', unlike 'is', can connect a concrete term, such as 'Socrates', to an abstract term such as 'baldness'. "Socrates has baldness" is, according to Bolzano, preferable to "Socrates is bald" because the latter form is less basic: 'bald' is itself composed of the elements 'something', 'that', 'has' and 'baldness'. Bolzano also reduces existential propositions to this form: "Socrates exists" would simply become "Socrates has existence (Dasein)". A major role in Bolzano’s logical theory is played by the notion of variations: various logical relations are defined in terms of the changes in truth value that propositions incur when their non-logical parts are replaced by others. Logically analytical propositions, for instance, are those in which all the non-logical parts can be replaced without change of truth value. Two propositions are 'compatible' (verträglich) with respect to one of their component parts x if there is at least one term that can be inserted that would make both true. A proposition Q is 'deducible' (ableitbar) from a proposition P, with respect to certain of their non-logical parts, if any replacement of those parts that makes P true also makes Q true. If a proposition is deducible from another with respect to all its non-logical parts, it is said to be 'logically deducible'. Besides the relation of deducibility, Bolzano also has a stricter relation of 'consequentiality' (Abfolge). This is an asymmetric relation that obtains between true propositions, when one of the propositions is not only deducible from, but also explained by the other.   === TruthEdit === Bolzano distinguishes five meanings the words true and truth have in common usage, all of which Bolzano takes to be unproblematic. The meanings are listed in order of properness: I. Abstract objective meaning: Truth signifies an attribute that may apply to a proposition, primarily to a proposition in itself, namely the attribute on the basis of which the proposition expresses something that in reality is as is expressed. Antonyms: falsity, falseness, falsehood. II. Concrete objective meaning: (a) Truth signifies a proposition that has the attribute truth in the abstract objective meaning. Antonym: (a) falsehood. III. Subjective meaning: (a) Truth signifies a correct judgment. Antonym: (a) mistake. IV. Collective meaning: Truth signifies a body or multiplicity true propositions or judgments (e.g. the biblical truth). V. Improper meaning: True signifies that some object is in reality what some denomination states it to be. (e.g. the true God). Antonyms: false, unreal, illusory. Bolzano's primary concern is with the concrete objective meaning: with concrete objective truths or truths in themselves. All truths in themselves are a kind of propositions in themselves. They do not exist, i.e. they are not spatiotemporally located as thought and spoken propositions are. However, certain propositions have the attribute of being a truth in itself. Being a thought proposition is not a part of the concept of a truth in itself, notwithstanding the fact that, given God’s omniscience, all truths in themselves are also thought truths. The concepts ‘truth in itself’ and ‘thought truth’ are interchangeable, as they apply to the same objects, but they are not identical. Bolzano offers as the correct definition of (abstract objective) truth: a proposition is true if it expresses something that applies to its object. The correct definition of a (concrete objective) truth must thus be: a truth is a proposition that expresses something that applies to its object. This definition applies to truths in themselves, rather than to thought or known truths, as none of the concepts figuring in this definition are subordinate to a concept of something mental or known. Bolzano proves in §§31-32 of his Wissenschaftslehre three things: A There is at least one truth in itself (concrete objective meaning): 1. There are no true propositions (assumption) 2. 1. is a proposition (obvious) 3. 1. is true (assumed) and false (because of 1.) 4. 1. is self-contradictory (because of 3.) 5. 1. is false (because of 4.) 6. There is at least one true proposition (because of 1. and 5.) B. There is more than one truth in itself: 7. There is only one truth in itself, namely A is B (assumption) 8. A is B is a truth in itself (because of 7.) 9. There are no other truths in themselves apart from A is B (because of 7.) 10. 9. is a true proposition/ a truth in itself (because of 7.) 11. There are two truths in themselves (because of 8. and 10.) 12. There is more than one truth in itself (because of 11.) C. There are infinitely many truths in themselves: 13. There are only n truths in themselves, namely A is B .... Y is Z (assumption) 14. A is B .... Y is Z are n truths in themselves (because of 13.) 15. There are no other truths apart from A is B .... Y is Z (because of 13.) 16. 15. is a true proposition/ a truth in itself (because of 13.) 17. There are n+1 truths in themselves (because of 14. and 16.) 18. Steps 1 to 5 can be repeated for n+1, which results in n+2 truths and so on endlessly (because n is a variable) 19. There are infinitely many truths in themselves (because of 18.)   === Judgments and cognitionsEdit === A known truth has as its parts (Bestandteile) a truth in itself and a judgment (Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre §26). A judgment is a thought which states a true proposition. In judging (at least when the matter of the judgment is a true proposition), the idea of an object is being connected in a certain way with the idea of a characteristic (§ 23). In true judgments, the relation between the idea of the object and the idea of the characteristic is an actual/existent relation (§28). Every judgment has as its matter a proposition, which is either true or false. Every judgment exists, but not ‘für sich’. Judgments, namely, in contrast with propositions in themselves, are dependent on subjective mental activity. Not every mental activity, though, has to be a judgment; recall that all judgments have as matter propositions, and hence all judgments need to be either true or false. Mere presentations or thoughts are examples of mental activities which do not necessarily need to be stated (behaupten), and so are not judgments (§ 34). Judgments that have as its matter true propositions can be called cognitions (§36). Cognitions are also dependent on the subject, and so, opposed to truths in themselves, cognitions do permit degrees; a proposition can be more or less known, but it cannot be more or less true. Every cognition implies necessarily a judgment, but not every judgment is necessarily cognition, because there are also judgments that are not true. Bolzano maintains that there are no such things as false cognitions, only false judgments (§34).   == MathematicsEdit == Bolzano made several original contributions to mathematics. His overall philosophical stance was that, contrary to much of the prevailing mathematics of the era, it was better not to introduce intuitive ideas such as time and motion into mathematics (Boyer 1959, pp. 268–269). To this end, he was one of the earliest mathematicians to begin instilling rigor into mathematical analysis with his three chief mathematical works Beyträge zu einer begründeteren Darstellung der Mathematik (1810), Der binomische Lehrsatz (1816) and Rein analytischer Beweis (1817). These works presented "...a sample of a new way of developing analysis", whose ultimate goal would not be realized until some fifty years later when they came to the attention of Karl Weierstrass (O'Connor & Robertson 2006). To the foundations of mathematical analysis he contributed the introduction of a fully rigorous ε-δ definition of a mathematical limit. Bolzano, like several others of his day, was skeptical of the possibility of Gottfried Leibniz's infinitesimals, that had been the earliest putative foundation for differential calculus. Bolzano's notion of a limit was similar to the modern one: that a limit, rather than being a relation among infinitesimals, must instead be cast in terms of how the dependent variable approaches a definite quantity as the independent variable approaches some other definite quantity. Bolzano also gave the first purely analytic proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra, which had originally been proven by Gauss from geometrical considerations. He also gave the first purely analytic proof of the intermediate value theorem (also known as Bolzano's theorem). Today he is mostly remembered for the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, which Karl Weierstrass developed independently and published years after Bolzano's first proof and which was initially called the Weierstrass theorem until Bolzano's earlier work was rediscovered (Boyer & Merzbach 1991, p. 561).   == Philosophical legacyEdit == The effect of his thought on philosophy initially seemed destined to be slight; his work was rediscovered, however, by Edmund Husserl and Kazimierz Twardowski, both students of Franz Brentano. Through them, Bolzano became a formative influence on both phenomenology and analytic philosophy.   == WritingsEdit == Gesamtausgabe (Collected Works) Critical edition edited by Eduard Winter, Jan Berg, Friedrich Kambartel, Bob van Rootselaar, Stuttgart:Fromman-Holzboog, 1969 ss. (89 volls. published) Wissenschaftslehre, 4 voll., 2nd rev. ed. by W. Schultz, Leipzig I-II 1929, III 1980, IV 1931; Critical edition edited by Jan Berg: Bolzano's Gesamtausgabe, voll. 11-14 (1985–2000). Bernard Bolzano's Grundlegung der Logik. Ausgewählte Paragraphen aus der Wissenschaftslehre, Vol. 1 and 2, with supplementary text summaries, an introduction and indices, edited by F. Kambartel, Hamburg, 1963, 1978². Bolzano, Bernard (1810), Beyträge zu einer begründeteren Darstellung der Mathematik. Erste Lieferung  (Contributions to a better grounded presentation of mathematics; Ewald 1996, pp. 174–224 and The Mathematical Works of Bernard Bolzano, 2004, pp. 83–137). Bolzano, Bernard (1817), Rein analytischer Beweis des Lehrsatzes, dass zwischen je zwey Werthen, die ein entgegengesetzes Resultat gewähren, wenigstens eine reele Wurzel der Gleichung liege, Wilhelm Engelmann  (Purely analytic proof of the theorem that between any two values which give results of opposite sign, there lies at least one real root of the equation; Ewald 1996, pp. 225–48. Franz Prihonsky (1850) Der Neue Anti-Kant, Bautzen (an assessment of the Critique of Pure Reason by Bolzano, published posthumously by his friend F. Prihonsky).*Bolzano, Bernard (1851), Paradoxien des Unendlichen, C.H. Reclam  (Paradoxes of the Infinite; Ewald 1996, pp. 249–92 (excerpt)).   === Translations and compilationsEdit === Theory of Science, (Selection edited and translated by Rolf George, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1972). Theory of Science, (Selection edited, with an introduction, by Jan Berg. Translated from the German by Burnham Terrell, Dordrecht and Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1973). Theory of Science, First complete English translation in four volumes by Rolf George and Paul Rusnock, New York: Oxford University Press, 2014. The Mathematical Works of Bernard Bolzano, translated and edited by Steve Russ, New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. On the Mathematical Method and Correspondence with Exner, translated by Rolf George and Paul Rusnock, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2004. Selected Writings on Ethics and Politics, translated by Rolf George and Paul Rusnock, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2007. Franz Prihonsky, The New Anti-Kant, Edited by Sandra Lapointe and Clinton Tolley, New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.   == Named after BolzanoEdit == Bolzano's theorem, or "Intermediate value theorem", a theorem in mathematical analysis Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, a theorem concerning sequences in real analysis   == See alsoEdit == List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Boyer, Carl B. (1959), The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual Development, New York: Dover Publications, MR 0124178 . Boyer, Carl B.; Merzbach, Uta C. (1991), A History of Mathematics, New York: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-471-54397-8 . Ewald, William B., ed. (1996), From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 volumes, Oxford University Press . Künne, Wolfgang (1998), "Bolzano, Bernard", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy 1, London: Routledge, pp. 823–827 . Retrieved on 2007-03-05 Kamila, Veverková Kleinere Schriften des deutschen Lehrers und Priester Anton Krombholz (1790-1869). In Homiletisch – Liturgisches Korrespondenzblatt – Neue Folge. Nr 107, Jg 28/2011, str. 758-782. ISSN 0724-7680. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F. (2005), "Bolzano", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .   == External linksEdit == Bernard Bolzano entry by Edgar Morscher in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bolzano's Logic entry by Jan Sebestik in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bolzano’s Philosophy of Mathematical Knowledge entry by Sandra Lapointe in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Philosophy of Bernard Bolzano: Logic and Ontology Bernard Bolzano: English Translations and Selected Texts Annotated Bibliography on the Philosophical Work of Bolzano (First Part: A - C) Annotated Bibliography on the Philosophical Work of Bolzano (Second Part: D - L) Annotated Bibliography on the Philosophical Work of Bolzano (Third Part: M - Z) Bernard Bolzano at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Works by or about Bernard Bolzano at Internet Archive Digitized Bolzano's works Volume 3 of Wissenschaftslehre in Gallica Volume 4 of Wissenschaftslehre in Gallica

Bertrand Arthur William Russell, 3rd Earl Russell OM FRS (/ˈrʌsəl/; 18 May 1872 – 2 February 1970) was a British philosopher, logician, mathematician, historian, writer, social critic and political activist. At various points in his life he considered himself a liberal, a socialist, and a pacifist, but he also admitted that he had never been any of these in any profound sense. He was born in Monmouthshire into one of the most prominent aristocratic families in Britain. In the early 20th century, Russell led the British "revolt against idealism". He is considered one of the founders of analytic philosophy along with his predecessor Gottlob Frege, colleague G. E. Moore, and his protégé Ludwig Wittgenstein. He is widely held to be one of the 20th century's premier logicians. With A. N. Whitehead he wrote Principia Mathematica, an attempt to create a logical basis for mathematics. His philosophical essay "On Denoting" has been considered a "paradigm of philosophy". His work has had a considerable influence on logic, mathematics, set theory, linguistics, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computer science (see type theory and type system), and philosophy, especially the philosophy of language, epistemology, and metaphysics. Russell was a prominent anti-war activist; he championed anti-imperialism and went to prison for his pacifism during World War I. Later, he campaigned against Adolf Hitler, then criticised Stalinist totalitarianism, attacked the involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War, and was an outspoken proponent of nuclear disarmament. In 1950 Russell was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature "in recognition of his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom of thought".   == Biography ==   === Early life and background ===  Bertrand Russell was born on the 18th of May, 1872 at Ravenscroft, Trellech, Monmouthshire, into an influential and liberal family of the British aristocracy. His parents, Viscount and Viscountess Amberley, were radical for their times. Lord Amberley consented to his wife's affair with their children's tutor, the biologist Douglas Spalding. Both were early advocates of birth control at a time when this was considered scandalous. Lord Amberley was an atheist and his atheism was evident when he asked the philosopher John Stuart Mill to act as Russell's secular godfather. Mill died the year after Russell's birth, but his writings had a great effect on Russell's life. His paternal grandfather, the Earl Russell, had been asked twice by Queen Victoria to form a government, serving her as Prime Minister in the 1840s and 1860s. The Russells had been prominent in England for several centuries before this, coming to power and the peerage with the rise of the Tudor dynasty (see: Duke of Bedford). They established themselves as one of Britain's leading Whig families, and participated in every great political event from the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536–40 to the Glorious Revolution in 1688–89 and the Great Reform Act in 1832. Lady Amberley was the daughter of Lord and Lady Stanley of Alderley. Russell often feared the ridicule of his maternal grandmother, one of the campaigners for education of women.   === Childhood and adolescence === Russell had two siblings: brother Frank (nearly seven years older than Bertrand), and sister Rachel (four years older). In June 1874 Russell's mother died of diphtheria, followed shortly by Rachel's death. In January 1876, his father died of bronchitis following a long period of depression. Frank and Bertrand were placed in the care of their staunchly Victorian paternal grandparents, who lived at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park. His grandfather, former Prime Minister Earl Russell, died in 1878, and was remembered by Russell as a kindly old man in a wheelchair. His grandmother, the Countess Russell (née Lady Frances Elliot), was the dominant family figure for the rest of Russell's childhood and youth. The countess was from a Scottish Presbyterian family, and successfully petitioned the Court of Chancery to set aside a provision in Amberley's will requiring the children to be raised as agnostics. Despite her religious conservatism, she held progressive views in other areas (accepting Darwinism and supporting Irish Home Rule), and her influence on Bertrand Russell's outlook on social justice and standing up for principle remained with him throughout his life. (One could challenge the view that Bertrand stood up for his principles, based on his own well-known quotation: "I would never die for my beliefs because I might be wrong".) Her favourite Bible verse, 'Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil' (Exodus 23:2), became his motto. The atmosphere at Pembroke Lodge was one of frequent prayer, emotional repression, and formality; Frank reacted to this with open rebellion, but the young Bertrand learned to hide his feelings. Russell's adolescence was very lonely, and he often contemplated suicide. He remarked in his autobiography that his keenest interests were in religion and mathematics, and that only his wish to know more mathematics kept him from suicide. He was educated at home by a series of tutors. At age eleven, his brother Frank introduced him to the work of Euclid, which transformed Russell's life. During these formative years he also discovered the works of Percy Bysshe Shelley. In his autobiography, he writes: "I spent all my spare time reading him, and learning him by heart, knowing no one to whom I could speak of what I thought or felt, I used to reflect how wonderful it would have been to know Shelley, and to wonder whether I should meet any live human being with whom I should feel so much sympathy". Russell claimed that beginning at age 15, he spent considerable time thinking about the validity of Christian religious dogma, which he found very unconvincing. At this age, he came to the conclusion that there is no free will and, two years later, that there is no life after death. Finally, at the age of 18, after reading Mill's "Autobiography", he abandoned the "First Cause" argument and became an atheist.   === University and first marriage === Russell won a scholarship to read for the Mathematical Tripos at Trinity College, Cambridge, and commenced his studies there in 1890, taking as coach Robert Rumsey Webb. He became acquainted with the younger George Edward Moore and came under the influence of Alfred North Whitehead, who recommended him to the Cambridge Apostles. He quickly distinguished himself in mathematics and philosophy, graduating as a high Wrangler in 1893 and becoming a Fellow in the latter in 1895. Russell first met the American Quaker Alys Pearsall Smith when he was 17 years old. He became a friend of the Pearsall Smith family—they knew him primarily as 'Lord John's grandson' and enjoyed showing him off—and travelled with them to the continent; it was in their company that Russell visited the Paris Exhibition of 1889 and was able to climb the Eiffel Tower soon after it was completed. He soon fell in love with the puritanical, high-minded Alys, who was a graduate of Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, and, contrary to his grandmother's wishes, married her on 13 December 1894. Their marriage began to fall apart in 1901 when it occurred to Russell, while he was cycling, that he no longer loved her. She asked him if he loved her and he replied that he didn't. Russell also disliked Alys's mother, finding her controlling and cruel. It was to be a hollow shell of a marriage and they finally divorced in 1921, after a lengthy period of separation. During this period, Russell had passionate (and often simultaneous) affairs with a number of women, including Lady Ottoline Morrell and the actress Lady Constance Malleson.   === Early career ===  Russell began his published work in 1896 with German Social Democracy, a study in politics that was an early indication of a lifelong interest in political and social theory. In 1896 he taught German social democracy at the London School of Economics. He was a member of the Coefficients dining club of social reformers set up in 1902 by the Fabian campaigners Sidney and Beatrice Webb. He now started an intensive study of the foundations of mathematics at Trinity. In 1898 he wrote An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry which discussed the Cayley–Klein metrics used for non-Euclidean geometry. He attended the International Congress of Philosophy in Paris in 1900 where he met Giuseppe Peano and Alessandro Padoa. The Italians had responded to Georg Cantor, making a science of set theory; they gave Russell their literature including the Formulario mathematico. Russell was impressed by the precision of Peano's arguments at the Congress, read the literature upon returning to England, and came upon Russell's paradox. In 1903 he published The Principles of Mathematics, a work on foundations of mathematics. It advanced a thesis of logicism, that mathematics and logic are one and the same. At the age of 29, in February 1901, Russell underwent what he called a "sort of mystic illumination", after witnessing Whitehead's wife's acute suffering in an angina attack. "I found myself filled with semi-mystical feelings about beauty... and with a desire almost as profound as that of the Buddha to find some philosophy which should make human life endurable", Russell would later recall. "At the end of those five minutes, I had become a completely different person." In 1905 he wrote the essay "On Denoting", which was published in the philosophical journal Mind. Russell was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1908. The three-volume Principia Mathematica, written with Whitehead, was published between 1910 and 1913. This, along with the earlier The Principles of Mathematics, soon made Russell world-famous in his field. In 1910 he became a lecturer in the University of Cambridge, where he was approached by the Austrian engineering student Ludwig Wittgenstein, who became his PhD student. Russell viewed Wittgenstein as a genius and a successor who would continue his work on logic. He spent hours dealing with Wittgenstein's various phobias and his frequent bouts of despair. This was often a drain on Russell's energy, but Russell continued to be fascinated by him and encouraged his academic development, including the publication of Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus in 1922. Russell delivered his lectures on Logical Atomism, his version of these ideas, in 1918, before the end of the First World War. Wittgenstein was, at that time, serving in the Austrian Army and subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp at the end of the conflict.   === First World War === During the First World War, Russell was one of the few people to engage in active pacifist activities and in 1916, he was dismissed from Trinity College following his conviction under the Defence of the Realm Act 1914. Russell played a significant part in the Leeds Convention in June 1917, a historic event which saw well over a thousand "anti-war socialists" gather; many being delegates from the Independent Labour Party and the Socialist Party, united in their pacifist beliefs and advocating a peace settlement. The international press reported that Russell appeared with a number of Labour MPs, including Ramsey McDonald and Philip Snowden, as well as former Liberal MP and anti-conscription campaigner, Professor Arnold Lupton. After the event, Russell told Lady Ottoline Morrell that, "to my surprise, when I got up to speak, I was given the greatest ovation that was possible to give anybody". The Trinity incident resulted in Russell being fined £100, which he refused to pay in hopes that he would be sent to prison but his books were sold at auction to raise the money. The books were bought by friends; he later treasured his copy of the King James Bible that was stamped "Confiscated by Cambridge Police". A later conviction for publicly lecturing against inviting the US to enter the war on Britain's side resulted in six months' imprisonment in Brixton prison (see Bertrand Russell's views on society) in 1918. While in prison, Russell read enormously and wrote the book Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy.  Russell was reinstated in 1919, resigned in 1920, was Tarner Lecturer 1926 and became a Fellow again in 1944 until 1949. In 1924, Bertrand again gained press attention when attending a "banquet" in the House of Commons with well-known campaigners, including Arnold Lupton, who had been a Member of Parliament and had also endured imprisonment for "passive resistance to military or naval service".   === G. H. Hardy on the Trinity Controversy and Russell's personal life === In 1941, G. H. Hardy wrote a 61-page pamphlet titled Bertrand Russell and Trinity—published later as a book by Cambridge University Press with a foreword by C. D. Broad—in which he gave an authoritative account about Russell's 1916 dismissal from Trinity College, explaining that a reconciliation between the college and Russell had later taken place and gave details about Russell's personal life. Hardy writes that Russell's dismissal had created a scandal since the vast majority of the Fellows of the College opposed the decision. The ensuing pressure from the Fellows induced the Council to reinstate Russell. In January 1920, it was announced that Russell had accepted the reinstatement offer from Trinity and would begin lecturing from October. In July 1920, Russell applied for a one year leave of absence; this was approved. He spent the year giving lectures in China and Japan. In January 1921, it was announced by Trinity that Russell had resigned and his resignation had been accepted. This resignation, Hardy explains, was completely voluntary and was not the result of another altercation. The reason for the resignation, according to Hardy, was that Russell was going through a tumultuous time in his personal life with a divorce and subsequent remarriage. Russell contemplated asking Trinity for another one year leave of absence but decided against it, since this would have been an 'unusual application' and the situation had the potential to snowball into another controversy. Although Russell did the right thing, in Hardy's opinion, the reputation of the College suffered due to Russell's resignation since the 'world of learning' knew about Russell's altercation with Trinity but not that the rift had healed. In 1925, Russell was asked by the Council of Trinity College to give the Tarner Lectures on the Philosophy of the Sciences; these would later be the basis for one of Russell's best received books according to Hardy: The Analysis of Matter, published in 1927. In the preface to this pamphlet, Hardy wrote:   === Between the wars ===  In August 1920, Russell traveled to Russia as part of an official delegation sent by the British government to investigate the effects of the Russian Revolution. He met Vladimir Lenin and had an hour-long conversation with him. In his autobiography, he mentions that he found Lenin disappointing, sensing an "impish cruelty" in him and comparing him to "an opinionated professor". He cruised down the Volga on a steamship. His experiences destroyed his previous tentative support for the revolution. He wrote a book The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism about his experiences on this trip, taken with a group of 24 others from Britain, all of whom came home thinking well of the régime, despite Russell's attempts to change their minds. For example, he told them that he heard shots fired in the middle of the night and was sure these were clandestine executions, but the others maintained that it was only cars backfiring. Russell's lover Dora Black, a British author, feminist and socialist campaigner, visited Russia independently at the same time; in contrast to his reaction, she was enthusiastic about the revolution. The following autumn Russell, accompanied by Dora, visited Peking (as it was then known in the West) to lecture on philosophy for a year. He went with optimism and hope, seeing China as then being on a new path. Other scholars present in China at the time included John Dewey and Rabindranath Tagore, the Indian Nobel-laureate poet. Before leaving China, Russell became gravely ill with pneumonia, and incorrect reports of his death were published in the Japanese press. When the couple visited Japan on their return journey, Dora took on the role of spurning the local press by handing out notices reading "Mr. Bertrand Russell, having died according to the Japanese press, is unable to give interviews to Japanese journalists". Apparently they found this harsh and reacted resentfully. Dora was six months pregnant when the couple returned to England on 26 August 1921. Russell arranged a hasty divorce from Alys, marrying Dora six days after the divorce was finalised, on 27 September 1921. Their children were John Conrad Russell, 4th Earl Russell, born on 16 November 1921, and Katharine Jane Russell (now Lady Katharine Tait), born on 29 December 1923. Russell supported his family during this time by writing popular books explaining matters of physics, ethics, and education to the layman. Some have suggested that at this point he had an affair with Vivienne Haigh-Wood, the English governess and writer, and first wife (the Eliots did not formally separate until 1933) of T. S. Eliot. Together with Dora, he founded the experimental Beacon Hill School in 1927. The school was run from a succession of different locations, including its original premises at the Russells' residence, Telegraph House, near Harting, West Sussex. On 8 July 1930 Dora gave birth to her third child Harriet Ruth. After he left the school in 1932, Dora continued it until 1943. On a tour through the USA in 1927 Russell met Barry Fox (later Barry Stevens) who became a well-known Gestalt therapist and writer in later years. Russell and Fox/Stevens developed an intensive relationship. In Fox/Stevens' words: "... for three years we were very close." Barry Fox/Stevens sent her daughter Judith to Beacon Hill School for some time. From 1927 to 1932 Russell wrote 34 letters to Barry Fox/Stevens. Upon the death of his elder brother Frank, in 1931, Russell became the 3rd Earl Russell. Russell's marriage to Dora grew increasingly tenuous, and it reached a breaking point over her having two children with an American journalist, Griffin Barry. They separated in 1932 and finally divorced. On 18 January 1936, Russell married his third wife, an Oxford undergraduate named Patricia ("Peter") Spence, who had been his children's governess since 1930. Russell and Peter had one son, Conrad Sebastian Robert Russell, 5th Earl Russell, who became a prominent historian and one of the leading figures in the Liberal Democratic party. Russell returned to the London School of Economics to lecture on the science of power in 1937. During the 1930s, Russell became a close friend and collaborator of V. K. Krishna Menon, then secretary of the India League, the foremost lobby in Great Britain for Indian self-rule.   === Second World War === Russell opposed rearmament against Nazi Germany, but in 1940 he changed his view that avoiding a full-scale world war was more important than defeating Hitler. He concluded that Adolf Hitler taking over all of Europe would be a permanent threat to democracy. In 1943, he adopted a stance toward large-scale warfare, "Relative Political Pacifism": War was always a great evil, but in some particularly extreme circumstances, it may be the lesser of two evils. Before World War II, Russell taught at the University of Chicago, later moving on to Los Angeles to lecture at the UCLA Department of Philosophy. He was appointed professor at the City College of New York (CCNY) in 1940, but after a public outcry the appointment was annulled by a court judgment that pronounced him "morally unfit" to teach at the college due to his opinions—notably those relating to sexual morality, detailed in Marriage and Morals (1929). The protest was started by the mother of a student who would not have been eligible for his graduate-level course in mathematical logic; many intellectuals, led by John Dewey, protested at his treatment. Albert Einstein's oft-quoted aphorism that "great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds" originated in his open letter, dated 19 March 1940, to Morris Raphael Cohen, a professor emeritus at CCNY, supporting Russell's appointment. Dewey and Horace M. Kallen edited a collection of articles on the CCNY affair in The Bertrand Russell Case. He soon joined the Barnes Foundation, lecturing to a varied audience on the history of philosophy; these lectures formed the basis of A History of Western Philosophy. His relationship with the eccentric Albert C. Barnes soon soured, and he returned to Britain in 1944 to rejoin the faculty of Trinity College.   === Later life === Russell participated in many broadcasts over the BBC, particularly The Brains Trust and the Third Programme, on various topical and philosophical subjects. By this time Russell was world-famous outside academic circles, frequently the subject or author of magazine and newspaper articles, and was called upon to offer opinions on a wide variety of subjects, even mundane ones. En route to one of his lectures in Trondheim, Russell was one of 24 survivors (among a total of 43 passengers) of an aeroplane crash in Hommelvik in October 1948. He said he owed his life to smoking since the people who drowned were in the non-smoking part of the plane. A History of Western Philosophy (1945) became a best-seller and provided Russell with a steady income for the remainder of his life. In 1942 Russell argued in favour of a moderate socialism, capable of overcoming its metaphysical principles, in an inquiry on Dialectical Materialism, launched by the Austrian artist and philosopher Wolfgang Paalen in his journal DYN, saying, "I think the metaphysics of both Hegel and Marx plain nonsense – Marx´s claim to be 'science' is no more justified than Mary Baker Eddy´s. This does not mean that I am opposed to socialism." In 1943, Russell expressed support for Zionism: "I have come gradually to see that, in a dangerous and largely hostile world, it is essential to Jews to have some country which is theirs, some region where they are not suspected aliens, some state which embodies what is distinctive in their culture". In a speech in 1948, Russell said that if the USSR's aggression continued, it would be morally worse to go to war after the USSR possessed an atomic bomb than before it possessed one, because if the USSR had no bomb the West's victory would come more swiftly and with fewer casualties than if there were atom bombs on both sides. At that time, only the United States possessed an atomic bomb, and the USSR was pursuing an extremely aggressive policy towards the countries in Eastern Europe which it was absorbing into its sphere of influence. Many understood Russell's comments to mean that Russell approved of a first strike in a war with the USSR, including Nigel Lawson, who was present when Russell spoke. Others, including Griffin, who obtained a transcript of the speech, have argued that he was merely explaining the usefulness of America's atomic arsenal in deterring the USSR from continuing its domination of Eastern Europe. However, just after the atomic bombs exploded over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Russell wrote letters, and published articles in newspapers from 1945 to 1948, stating clearly that it was morally justified and better to go to war against the USSR using atomic bombs while the USA possessed them and before the USSR did. After the USSR exploded the atomic bomb, Russell changed his position and advocated the total abolishment of atomic weapons. In 1948, Russell was invited by the BBC to deliver the inaugural Reith Lectures—what was to become an annual series of lectures, still broadcast by the BBC. His series of six broadcasts, titled Authority and the Individual, explored themes such as the role of individual initiative in the development of a community and the role of state control in a progressive society. Russell continued to write about philosophy. He wrote a foreword to Words and Things by Ernest Gellner, which was highly critical of the later thought of Ludwig Wittgenstein and of ordinary language philosophy. Gilbert Ryle refused to have the book reviewed in the philosophical journal Mind, which caused Russell to respond via The Times. The result was a month-long correspondence in The Times between the supporters and detractors of ordinary language philosophy, which was only ended when the paper published an editorial critical of both sides but agreeing with the opponents of ordinary language philosophy. In the King's Birthday Honours of 9 June 1949, Russell was awarded the Order of Merit, and the following year he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. When he was given the Order of Merit, George VI was affable but slightly embarrassed at decorating a former jailbird, saying, "You have sometimes behaved in a manner that would not do if generally adopted". Russell merely smiled, but afterwards claimed that the reply "That's right, just like your brother" immediately came to mind. In 1952 Russell was divorced by Spence, with whom he had been very unhappy. Conrad, Russell's son by Spence, did not see his father between the time of the divorce and 1968 (at which time his decision to meet his father caused a permanent breach with his mother). Russell married his fourth wife, Edith Finch, soon after the divorce, on 15 December 1952. They had known each other since 1925, and Edith had taught English at Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, sharing a house for 20 years with Russell's old friend Lucy Donnelly. Edith remained with him until his death, and, by all accounts, their marriage was a happy, close, and loving one. Russell's eldest son John suffered from serious mental illness, which was the source of ongoing disputes between Russell and his former wife Dora. John's wife Susan was also mentally ill, and eventually Russell and Edith became the legal guardians of their three daughters, two of whom were later diagnosed with schizophrenia. In September 1961, at the age of 89, Russell was jailed for seven days in Brixton Prison after taking part in an anti-nuclear demonstration in London, for "breach of peace". The magistrate offered to exempt him from jail if he pledged himself to "good behaviour", to which Russell replied: "No, I won't." In 1962 Russell played a public role in the Cuban Missile Crisis: in an exchange of telegrams with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev assured him that the Soviet government would not be reckless. Russell sent this telegram to President Kennedy:  YOUR ACTION DESPERATE. THREAT TO HUMAN SURVIVAL. NO CONCEIVABLE JUSTIFICATION. CIVILIZED MAN CONDEMNS IT. WE WILL NOT HAVE MASS MURDER. ULTIMATUM MEANS WAR... END THIS MADNESS.  According to historian Peter Knight, after JFK's assassination, Russell, "prompted by the emerging work of the lawyer Mark Lane in the US ... rallied support from other noteworthy and left-leaning compatriots to form a Who Killed Kennedy Committee in June 1964, members of which included Michael Foot MP, Caroline Benn, the publisher Victor Gollancz, the writers John Arden and J. B. Priestley, and the Oxford history professor Hugh Trevor-Roper. Russell published a highly critical article weeks before the Warren Commission Report was published, setting forth 16 Questions on the Assassination and equating the Oswald case with the Dreyfus affair of late 19th-century France, in which the state wrongly convicted an innocent man. Russell also criticised the American press for failing to heed any voices critical of the official version.   === Political causes ===  Russell spent the 1950s and 1960s engaged in political causes primarily related to nuclear disarmament and opposing the Vietnam War. The 1955 Russell–Einstein Manifesto was a document calling for nuclear disarmament and was signed by eleven of the most prominent nuclear physicists and intellectuals of the time. In 1966–67, Russell worked with Jean-Paul Sartre and many other intellectual figures to form the Russell Vietnam War Crimes Tribunal to investigate the conduct of the United States in Vietnam. He wrote a great many letters to world leaders during this period. In 1956, immediately before and during the Suez Crisis, Russell expressed his opposition to what he viewed as European imperialism in the Middle East. He viewed the crisis as another reminder of what he saw as a pressing need for a more effective mechanism for international governance, and to restrict national sovereignty to places such as the Suez Canal area "where general interest is involved". At the same time the Suez Crisis was taking place, the world was also captivated by the Hungarian Revolution and the subsequent crushing of the revolt by intervening Soviet forces. Russell attracted criticism for speaking out fervently against the Suez war while ignoring Soviet repression in Hungary, to which he responded that he did not criticise the Soviets "because there was no need. Most of the so-called Western World was fulminating". Although he later feigned a lack of concern, at the time he was disgusted by the brutal Soviet response, and on 16 November 1956, he expressed approval for a declaration of support for Hungarian scholars which Michael Polanyi had cabled to the Soviet embassy in London twelve days previously, shortly after Soviet troops had already entered Budapest. In November 1957 Russell wrote an article addressing US President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, urging a summit to consider "the conditions of co-existence". Khrushchev responded that peace could indeed be served by such a meeting. In January 1958 Russell elaborated his views in The Observer, proposing a cessation of all nuclear-weapons production, with Britain taking the first step by unilaterally suspending its own nuclear-weapons program if necessary, and with Germany "freed from all alien armed forces and pledged to neutrality in any conflict between East and West". US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles replied for Eisenhower. The exchange of letters was published as The Vital Letters of Russell, Khrushchev, and Dulles. Russell was asked by The New Republic, a liberal American magazine, to elaborate his views on world peace. He suggested that all nuclear-weapons testing and constant flights by planes armed with nuclear weapons be halted immediately, and negotiations be opened for the destruction of all hydrogen bombs, with the number of conventional nuclear devices limited to ensure a balance of power. He proposed that Germany be reunified and accept the Oder-Neisse line as its border, and that a neutral zone be established in Central Europe, consisting at the minimum of Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, with each of these countries being free of foreign troops and influence, and prohibited from forming alliances with countries outside the zone. In the Middle East, Russell suggested that the West avoid opposing Arab nationalism, and proposed the creation of a United Nations peacekeeping force to guard Israel's frontiers to ensure that Israel was protected from aggression and prevented from committing it. He also suggested Western recognition of the People's Republic of China, and that it be admitted to the UN with a permanent seat on the UN Security Council. He was in contact with Lionel Rogosin while the latter was filming his anti-war film Good Times, Wonderful Times in the 1960s. He became a hero to many of the youthful members of the New Left. In early 1963, in particular, Russell became increasingly vocal in his disapproval of the Vietnam War, and felt that the US government's policies there were near-genocidal. In 1963 he became the inaugural recipient of the Jerusalem Prize, an award for writers concerned with the freedom of the individual in society. In 1964 he was one of eleven world figures who issued an appeal to Israel and the Arab countries to accept an arms embargo and international supervision of nuclear plants and rocket weaponry. In October 1965 he tore up his Labour Party card because he suspected Harold Wilson's Labour government was going to send troops to support the United States in Vietnam.   === Final years and death ===  Russell published his three-volume autobiography in 1967, 1968, and 1969. Russell made a cameo appearance playing himself in the anti-war Hindi film Aman which was released in India in 1967. This was Russell's only appearance in a feature film. On 23 November 1969 he wrote to The Times newspaper saying that the preparation for show trials in Czechoslovakia was "highly alarming". The same month, he appealed to Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to support an international war crimes commission to investigate alleged torture and genocide by the United States in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War. The following month, he protested to Alexei Kosygin over the expulsion of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn from the Soviet Union of Writers. On 31 January 1970 Russell issued a statement condemning "Israel's aggression in the Middle East", and in particular, Israeli bombing raids being carried out deep in Egyptian territory as part of the War of Attrition. He called for an Israeli withdrawal to the pre-Six-Day War borders. This was Russell's final political statement or act. It was read out at the International Conference of Parliamentarians in Cairo on 3 February 1970, the day after his death. Russell died of influenza on 2 February 1970 at his home, Plas Penrhyn, in Penrhyndeudraeth, Merionethshire, Wales. His body was cremated in Colwyn Bay on 5 February 1970. In accordance with his will, there was no religious ceremony; his ashes were scattered over the Welsh mountains later that year. He left an estate valued at £69,423. In 1980 a memorial to Russell was commissioned by a committee including the philosopher A. J. Ayer. It consists of a bust of Russell in Red Lion Square in London sculpted by Marcelle Quinton.   === Titles and honours from birth === Russell held throughout his life the following styles and honours: from birth until 1908: The Honourable Bertrand Arthur William Russell from 1908 until 1931: The Honourable Bertrand Arthur William Russell, FRS from 1931 until 1949: The Right Honourable The Earl Russell, FRS from 1949 until death: The Right Honourable The Earl Russell, OM, FRS   == Views ==   === Philosophy ===  Russell is generally credited with being one of the founders of analytic philosophy. He was deeply impressed by Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), and wrote on every major area of philosophy except aesthetics. He was particularly prolific in the field of metaphysics, the logic and the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of language, ethics and epistemology. When Brand Blanshard asked Russell why he didn't write on aesthetics, Russell replied that he didn't know anything about it, "but that is not a very good excuse, for my friends tell me it has not deterred me from writing on other subjects".   === Religion === Russell described himself as an agnostic, "speaking to a purely philosophical audience", but as an atheist "speaking popularly", on the basis that he could not disprove the Christian God – similar to the way that he could not disprove the Olympic gods either. For most of his adult life, Russell maintained that religion is little more than superstition and, despite any positive effects that religion might have, it is largely harmful to people. He believed that religion and the religious outlook serve to impede knowledge and foster fear and dependency, and are responsible for much of our world's wars, oppression, and misery. He was a member of the Advisory Council of the British Humanist Association and President of Cardiff Humanists until his death.   === Society ===  Political and social activism occupied much of Russell's time for most of his life. Russell remained politically active almost to the end of his life, writing to and exhorting world leaders and lending his name to various causes. Russell argued for a "scientific society", where war would be abolished, population growth would be limited, and prosperity would be shared. He suggested the establishment of a "single supreme world government" able to enforce peace, claiming that "the only thing that will redeem mankind is co-operation". Russell was an active supporter of the Homosexual Law Reform Society, being one of the signatories of A. E. Dyson's 1958 letter to The Times calling for a change in the law regarding male homosexual practices, which were partly legalised in 1967, when Russell was still alive. In "Reflections on My Eightieth Birthday" ("Postscript" in his Autobiography), Russell wrote: "I have lived in the pursuit of a vision, both personal and social. Personal: to care for what is noble, for what is beautiful, for what is gentle; to allow moments of insight to give wisdom at more mundane times. Social: to see in imagination the society that is to be created, where individuals grow freely, and where hate and greed and envy die because there is nothing to nourish them. These things I believe, and the world, for all its horrors, has left me unshaken".   == Ancestry ==   == Selected bibliography == A selected bibliography of Russell's books in English, sorted by year of first publication: 1896. German Social Democracy. London: Longmans, Green. 1897. An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1900. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge University Press. 1903 A Free man's worship, and other essays. 1905. On Denoting, Mind, Vol. 14. ISSN: 00264425. Basil Blackwell. 1910. Philosophical Essays. London: Longmans, Green. 1910–1913. Principia Mathematica (with Alfred North Whitehead). 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1912. The Problems of Philosophy. London: Williams and Norgate. 1914. Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy. Chicago and London: Open Court Publishing. 1916. Principles of Social Reconstruction. London, George Allen and Unwin. 1916. Why Men Fight. New York: The Century Co. 1916. The Policy of the Entente, 1904-1914 : a reply to Professor Gilbert Murray. Manchester: The National Labour Press 1916. Justice in War-time. Chicago: Open Court. 1917. Political Ideals. New York: The Century Co. 1918. Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1918. Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism, Anarchism, and Syndicalism. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: George Allen & Unwin. (ISBN 0-415-09604-9 for Routledge paperback) 1920. The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1921. The Analysis of Mind. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1922. The Problem of China. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1923. The Prospects of Industrial Civilization, in collaboration with Dora Russell. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1923. The ABC of Atoms, London: Kegan Paul. Trench, Trubner. 1924. Icarus; or, The Future of Science. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1925. The ABC of Relativity. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1925. What I Believe. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1926. On Education, Especially in Early Childhood. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1927. The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1927. An Outline of Philosophy. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1927. Why I Am Not a Christian. London: Watts. 1927. Selected Papers of Bertrand Russell. New York: Modern Library. 1928. Sceptical Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1929. Marriage and Morals. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1930. The Conquest of Happiness. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1931. The Scientific Outlook, London: George Allen & Unwin. 1932. Education and the Social Order, London: George Allen & Unwin. 1934. Freedom and Organization, 1814–1914. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1935. In Praise of Idleness. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1935. Religion and Science. London: Thornton Butterworth. 1936. Which Way to Peace?. London: Jonathan Cape. 1937. The Amberley Papers: The Letters and Diaries of Lord and Lady Amberley, with Patricia Russell, 2 vols., London: Leonard & Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press. 1938. Power: A New Social Analysis. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1940. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. 1945. A History of Western Philosophy and Its Connection with Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day New York: Simon and Schuster. 1948. Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1949. Authority and the Individual. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1950. Unpopular Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1951. New Hopes for a Changing World. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1952. The Impact of Science on Society. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1953. Satan in the Suburbs and Other Stories. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1954. Human Society in Ethics and Politics. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1954. Nightmares of Eminent Persons and Other Stories. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1956. Portraits from Memory and Other Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1956. Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901–1950, edited by Robert C. Marsh. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1957. Why I Am Not A Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects, edited by Paul Edwards. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1958. Understanding History and Other Essays. New York: Philosophical Library. 1959. Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1959. My Philosophical Development. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1959. Wisdom of the West, edited by Paul Foulkes. London: Macdonald. 1960. Bertrand Russell Speaks His Mind, Cleveland and New York: World Publishing Company. 1961. The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell, edited by R. E. Egner and L. E. Denonn. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1961. Fact and Fiction. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1961. Has Man a Future? London: George Allen & Unwin. 1963. Essays in Skepticism. New York: Philosophical Library. 1963. Unarmed Victory. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1965. Legitimacy Versus Industrialism, 1814–1848. London: George Allen & Unwin (first published as Parts I and II of Freedom and Organization, 1814–1914, 1934). 1965. On the Philosophy of Science, edited by Charles A. Fritz, Jr. Indianapolis: The Bobbs–Merrill Company. 1966. The ABC of Relativity. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1967. Russell's Peace Appeals, edited by Tsutomu Makino and Kazuteru Hitaka. Japan: Eichosha's New Current Books. 1967. War Crimes in Vietnam. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1951–1969. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols., London: George Allen & Unwin. Vol. 2, 1956 1969. Dear Bertrand Russell... A Selection of his Correspondence with the General Public 1950–1968, edited by Barry Feinberg and Ronald Kasrils. London: George Allen and Unwin. Russell also wrote many pamphlets, introductions, articles, and letters to the editor. One pamphlet titled, I Appeal unto Caesar: The Case of the Conscientious Objectors, ghostwritten for Margaret Hobhouse, the mother of imprisoned peace activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse allegedly helped secure the release of hundreds of conscientious objectors from prison. His works can be found in anthologies and collections, perhaps most notably The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, which McMaster University began publishing in 1983. This collection of his shorter and previously unpublished works is now up to 16 volumes, and many more are forthcoming. An additional three volumes catalogue just his bibliography. The Russell Archives at McMaster University possess over 30,000 of his letters.   == See also == Russell's teapot Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club Criticism of Jesus Doctrine of internal relations In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays List of peace activists Structuralism (philosophy of science)   == References ==   === Russell === 1900, Sur la logique des relations avec des applications à la théorie des séries, Rivista di matematica 7: 115–148. 1901, On the Notion of Order, Mind (n.s.) 10: 35–51. 1902, (with Alfred North Whitehead), On Cardinal Numbers, American Journal of Mathematics 24: 367–384. 1948, BBC Reith Lectures: Authority and the Individual A series of six radio lectures broadcast on the BBC Home Service in December 1948.   === Secondary references === John Newsome Crossley. A Note on Cantor's Theorem and Russell's Paradox, Australian Journal of Philosophy 51, 1973, 70–71. Ivor Grattan-Guinness. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000. Alan Ryan. Bertrand Russell: A Political Life, New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.   === Books about Russell's philosophy === Alfred Julius Ayer. Russell, London: Fontana, 1972. ISBN 0-00-632965-9. A lucid summary exposition of Russell's thought. Celia Green. The Lost Cause: Causation and the Mind-Body Problem, Oxford: Oxford Forum, 2003. ISBN 0-9536772-1-4 Contains a sympathetic analysis of Russell's views on causality. A. C. Grayling. Russell: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2002. Nicholas Griffin. Russell's Idealist Apprenticeship, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991. A. D. Irvine (ed.). Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, 4 volumes, London: Routledge, 1999. Consists of essays on Russell's work by many distinguished philosophers. Michael K. Potter. Bertrand Russell's Ethics, Bristol: Thoemmes Continuum, 2006. A clear and accessible explanation of Russell's moral philosophy. Elizabeth Ramsden Eames. Bertrand Russell's Theory of Knowledge, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1969. A clear description of Russell's philosophical development. P. A. Schilpp (ed.). The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University, 1944. John Slater. Bertrand Russell, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1994.   === Biographical books === A. J. Ayer. Bertrand Russell, New York: Viking Press, 1972, reprint ed. London: University of Chicago Press, 1988: ISBN 0-226-03343-0 Ronald W. Clark. The Life of Bertrand Russell, London: Jonathan Cape,1975 ISBN 0-394-49059-2 Ronald W. Clark. Bertrand Russell and His World, London: Thames & Hudson, 1981 ISBN 0-500-13070-1 Rupert Crawshay-Williams. Russell Remembered, London: Oxford University Press, 1970. Written by a close friend of Russell's John Lewis. Bertrand Russell: Philosopher and Humanist, London: Lawerence & Wishart, 1968 Ray Monk. Bertrand Russell: Mathematics: Dreams and Nightmares London: Phoenix, 1997 ISBN 0-7538-0190-6 Ray Monk. Bertrand Russell: 1872–1920 The Spirit of Solitude Vol. I, New York: Routledge, 1997 ISBN 0-09-973131-2 Ray Monk. Bertrand Russell: 1921–1970 The Ghost of Madness Vol. II, New York: Routledge, 2001 ISBN 0-09-927275-X George Santayana. 'Bertrand Russell', in Selected Writings of George Santayana, ed. Norman Henfrey, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, I, 1968, pp. 326–329 Katharine Tait. My father Bertrand Russell, New York: Thoemmes Press, 1975 David Wallechinsky & Wallace Irving. 1975–1981, "Famous Marriages Bertrand Russell & Alla Pearsall Smith Part 1" & "Part 3", on "Alys" Pearsall Smith, webpage content from The People's Almanac, webpages: Part 1 & Part 3 (accessed 18 May 2014). Alan Wood. Bertrand Russell The Passionate Sceptic London: George Allen & Unwin, 1957. Russell had a good opinion of this author.   == External links == Bertrand Russell entry by A. D. Irvine in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1 May 2003 Bertrand Russell's Ethics entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bertrand Russell's Metaphysics entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Bertrand Russell Archives at McMaster University The Bertrand Russell Society The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation Bertrand Russell at the Internet Movie Database Bertrand Russell in Japan Photographs at the National Portrait Gallery (London) Resource list The First Reith Lecture given by Russell (Real Audio) Complete Bibliography of Bertrand Russell's Works Nobel Prize Bertrand Russell at 100 Welsh Heroes Key Participants: Bertrand Russell – Linus Pauling and the International Peace Movement: A Documentary History PM@100: LOGIC FROM 1910 TO 1927 Conference at the Bertrand Russell Research Centre (McMaster University, Ontario, Canada), to be held on 21–24 May 2010, celebrating the 100th anniversary of the publication of Principia Mathematica Bertrand Russell Society Bulletin (2013–present Editor Michael Berumen) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Bertrand Russell", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .   === Other writings available online === Works by Bertrand Russell at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Bertrand Russell at Internet Archive Works by Bertrand Russell at Open Library "A Free Man's Worship" (1903) "On Denoting" (1905) Anti-Suffragist Anxieties (1910) "The Elements of Ethics" (1910) War and Non-Resistance (1915) The War and Non-Resistance — A Rejoinder to Professor Perry (1915) The Ethics of War (1915) Justice in Wartime (1917) Why Men Fight: A Method of Abolishing the International Duel (1917) The Philosophy of Logical Atomism (1918–19) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) "The Conquest of Happiness" (1930) "Has Religion Made Useful Contributions to Civilization?" (1930) Legitimacy Versus Industrialism 1814–1848 (1935) "Am I an Atheist or an Agnostic?" (1947) "Ideas that Have Harmed Mankind" (1950) "What Desires Are Politically Important?" Bertrand Russell's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech (1950) An Outline of Philosophy (1951) Is There a God? (1952) Russell, Bertrand (1953). "What is an Agnostic?". Archived from the original on 2 February 2008.  The Scientific Outlook (1954) "16 Questions on the Assassination" (of President Kennedy) (1964) Bertrand Russell, Selected Writings   === Audio === Works by Bertrand Russell at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Sound clips of Bertrand Russell speaking Russell's BBC broadcast on "Man's Peril" (1954) and the "Russell–Einstein Manifesto" Press conference (1955) "What Desires Are Politically Important?" Bertrand Russell's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech (1950)

Bjarni Jónsson (born February 15, 1920) is an Icelandic mathematician and logician working in universal algebra and lattice theory. He is emeritus Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at Vanderbilt University and the honorary editor in chief of Algebra Universalis. He received his PhD in 1946 at UC Berkeley under supervision of Alfred Tarski. Several mathematical objects are named for him, among them Jónsson algebras, ω-Jónsson functions, Jónsson cardinals, Jónsson terms, Jónsson–Tarski algebras and Jónsson–Tarski duality. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == Publications == Jónsson, Bjarni (1972), Topics in universal algebra, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 250, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, doi:10.1007/BFb0058648, MR 0345895    == References ==   == External links == Bjarni Jónsson's homepage

Robert Bernard Meyer (born August 4, 1939, in Toledo, Ohio) is an American former Major League Baseball left-handed pitcher. He was signed by the New York Yankees as an amateur free agent in 1960. Meyer pitched for the Yankees (1964), Los Angeles Angels (1964), Kansas City Athletics (1964), Seattle Pilots (1969), and Milwaukee Brewers (1970). His first major league strikeout victim was future Hall of Famer Carl Yastrzemski. During a 3-year baseball career, Meyer compiled 2 wins, 92 strikeouts, and a 4.38 earned run average. Meyer is probably best known for being the loser in the best big league game he ever pitched. On September 12, 1964, while starting for the Athletics on the road at Memorial Stadium, he and Baltimore Orioles left-hander Frank Bertaina each pitched a complete game one-hitter, but the A's lost 1-0 as Jackie Brandt hit a sacrifice fly in the bottom of the 8th to score pinch-runner Bob Saverine from third. Other career highlights include a six scoreless inning win against the Kansas City Athletics on June 26, 1964, a six-hit, complete game win (6-1) against the Baltimore Orioles on September 7, 1964, and pitching the first nine innings and giving up one unearned run in a 13-inning victory over the New York Yankees on September 1, 1969.   == External links ==  Career statistics and player information from Baseball-Reference, or Baseball-Reference (Minors) Retrosheet Baseball Library

Anicius Manlius Severinus Boëthius, commonly called Boethius (/boʊˈiːθiəs/; also Boetius /boʊˈiːʃəs/; c. 480–524 AD), was a Roman senator, consul, magister officiorum, and philosopher of the early 6th century. He was born four years after Odoacer deposed the last Roman Emperor and declared himself King of Italy, and entered public service under Ostrogothic King Theodoric the Great, who later imprisoned and executed him in 524 on charges of conspiracy to overthrow him. While jailed, Boethius composed his Consolation of Philosophy, a philosophical treatise on fortune, death, and other issues, which became one of the most popular and influential works of the Middle Ages.   == Biography ==   === Early life and rise to power === Boethius was born in Rome to a patrician family around 480 AD, but his exact birth date is unknown. His family, the Anicii, included emperors Petronius Maximus and Olybrius and many consuls. His father, Manlius Boethius, who was appointed consul in 487, died while Boethius was young. Another patrician, Quintus Aurelius Memmius Symmachus, adopted and raised Boethius, instilling in him a love for literature and philosophy. Both Memmius Symmachus and Boethius were fluent in Greek, an increasingly rare skill at the time in the Western Empire; for this reason, some scholars believe that Boethius was educated in the East. According to John Moorhead, the traditional view is that Boethius studied in Athens based on Cassiodorus's rhetoric describing Boethius' learning in one of his letters, but this appears to be a misreading and his studying in Athens is more likely a legend. The French scholar Pierre Courcelle has argued that Boethius studied at Alexandria with the Neo-Platonist philosopher Ammonius Hermiae. However, Moorhead observes that the evidence supporting Boethius having studied in Alexandria "is not as strong as it may appear", and observes that Boethius may have been able to acquire his formidable learning without travelling. On account of his erudition, Boethius entered the service of Theodoric the Great at a young age and was already a senator by the age of 25. His earliest documented acts on behalf of the Ostrogothic ruler were to investigate allegations that the paymaster of Theodoric's bodyguards had debased the coins of their pay; to produce a waterclock for Theodoric to give to king Gundobad of the Burgunds; and to recruit a lyre-player to perform for Clovis king of the Franks. Boethius married his foster-father's daughter, Rusticiana; their children included two boys, Symmachus and Boethius. During Theodoric's reign, Boethius held many important offices, including the consulship in the year 510, but Boethius confesses in his De consolatione philosophiae that his greatest achievement was to have both his sons made co-consuls for the same year (522), one representing the east and the other the west, and finding himself sitting "between the two consuls and as if it were a military triumph [letting his] largesse fulfill the wildest expectations of the people packed in their seats around [him]". In 522, the same year his two sons were appointed joint consuls, Boethius accepted the appointment to the position of magister officiorum, the head of all the government and court services.   === Fall and death ===  In 520, Boethius was working to revitalize the relationship between the Roman See and the Constantinopalian See; though still both a part of the same Church, disagreements had begun to emerge between them. This may have set in place a course of events that would lead to loss of royal favour. Five-hundred years later, this continuing disagreement led to the East-West Schism in 1054, in which communion between the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church was broken. In 523 Boethius fell from power. After a period of imprisonment in Pavia for what was deemed a treasonable offense, he was executed in 524. The primary sources are in general agreement over the facts of what happened. At a meeting of the Royal Council in Verona, the referandarius Cyprianus accused the ex-consul Caecina Decius Faustus Albinus of treasonous correspondence with Justin I. Boethius leapt to his defense, crying, "The charge of Cyprianus is false, but if Albinus did that, so also have I and the whole senate with one accord done it; it is false, my Lord King." Cyprianus then also accused Boethius of the same crime, and produced three men who claimed they had witnessed the crime. Boethius and Basilius were arrested. First the pair were detained in the baptistery of a church, then Boethius was exiled to the Ager Calventianus, a distant country estate, where he was put to death. Not long afterwards Theodoric had Boethius' father-in-law Symmachus put to death, according to Procopius, on the grounds that he and Boethius together were planning a revolution, and confiscated their property. "The basic facts in the case are not in dispute," writes Jeffrey Richards. "What is disputed about this sequence of events is the interpretation that should be put on them." Boethius claims his crime was seeking "the safety of the Senate." He describes the three witnesses against him as dishonorable: Basilius had been dismissed from Royal service for his debts, while Venantius Opilio and Gaudentius had been exiled for fraud. However, other sources depict these men in far more positive light. For example, Cassiodorus describes Cyprianus and Opilio as "utterly scrupulous, just and loyal" and mentions they are brothers and grandsons of the consul Opilio; Theodoric was feeling threatened by international events. The Acacian Schism had been resolved, and the Nicene Christian aristocrats of his kingdom were seeking to renew their ties with Constantinople. The Catholic Hilderic had become king of the Vandals and had put Theodoric's sister Amalafrida to death, and Arians in the East were being persecuted. Then there was the matter that with his previous ties to Theodahad, Boethius apparently found himself on the wrong side in the succession dispute following the untimely death of Eutharic, Theodoric's announced heir. The method of Boethius' execution varies in the sources. Perhaps he was killed with an axe or a sword, or, possibly, he was clubbed to death. According to another version a rope was attached round his head and tightened till his eyes bulged out; then his skull was cracked. In any case, his remains were entombed in the church of San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro in Pavia, also the resting place of Augustine of Hippo. In Dante's The Divine Comedy, Paradise, Canto X, lines 121–29, the spirit of Boethius is pointed out by Saint Thomas Aquinas:  Now if thy mental eye conducted be From light to light, as I resound their frame, The eighth well worth attention thou wilt see. The soul who pointed out the world's dark ways, To all who listen, its deceits unfolding. Beneath in Cieldauro lies the frame Whence it was driven; -from woe and exile, to This fair abode of peace and bliss it came.  Past Classical and Medieval historians have had a hard time accepting a sincere Christian who was also a serious Hellenist. Arnaldo Momigliano argues that "many people have turned to Christianity for consolation. Boethius turned to paganism. His Christianity collapsed—it collapsed so thoroughly that perhaps he did not even notice its disappearance." However, this view does not reflect the majority of current scholarship on the matter. The community that he was part of valued both classical culture and Christian belief.   == Works ==   === De consolatione philosophiae ===  Boethius's best known work is the Consolation of Philosophy (De consolatione philosophiae), which he wrote most likely while in exile under house arrest or in prison while awaiting his execution. This work represented an imaginary dialogue between himself and philosophy, with philosophy personified as a woman. The book argues that despite the apparent inequality of the world, there is, in Platonic fashion, a higher power and everything else is secondary to that divine Providence. Several manuscripts survived and these were widely edited, translated and printed throughout the late 15th century and later in Europe. Beyond Consolation of Philosophy, his lifelong project was a deliberate attempt to preserve ancient classical knowledge, particularly philosophy. Boethius intended to translate all the works of Aristotle and Plato from the original Greek into Latin.   === De topicis differentiis === His completed translations of Aristotle's works on logic were the only significant portions of Aristotle available in Latin Christendom from the sixth century until the 12th century. However, some of his translations (such as his treatment of the topoi in The Topics) were mixed with his own commentary, which reflected both Aristotelian and Platonic concepts. Unfortunately, the commentaries themselves have been lost. In addition to his commentary on the Topics, Boethius composed two treatises on Topical argumentation, In Ciceronis Topica and De topicis differentiis. The first work has six books, and is largely a response to Cicero's Topica. The first book of In Ciceronis Topica begins with a dedication to Patricius. It includes distinctions and assertions important to Boethius's overall philosophy, such as his view of the role of philosophy to "establish our judgment concerning the governing of life," and definitions of logic from Plato, Aristotle and Cicero. He breaks logic into three parts: that which defines, that which divides, and that which deduces. He asserts that there are three types of arguments: those of necessity, of ready believability, and sophistry. He follows Aristotle in defining one sort of Topic as the maximal proposition, a proposition which is somehow shown to be universal or readily believable. The other sort of Topic, the differentiae, are "Topics that contain and include the maximal propositions"; means of categorizing the Topics which Boethius credits to Cicero. Book II covers two kinds of topics: those from related things and those from extrinsic topics. Book III discusses the relationship between things studied through Topics, Topics themselves, and the nature of definition. Book IV analyzes partition, designation and relationships between things (such as pairing, numbering, genus, and species, etc.) After a review of his terms, Boethius spends Book V discussing Stoic logic and Aristotelian causation. Book VI relates the nature of the Topic to causes. In Topicis Differentiis has four books; Book I discusses the nature of rhetorical and dialectical Topics together, Boethius's overall purpose being "to show what the Topics are, what their differentiae are, and which are suited for what syllogisms." He distinguishes between argument (that which constitutes belief) and argumentation (that which demonstrates belief). Propositions are divided into three parts: those that are universal, those that are particular, and those that are somewhere in between. These distinctions, and others, are applicable to both types of Topical argument, rhetorical and dialectical. Books II and III are primarily focused on Topics of dialectic (syllogisms), while Book IV concentrates on the unit of the rhetorical Topic, the enthymeme. Topical argumentation is at the core of Boethius’s conception of dialectic, which "have categorical rather than conditional conclusions, and he conceives of the discovery of an argument as the discovery of a middle term capable of linking the two terms of the desired conclusion." Not only are these texts of paramount importance to the study of Boethius, they are also crucial to the history of topical lore. It is largely due to Boethius that the Topics of Aristotle and Cicero were revived, and the Boethian tradition of topical argumentation spans its influence throughout the Middle Ages and into the early Renaissance: "In the works of Ockham, Buridan, Albert of Saxony, and the Pseudo-Scotus, for instance, many of the rules of consequence bear a strong resemblance to or are simply identical with certain Boethian Topics...Boethius’s influence, direct and indirect, on this tradition is enormous." It was also in De Topicis Differentiis that Boethius made a unique contribution to the discourse on dialectic and rhetoric. Topical argumentation for Boethius is dependent upon a new category for the topics discussed by Aristotle and Cicero, and "[u]nlike Aristotle, Boethius recognizes two different types of Topics. First, he says, a Topic is a maximal proposition (maxima propositio), or principle; but there is a second kind of Topic, which he calls the differentia of a maximal proposition..." Maximal propositions are "propositions [that are] known per se, and no proof can be found for these." This is the basis for the idea that demonstration (or the construction of arguments) is dependent ultimately upon ideas or proofs that are known so well and are so fundamental to human understanding of logic that no other proofs come before it. They must hold true in and of themselves. According to Stump, "the role of maximal propositions in argumentation is to ensure the truth of a conclusion by ensuring the truth of its premises either directly or indirectly." These propositions would be used in constructing arguments through the Differentia, which is the second part of Boethius' theory. This is "the genus of the intermediate in the argument." So maximal propositions allow room for an argument to be founded in some sense of logic while differentia are critical for the demonstration and construction of arguments. Boethius’ definition of “differentiae” is that they are "the Topics of arguments...The Topics which are the Differentiae of [maximal] propositions are more universal than those propositions, just as rationality is more universal than man." This is the second part of Boethius’ unique contribution to the field of rhetoric. Differentia operate under maximal propositions to "be of use in finding maximal propositions as well as intermediate terms," or the premises that follow maximal propositions. Though Boethius is drawing from Aristotle’s Topics, Differentiae are not the same as Topics in some ways. Boethius arranges differentiae through statements, instead of generalized groups as Aristotle does. Stump articulates the difference. They are "expressed as words or phrases whose expansion into appropriate propositions is neither intended nor readily conceivable," unlike Aristotle’s clearly defined four groups of Topics. Aristotle had hundreds of topics organized into those four groups, whereas Boethius has twenty-eight "Topics" that are “highly ordered among themselves." This distinction is necessary to understand Boethius as separate from past rhetorical theories. Maximal propositions and Differentiae belong not only to rhetoric, but also to dialectic. Boethius defines dialectic through an analysis of "thesis" and hypothetical propositions. He claims that "[t]here are two kinds of questions. One is that called, ‘thesis’ by the [Greek] dialecticians. This is the kind of question which asks about and discusses things stripped of relation to other circumstances; it is the sort of question dialecticians most frequently dispute about—for example, ‘Is pleasure the greatest good?’ [or] ‘Should one marry?’." Dialectic has "dialectical topics" as well as "dialectical-rhetorical topics," all of which are still discussed in De Topicis Differentiis. Dialectic, especially in Book I, comprises a major component of Boethius’ discussion on Topics. Boethius planned to completely translate Plato's Dialogues, but there is no known surviving translation, if it was actually ever begun.   === De arithmetica === Boethius intended to pass on the great Greco-Roman culture to future generations by writing manuals on music and astronomy, geometry, and arithmetic. Several of Boethius' writings, which were largely influential during the Middle Ages, drew from the thinking of Porphyry and Iamblichus. Boethius wrote a commentary on the Isagoge by Porphyry, which highlighted the existence of the problem of universals: whether these concepts are subsistent entities which would exist whether anyone thought of them, or whether they only exist as ideas. This topic concerning the ontological nature of universal ideas was one of the most vocal controversies in medieval philosophy. Besides these advanced philosophical works, Boethius is also reported to have translated important Greek texts for the topics of the quadrivium  His loose translation of Nicomachus's treatise on arithmetic (De institutione arithmetica libri duo) and his textbook on music (De institutione musica libri quinque, unfinished) contributed to medieval education. De arithmetica begins with modular arithmetic, such as even and odd, evenly even, evenly odd, and oddly even. He then turns to unpredicted complexity by categorizing numbers and parts of numbers. His translations of Euclid on geometry and Ptolemy on astronomy, if they were completed, no longer survive. Boethius made Latin translations of Aristotle's De interpretatione and Categories with commentaries. In his article The Ancient Classics in the Mediaeval Libraries, James Stuart Beedie sites Boethius as the reason Aristotle’s works were popular in the Middle Ages, as Boethius preserved many of the philosopher’s works.   === De institutione musica === Boethius' De institutione musica was one of the first musical works to be printed in Venice between the years of 1491 and 1492. It was written toward the beginning of the sixth century and helped medieval authors during the ninth century understand Greek music. In "De Musica," Boethius introduced the threefold classification of music: Musica mundana — music of the spheres/world Musica humana — harmony of human body and spiritual harmony Musica instrumentalis — instrumental music In De musica I.2, Boethius describes 'musica instrumentis' as music produced by something under tension (e.g. strings), by wind (e.g. aulos), by water, or by percussion (e.g. cymbals). Boethius himself doesn't use the term 'instrumentalis', which was used by Adalbold II of Utrecht (975-1026) in his Epistola cum tractatu. The term is much more common in the 13th century and later. It is also in these later texts that musica instrumentalis is firmly associated with audible music in general, including vocal music. Scholars have traditionally assumed that Boethius also made this connection, possibly under the header of wind instruments ("administratur ... aut spiritu ut tibiis" ), but Boethius himself never writes about "instrumentalis" as separate from "instrumentis" explicitly in his very brief description. In one of his works within De institutione musica, was to say that "music is so naturally united with us that we cannot be free from it even if we so desired." During the Middle Ages, Boethius was connected to several texts that were used to teach liberal arts. Although he did not address the subject of trivium, he did write many treatises explaining the principles of rhetoric, grammar, and logic. During the Middle Ages, his works of these disciplines were commonly used when studying the three elementary arts.   === Opuscula sacra === Boethius also wrote Christian theological treatises, which supported Catholicism and condemned Arianism and other heterodox forms of Christianity. Five theological works are known: De Trinitate – "The Trinity", where he defends the Council of Chalcedon Trinitarian position, that God is in three persons who have no differences in nature. He argues against the Arian view of the nature of God, which put him at odds with the faith of Arian King of Italy. Utrum Pater et filius et Spiritus Sanctus de divinitale substantialiter praedicentur – "Whether Father, Son and Holy Spirit are Substantially Predicated of the Divinity," A short work where he uses reason and Aristotelian epistemology to argue that the Catholic faiths' views of the nature of God are correct. Quomodo substantiae De fide catholica - On the Catholic Faith Contra Eutychen et Nestorium – "Against Eutyches and Nestorius," from around 513, which dates it as the earliest of his theological works. Eutyches and Nestorius were contemporaries from the early to mid 5th century who held divergent Christological theologies, Boethius argues for a middle ground in conformity with Roman Catholic faith. His theological works played an important part during the Middle Ages on philosophical thought, including the fields of logic, ontology, and metaphysics.   == History of reception == Lorenzo Valla described Boethius as the last of the Romans and the first of the scholastic philosophers. Despite the use of his mathematical texts in the early universities, it is his final work, the Consolation of Philosophy, that assured his legacy in the Middle Ages and beyond. This work is cast as a dialogue between Boethius himself, at first bitter and despairing over his imprisonment, and the spirit of philosophy, depicted as a woman of wisdom and compassion. "Alternately composed in prose and verse, the Consolation teaches acceptance of hardship in a spirit of philosophical detachment from misfortune". Parts of the work are reminiscent of the Socratic method of Plato's dialogues, as the spirit of philosophy questions Boethius and challenges his emotional reactions to adversity. The work was translated into Old English by King Alfred, although Alfred's authorship of this Old English translation has recently been questioned, and into later English by Chaucer and Queen Elizabeth; many manuscripts survive and it was extensively edited, translated and printed throughout Europe from the 14th century onwards. Many commentaries on it were compiled and it has been one of the most influential books in European culture. No complete bibliography has ever been assembled but it would run into thousands of items. "The Boethian Wheel" is a model for Boethius' belief that history is a wheel, that Boethius uses frequently in the Consolation; it remained very popular throughout the Middle Ages, and is still often seen today. As the wheel turns those that have power and wealth will turn to dust; men may rise from poverty and hunger to greatness, while those who are great may fall with the turn of the wheel. It was represented in the Middle Ages in many relics of art depicting the rise and fall of man. Descriptions of "The Boethian Wheel" can be found in the literature of the Middle Ages from the Romance of the Rose to Chaucer.   == Veneration ==  Boethius is recognized as a martyr for the Catholic faith by the Roman Martyrology. His cult is held in Pavia and in the Church of Santa Maria in Portico in Rome. His feast day is October 23. He was declared a saint by the Sacred Congregation of Rites in 1883, and Pope Benedict XVI explains the relevance of Boethius to modern day Christians by linking his teachings to an understanding of Providence.   == See also == De Fide Catolica   == Notes ==   == References ==   === Works available online === James, H. R. (translator) [1897] (2007), The Consolation of Philosophy of Boethius, The University of Adelaide: eBooks @ Adelaide . Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (1867). "De institutione arithmetica libri duo". In Gottfried Friedlein. Anicii Manlii Torquati Severini Boetii De institutione arithmetica libri duo: De institutione musica libri quinque. Accedit geometria quae fertur Boetii (in Latin). in aedibus B.G. Teubneri. pp. 1–173. Retrieved 2008-08-03.  Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (1867). "De institutione musica libri quinque". In Gottfried Friedlein. Anicii Manlii Torquati Severini Boetii De institutione arithmetica libri duo: De institutione musica libri quinque. Accedit geometria quae fertur Boetii (in Latin). in aedibus B.G. Teubneri. pp. 177–371. Retrieved 2015-10-08.    === Bibliography === Attwater, Donald; Catherine Rachel John (1995). The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-051312-4. OCLC 34361179.  Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008). From Plato to Derrida. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-158591-6.  Chadwick, Henry (1981). Boethius, the Consolations of Music, Logic, Theology, and Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-826549-2. OCLC 8533668.  Colish, Marcia L. (2002). Medieval Foundations of the Western Intellectual Tradition, 400-1400. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-07852-8. OCLC 185694056.  Magee, John (1989). Boethius on Signification and Mind. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 9-0040-9096-7.  Marenbon, John (2004). Boethius. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513407-9. OCLC 186379876.  Marenbon, John (2009). The Cambridge Companion to Boethius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-52-187266-9.  Suto, Taki (2011). Boethius on Mind, Grammar and Logic. A Study of Boethius' Commentaries on Peri Hermeneias. Cambridge: Brill. ISBN 978-9004214187.  Westfall, Joseph (2008). "Boethius: Kierkegaard and The Consolation". In Stewart, Jon. Kierkegaard and the Patristic and Medieval Traditions. Ashgate. pp. 207–222. ISBN 9780754663911.    == Further reading == Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (1926), trans., H. F. Stewart, E. K. Rand, and "I. T.". The Theological Tractates and The Consolation of Philosophy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard, Loeb Classical Library, parallel text. Papahagi, Adrian (2010). Boethiana Mediaevalia – A Collection of Studies on the Early Medieval Fortune of Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy. Bucharest: Zeta Books. ISBN 978-973-199-779-7.   == Discography == Carlo Forlivesi, Boethius (2008) for biwa. The piece is included in the CD album Silenziosa Luna (ALCD 76).   == External links ==   === Works === Works by Boethius at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Boethius at Internet Archive Works by Boethius at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  {en} De Trinitate (On the Holy Trinity) — Boethius, Erik Kenyon (trans.) {en} Theological Tractates; Christian Classics Ethereal Library A 10th-century manuscript of Institutio Arithmetica is available online from Lund University, Sweden The Geoffrey Freudlin 1885 edition of the Arithmetica, from the Cornell Library Historical Mathematics Monographs Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by Boethius in .jpg and .tiff format.   === On Boethius' life and works === Blessed Severinus Boethius at Patron Saints Index Blackwood, Stephen.The Meters of Boethius: Rhythmic Therapy in the Consolation of Philosophy. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Boethius", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Phillips, Philip Edward. Boethius: A Selected Bibliography for Students Boethius at The Online Library of Liberty On Boethius and Cassiodorus — Pope Benedict XVI   === On Boethius' logic and philosophy === Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius entry by John Marenbon in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Contribution of Boethius to the Development of Medieval Logic



Carveth Read (1848–1931) was a 19th and 20th century British philosopher and logician.   == Life == He was born 16, March 1848 in Falmouth, Cornwall, England. He was the third son of Edward Read and Elizabeth Truscott. He attended the University of Cambridge (Christ's College). He received a B.A. (Moral Sciences Tripos, 1st) in 1873 and an M.A. in 1877. He was the Hilbert travelling scholar, studying at Leipzig and Heidelberg Universities in 1874-1877. In 1877 he married Evelyn Thompson. From 1878 he lectured at Wren's 'Coaching' establishment (located at 7 Powis Square, Westbourne Park, London). He was Grote professor of philosophy of mind and logic  at the University College London (UCL) from 1903 to 1911. From 1911 to 1921 he was Lecturer in Comparative Psychology at UCL. He died 6 December 1931 in Solihull, Warwickshire, England.   == Work == In the preface to the fourth edition of his book Logic: Deductive and Inductive (1920), he identifies his significant influences. He states, "the work may be considered, on the whole, as attached to the school of Mill; to whose System of Logic, and to Bain's Logic, it is deeply indebted. Amongst the works of living writers, the Empirical Logic of Venn and the Formal Logic of Keynes have given me most assistance." In Chapter 22 of Logic, Read says: "It is better to be vaguely right than exactly wrong", the original source of the much quoted aphorism "It is better to be roughly right than exactly wrong" that is often, incorrently attributed to John Maynard Keynes.   == Bibliography == Theory in Logic (1878) Logic: Deductive and Inductive (1898 – first edition) The Metaphysics of Nature (1905 - first edition) Natural and Social Morals (1909) The Origin of Man and His Superstitions (1920)   == References ==   == External links == Works by Carveth Read at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Carveth Read at Internet Archive

The Categoriae decem, also known as the Ten Categories and as the Paraphrasis Themistiana, was a Latin summary of the Categories of Aristotle. It is thought to date to the fourth century. Once and traditionally attributed to St. Augustine, it is now no longer thought to be his work. From the eighth century onwards, this text became one of the major sources of logical teaching in medieval Europe, where it was taken at times as a full translation of Aristotle's work, rather than a compression. Its importance rests in the revival of the study of logic it stimulated in the early medieval West, beginning, it would seem, at the court of Charlemagne. Those influenced included Alcuin, particularly in his De Dialectica, Fridugisus  and Johannes Scotus Eriugena. From around the eleventh century the influence of the Categoriae decem waned, as translations of the original work of Aristotle gained currency in Western Europe.   == Notes == ^ The Themistian paraphrase, an attribution to Themistius; other scholars play safe with Pseudo-Augustinus. ^ According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, [1]: 'An anonymous paraphrase of the Categories falsely attributed to Augustine and traditionally known as Categoriae Decem has survived only because it was widely read and used in the early Middle Ages.' ^ See, for example, this PDF, p.34. ^ A.Arlig's unpublished Ohio PhD thesis, 'A study in early medieval Mereology', note p.34, describes its popularity in the ninth and tenth centuries. It was glossed by Heiric, this PDF, note p.30. ^ The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy[2] describes the work as ‘neoplatonic’; it also states 'In the early Middle Ages, Neoplatonic works such as the Categoriae decem were very important'[3]. ^ 'It seems to have been Alcuin who introduced both Boethius' discussions of logic and the Categoriae Decem into general circulation in the Frankish kingdom, or at least, it is in his writings that the earliest extant evidence of these works being read is to be seen'. Rosamond McKitterick, The Frankish Kingdoms under the Carolingians (1983), p.287. On p.286 she includes Ratramnus of Corbie with those knowing Aristotle through the work. ^ Edited in J-P. Migne, Patrologia Latina ^ S.Haverkamp, 'Making something of Nothing: the Content and Context of Fredegisus of Tours' 'De substantia nihili et tenebrarum', unpublished thesis, Utrecht 2006 , ^ Eriugena's synthesis began with Dionysius' two branches of theology: apophatic and cataphatic. Apophasis was then considered from the perspective of the ten categories of Aristotle, interpreted through Augustine and the ps.-Augustinian Categoriae decem. ([4] p.23) ^ [5], reference to John Marenbon, ‘John Scottus and the “Categoriae decem”’, in Werner Beierwaltes (ed.), Eriugena: Studien zu seinen Quellen, Vorträge des III. Internationalen Eriugena-Colloquiums, Freiburg im Breisgau, 27.–30. August 1979   == References == Edition in the Aristoteles Latinus, editor Lorenzo Minio-Paluello: Categoriae vel Praedicamenta. Translatio Boethii, Editio Composite, Translatio Guillelmi de Moerbeka, Lemmata e Simplicii commentario decerpta, Pseudo-Augustini Paraphrasis Themistiana - Desclée De Brouwer (Bruges-Paris 1961).

This is a redirect from a page name that does not have diacritical marks (accents, umlauts, etc.) to essentially the same page name with diacritical marks. For more information follow the bold category link. Apply this redirect (without piping) when the subject page concerns language translation or foreign language equivalents. Other pages that use this redirect should be updated with a direct link to the redirect target (again, without piping).

Charles Parsons may refer to: Charles Algernon Parsons (1854–1931), Irish engineer (of Anglo-Irish background) known for his invention of the steam turbine Charles Parsons (philosopher) (born 1933), professor in the philosophy of mathematics at Harvard University Chick Parsons (Charles Thomas Parsons, Jr., 1900–1988), American businessman, diplomat, and decorated World War II veteran Chuck Parsons (Charles W. Parsons, 1924–1999), American sports car racing driver Charlie Parsons (born 1958), television producer Charlie Parsons (baseball) (1863–1936), Major League Baseball pitcher Charles Parsons (company), a large Australian textile company   == See also == Charlie Parsons (disambiguation)

Charles Sanders Peirce (/ˈpɜrs/, like "purse", September 10, 1839 – April 19, 1914) was an American philosopher, logician, mathematician, and scientist who is sometimes known as "the father of pragmatism". He was educated as a chemist and employed as a scientist for 30 years. Today he is appreciated largely for his contributions to logic, mathematics, philosophy, scientific methodology, and semiotics, and for his founding of pragmatism. An innovator in mathematics, statistics, philosophy, research methodology, and various sciences, Peirce considered himself, first and foremost, a logician. He made major contributions to logic, but logic for him encompassed much of that which is now called epistemology and philosophy of science. He saw logic as the formal branch of semiotics, of which he is a founder, and which foreshadowed the debate among logical positivists and proponents of philosophy of language that dominated 20th century Western philosophy; additionally, he defined the concept of abductive reasoning, as well as rigorously formulated mathematical induction and deductive reasoning. As early as 1886 he saw that logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits; the same idea was used decades later to produce digital computers. In 1934, the philosopher Paul Weiss called Peirce "the most original and versatile of American philosophers and America's greatest logician". Webster's Biographical Dictionary said in 1943 that Peirce was "now regarded as the most original thinker and greatest logician of his time." Keith Devlin similarly referred to Peirce as one of the greatest philosophers ever.   == LifeEdit ==  Peirce was born at 3 Phillips Place in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He was the son of Sarah Hunt Mills and Benjamin Peirce, himself a professor of astronomy and mathematics at Harvard University and perhaps the first serious research mathematician in America. At age 12, Charles read his older brother's copy of Richard Whately's Elements of Logic, then the leading English-language text on the subject. So began his lifelong fascination with logic and reasoning. He went on to earn the A.B. and A.M. from Harvard; in 1863 the Lawrence Scientific School awarded him a B.Sc. that was Harvard's first summa cum laude chemistry degree; and otherwise his academic record was undistinguished. At Harvard, he began lifelong friendships with Francis Ellingwood Abbot, Chauncey Wright, and William James. One of his Harvard instructors, Charles William Eliot, formed an unfavorable opinion of Peirce. This opinion proved fateful, because Eliot, while President of Harvard 1869–1909—a period encompassing nearly all of Peirce's working life—repeatedly vetoed Harvard's employing Peirce in any capacity. Peirce suffered from his late teens onward from a nervous condition then known as "facial neuralgia", which would today be diagnosed as trigeminal neuralgia. Brent says that when in the throes of its pain "he was, at first, almost stupefied, and then aloof, cold, depressed, extremely suspicious, impatient of the slightest crossing, and subject to violent outbursts of temper". Its consequences may have led to the social isolation which made his life's later years so tragic.   === Early employmentEdit === Between 1859 and 1891, Peirce was intermittently employed in various scientific capacities by the United States Coast Survey and its successor, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, where he enjoyed his highly influential father's protection until the latter's death in 1880. That employment exempted Peirce from having to take part in the Civil War; it would have been very awkward for him to do so, as the Boston Brahmin Peirces sympathized with the Confederacy. At the Survey, he worked mainly in geodesy and gravimetry, refining the use of pendulums to determine small local variations in the Earth's gravity. He was elected a resident fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in January 1867. The Survey sent him to Europe five times, first in 1871 as part of a group sent to observe a solar eclipse; there, he sought out Augustus De Morgan, William Stanley Jevons, and William Kingdon Clifford, British mathematicians and logicians whose turn of mind resembled his own. From 1869 to 1872, he was employed as an Assistant in Harvard's astronomical observatory, doing important work on determining the brightness of stars and the shape of the Milky Way. On April 20, 1877 he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences. Also in 1877, he proposed measuring the meter as so many wavelengths of light of a certain frequency, the kind of definition employed from 1960 to 1983. During the 1880s, Peirce's indifference to bureaucratic detail waxed while his Survey work's quality and timeliness waned. Peirce took years to write reports that he should have completed in months. Meanwhile, he wrote entries, ultimately thousands during 1883–1909, on philosophy, logic, science, and other subjects for the encyclopedic Century Dictionary. In 1885, an investigation by the Allison Commission exonerated Peirce, but led to the dismissal of Superintendent Julius Hilgard and several other Coast Survey employees for misuse of public funds. In 1891, Peirce resigned from the Coast Survey at Superintendent Thomas Corwin Mendenhall's request. He never again held regular employment.   === Johns Hopkins UniversityEdit === In 1879, Peirce was appointed Lecturer in logic at the new Johns Hopkins University, which had strong departments in a number of areas that interested him, such as philosophy (Royce and Dewey completed their PhDs at Hopkins), psychology (taught by G. Stanley Hall and studied by Joseph Jastrow, who coauthored a landmark empirical study with Peirce), and mathematics (taught by J. J. Sylvester, who came to admire Peirce's work on mathematics and logic). 1883 saw publication of his Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University containing works by himself and Allan Marquand, Christine Ladd, Benjamin Ives Gilman, and Oscar Howard Mitchell, several of whom were his graduate students. Peirce's nontenured position at Hopkins was the only academic appointment he ever held. Brent documents something Peirce never suspected, namely that his efforts to obtain academic employment, grants, and scientific respectability were repeatedly frustrated by the covert opposition of a major Canadian-American scientist of the day, Simon Newcomb. Peirce's efforts may also have been hampered by a difficult personality; Brent conjectures as to further psychological difficulty. Conversely, Keith Devlin believes that Peirce's work was too far ahead of his time to be appreciated by the academic establishment of the day and that this played a large role in Peirce's inability to obtain a tenured position. Peirce's personal life worked against his professional success. After his first wife, Harriet Melusina Fay ("Zina"), left him in 1875, Peirce, while still legally married, became involved with Juliette, whose name, given variously as Froissy and Pourtalai and nationality (she spoke French) remain uncertain. When his divorce from Zina became final in 1883, he married Juliette. That year, Newcomb pointed out to a Johns Hopkins trustee that Peirce, while a Hopkins employee, had lived and traveled with a woman to whom he was not married; the ensuing scandal led to his dismissal in January 1884. Over the years Peirce sought academic employment at various universities without success. He had no children by either marriage.   === PovertyEdit === In 1887 Peirce spent part of his inheritance from his parents to buy 2,000 acres (8 km2) of rural land near Milford, Pennsylvania, which never yielded an economic return. There he had an 1854 farmhouse remodeled to his design. The Peirces named the property "Arisbe". There they lived with few interruptions for the rest of their lives, Charles writing prolifically, much of it unpublished to this day (see Works). Living beyond their means soon led to grave financial and legal difficulties. He spent much of his last two decades unable to afford heat in winter and subsisting on old bread donated by the local baker. Unable to afford new stationery, he wrote on the verso side of old manuscripts. An outstanding warrant for assault and unpaid debts led to his being a fugitive in New York City for a while. Several people, including his brother James Mills Peirce and his neighbors, relatives of Gifford Pinchot, settled his debts and paid his property taxes and mortgage. Peirce did some scientific and engineering consulting and wrote much for meager pay, mainly encyclopedic dictionary entries, and reviews for The Nation (with whose editor, Wendell Phillips Garrison, he became friendly). He did translations for the Smithsonian Institution, at its director Samuel Langley's instigation. Peirce also did substantial mathematical calculations for Langley's research on powered flight. Hoping to make money, Peirce tried inventing. He began but did not complete a number of books. In 1888, President Grover Cleveland appointed him to the Assay Commission.  From 1890 on, he had a friend and admirer in Judge Francis C. Russell of Chicago, who introduced Peirce to editor Paul Carus and owner Edward C. Hegeler of the pioneering American philosophy journal The Monist, which eventually published at least 14 articles by Peirce. He wrote many texts in James Mark Baldwin's Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901–5); half of those credited to him appear to have been written actually by Christine Ladd-Franklin under his supervision. He applied in 1902 to the newly formed Carnegie Institution for a grant to write a systematic book of his life's work. The application was doomed; his nemesis Newcomb served on the Institution's executive committee, and its President had been the President of Johns Hopkins at the time of Peirce's dismissal. The one who did the most to help Peirce in these desperate times was his old friend William James, dedicating his Will to Believe (1897) to Peirce, and arranging for Peirce to be paid to give two series of lectures at or near Harvard (1898 and 1903). Most important, each year from 1907 until James's death in 1910, James wrote to his friends in the Boston intelligentsia to request financial aid for Peirce; the fund continued even after James died. Peirce reciprocated by designating James's eldest son as his heir should Juliette predecease him. It has been believed that this was also why Peirce used "Santiago" ("St. James" in English) as a middle name, but he appeared in print as early as 1890 as Charles Santiago Peirce. (See Charles Santiago Sanders Peirce for discussion and references). Peirce died destitute in Milford, Pennsylvania, twenty years before his widow.   === Slavery, the Civil War and racismEdit === Peirce grew up in a home where the supremacy of the white Anglo-Saxon male was taken for granted, Irish immigrants were considered inferior and Negro slavery was considered natural. Until the outbreak of the Civil War his father described himself as a secessionist, but after the outbreak of the war, this stopped and he became a Union partisan, supporting with donations the Sanitary Commission, the leading Northern war charity. No members of the Peirce family volunteered or enlisted. Peirce shared his father's views and liked to use the syllogism     All Men are equal in their political rights,    Negroes are Men    -  Negroes are equal in political rights to whites  to illustrate the unreliability of traditional forms of logic. See: Peirce's law#Other proofs of Peirce's law   == ReceptionEdit == Bertrand Russell (1959) wrote, "Beyond doubt [...] he was one of the most original minds of the later nineteenth century, and certainly the greatest American thinker ever." (Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, published from 1910 to 1913, does not mention Peirce; Peirce's work was not widely known until later.) A. N. Whitehead, while reading some of Peirce's unpublished manuscripts soon after arriving at Harvard in 1924, was struck by how Peirce had anticipated his own "process" thinking. (On Peirce and process metaphysics, see Lowe 1964.) Karl Popper viewed Peirce as "one of the greatest philosophers of all times". Yet Peirce's achievements were not immediately recognized. His imposing contemporaries William James and Josiah Royce admired him, and Cassius Jackson Keyser at Columbia and C. K. Ogden wrote about Peirce with respect, but to no immediate effect. The first scholar to give Peirce his considered professional attention was Royce's student Morris Raphael Cohen, the editor of an anthology of Peirce's writings titled Chance, Love, and Logic (1923) and the author of the first bibliography of Peirce's scattered writings. John Dewey studied under Peirce at Johns Hopkins and, from 1916 onwards, Dewey's writings repeatedly mention Peirce with deference. His 1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry is much influenced by Peirce. The publication of the first six volumes of the Collected Papers (1931–35), the most important event to date in Peirce studies and one that Cohen made possible by raising the needed funds, did not prompt an outpouring of secondary studies. The editors of those volumes, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, did not become Peirce specialists. Early landmarks of the secondary literature include the monographs by Buchler (1939), Feibleman (1946), and Goudge (1950), the 1941 Ph.D. thesis by Arthur W. Burks (who went on to edit volumes 7 and 8), and the studies edited by Wiener and Young (1952). The Charles S. Peirce Society was founded in 1946. Its Transactions, an academic quarterly specializing in Peirce, pragmatism, and American philosophy, has appeared since 1965. In 1949, while doing unrelated archival work, the historian of mathematics Carolyn Eisele (1902–2000) chanced on an autograph letter by Peirce. So began her 40 years of research on Peirce the mathematician and scientist, culminating in Eisele (1976, 1979, 1985). Beginning around 1960, the philosopher and historian of ideas Max Fisch (1900–1995) emerged as an authority on Peirce; Fisch (1986) includes many of his relevant articles, including a wide-ranging survey (Fisch 1986: 422–48) of the impact of Peirce's thought through 1983. Peirce has gained a significant international following, marked by university research centers devoted to Peirce studies and pragmatism in Brazil (CeneP/CIEP), Finland (HPRC, including Commens), Germany (Wirth's group, Hoffman's and Otte's group, and Deuser's and Härle's group), France (L'I.R.S.C.E.), Spain (GEP), and Italy (CSP). His writings have been translated into several languages, including German, French, Finnish, Spanish, and Swedish. Since 1950, there have been French, Italian, Spanish, British, and Brazilian Peirceans of note. For many years, the North American philosophy department most devoted to Peirce was the University of Toronto's, thanks in good part to the leadership of Thomas Goudge and David Savan. In recent years, U.S. Peirce scholars have clustered at Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, home of the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), and the Pennsylvania State University.  Currently, considerable interest is being taken in Peirce's ideas by researchers wholly outside the arena of academic philosophy. The interest comes from industry, business, technology, intelligence organizations, and the military; and it has resulted in the existence of a substantial number of agencies, institutes, businesses, and laboratories in which ongoing research into and development of Peircean concepts are being vigorously undertaken.  In recent years, Peirce's trichotomy of signs is exploited by a growing number of practitioners for marketing and design tasks.   == WorksEdit == Peirce's reputation rests largely on a number of academic papers published in American scientific and scholarly journals such as Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Journal of Speculative Philosophy, The Monist, Popular Science Monthly, the American Journal of Mathematics, Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, The Nation, and others. See Articles by Peirce, published in his lifetime for an extensive list with links to them online. The only full-length book (neither extract nor pamphlet) that Peirce authored and saw published in his lifetime was Photometric Researches (1878), a 181-page monograph on the applications of spectrographic methods to astronomy. While at Johns Hopkins, he edited Studies in Logic (1883), containing chapters by himself and his graduate students. Besides lectures during his years (1879–1884) as Lecturer in Logic at Johns Hopkins, he gave at least nine series of lectures, many now published; see Lectures by Peirce. Harvard University obtained from Peirce's widow soon after his death the papers found in his study, but did not microfilm them until 1964. Only after Richard Robin (1967) catalogued this Nachlass did it become clear that Peirce had left approximately 1650 unpublished manuscripts, totaling over 100,000 pages, mostly still unpublished except on microfilm. On the vicissitudes of Peirce's papers, see Houser (1989). Reportedly the papers remain in unsatisfactory condition. The first published anthology of Peirce's articles was the one-volume Chance, Love and Logic: Philosophical Essays, edited by Morris Raphael Cohen, 1923, still in print. Other one-volume anthologies were published in 1940, 1957, 1958, 1972, 1994, and 2009, most still in print. The main posthumous editions of Peirce's works in their long trek to light, often multi-volume, and some still in print, have included: 1931–58: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (CP), 8 volumes, includes many published works, along with a selection of previously unpublished work and a smattering of his correspondence. This long-time standard edition drawn from Peirce's work from the 1860s to 1913 remains the most comprehensive survey of his prolific output from 1893 to 1913. It is organized thematically, but texts (including lecture series) are often split up across volumes, while texts from various stages in Peirce's development are often combined, requiring frequent visits to editors' notes. Edited (1–6) by Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss and (7–8) by Arthur Burks, in print and online. 1975–87: Charles Sanders Peirce: Contributions to The Nation, 4 volumes, includes Peirce's more than 300 reviews and articles published 1869–1908 in The Nation. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner and James Edward Cook, online. 1976: The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, 4 volumes in 5, included many previously unpublished Peirce manuscripts on mathematical subjects, along with Peirce's important published mathematical articles. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1977: Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence between C. S. Peirce and Victoria Lady Welby (2nd edition 2001), included Peirce's entire correspondence (1903–1912) with Victoria, Lady Welby. Peirce's other published correspondence is largely limited to the 14 letters included in volume 8 of the Collected Papers, and the 20-odd pre-1890 items included so far in the Writings. Edited by Charles S. Hardwick with James Cook, out of print. 1982–now: Writings of Charles S. Peirce, A Chronological Edition (W), Volumes 1–6 & 8, of a projected 30. The limited coverage, and defective editing and organization, of the Collected Papers led Max Fisch and others in the 1970s to found the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), whose mission is to prepare a more complete critical chronological edition. Only seven volumes have appeared to date, but they cover the period from 1859–1892, when Peirce carried out much of his best-known work. W 8 was published in November 2010; and work continues on W 7, 9, and 11. In print and online. 1985: Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic of Science: A History of Science, 2 volumes. Auspitz has said, "The extent of Peirce's immersion in the science of his day is evident in his reviews in the Nation [...] and in his papers, grant applications, and publishers' prospectuses in the history and practice of science", referring latterly to Historical Perspectives. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1992: Reasoning and the Logic of Things collects in one place Peirce's 1898 series of lectures invited by William James. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner, with commentary by Hilary Putnam, in print. 1992–98: The Essential Peirce (EP), 2 volumes, is an important recent sampler of Peirce's philosophical writings. Edited (1) by Nathan Hauser and Christian Kloesel and (2) by PEP editors, in print. 1997: Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking collects Peirce's 1903 Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" in a study edition, including drafts, of Peirce's lecture manuscripts, which had been previously published in abridged form; the lectures now also appear in EP 2. Edited by Patricia Ann Turisi, in print. 2010: Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Writings collects important writings by Peirce on the subject, many not previously in print. Edited by Matthew E. Moore, in print.   == MathematicsEdit ==  Peirce's most important work in pure mathematics was in logical and foundational areas. He also worked on linear algebra, matrices, various geometries, topology and Listing numbers, Bell numbers, graphs, the four-color problem, and the nature of continuity. He worked on applied mathematics in economics, engineering, and map projections (such as the Peirce quincuncial projection), and was especially active in probability and statistics. Discoveries Peirce made a number of striking discoveries in formal logic and foundational mathematics, nearly all of which came to be appreciated only long after he died: In 1860 he suggested a cardinal arithmetic for infinite numbers, years before any work by Georg Cantor (who completed his dissertation in 1867) and without access to Bernard Bolzano's 1851 (posthumous) Paradoxien des Unendlichen.  In 1880–81 he showed how Boolean algebra could be done via a repeated sufficient single binary operation (logical NOR), anticipating Henry M. Sheffer by 33 years. (See also De Morgan's Laws). In 1881 he set out the axiomatization of natural number arithmetic, a few years before Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano. In the same paper Peirce gave, years before Dedekind, the first purely cardinal definition of a finite set in the sense now known as "Dedekind-finite", and implied by the same stroke an important formal definition of an infinite set (Dedekind-infinite), as a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with one of its proper subsets. In 1885 he distinguished between first-order and second-order quantification. In the same paper he set out what can be read as the first (primitive) axiomatic set theory, anticipating Zermelo by about two decades (Brady 2000, pp. 132–3). In 1886 he saw that Boolean calculations could be carried out via electrical switches, anticipating Claude Shannon by more than 50 years.  By the later 1890s he was devising existential graphs, a diagrammatic notation for the predicate calculus. Based on them are John F. Sowa's conceptual graphs and Sun-Joo Shin's diagrammatic reasoning. The New Elements of Mathematics Peirce wrote drafts for an introductory textbook, with the working title The New Elements of Mathematics, that presented mathematics from an original standpoint. Those drafts and many other of his previously unpublished mathematical manuscripts finally appeared in The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce (1976), edited by mathematician Carolyn Eisele. Nature of mathematics Peirce agreed with Auguste Comte in regarding mathematics as more basic than philosophy and the special sciences (of nature and mind). Peirce classified mathematics into three subareas: (1) mathematics of logic, (2) discrete series, and (3) pseudo-continua (as he called them, including the real numbers) and continua. Influenced by his father Benjamin, Peirce argued that mathematics studies purely hypothetical objects and is not just the science of quantity but is more broadly the science which draws necessary conclusions; that mathematics aids logic, not vice versa; and that logic itself is part of philosophy and is the science about drawing conclusions necessary and otherwise.   === Mathematics of logicEdit ===  Beginning with his first paper on the "Logic of Relatives" (1870), Peirce extended the theory of relations that Augustus De Morgan had just recently awakened from its Cinderella slumbers. Much of the mathematics of relations now taken for granted was "borrowed" from Peirce, not always with all due credit; on that and on how the young Bertrand Russell, especially his Principles of Mathematics and Principia Mathematica, did not do Peirce justice, see Anellis (1995). In 1918 the logician C. I. Lewis wrote, "The contributions of C.S. Peirce to symbolic logic are more numerous and varied than those of any other writer — at least in the nineteenth century." Beginning in 1940, Alfred Tarski and his students rediscovered aspects of Peirce's larger vision of relational logic, developing the perspective of relation algebra. Relational logic gained applications. In mathematics, it influenced the abstract analysis of E. H. Moore and the lattice theory of Garrett Birkhoff. In computer science, the relational model for databases was developed with Peircean ideas in work of Edgar F. Codd, who was a doctoral student of Arthur W. Burks, a Peirce scholar. In economics, relational logic was used by Frank P. Ramsey, John von Neumann, and Paul Samuelson to study preferences and utility and by Kenneth J. Arrow in Social Choice and Individual Values, following Arrow's association with Tarski at City College of New York. On Peirce and his contemporaries Ernst Schröder and Gottlob Frege, Hilary Putnam (1982) documented that Frege's work on the logic of quantifiers had little influence on his contemporaries, although it was published four years before the work of Peirce and his student Oscar Howard Mitchell. Putnam found that mathematicians and logicians learned about the logic of quantifiers through the independent work of Peirce and Mitchell, particularly through Peirce's "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation" (1885), published in the premier American mathematical journal of the day, and cited by Peano and Schröder, among others, who ignored Frege. They also adopted and modified Peirce's notations, typographical variants of those now used. Peirce apparently was ignorant of Frege's work, despite their overlapping achievements in logic, philosophy of language, and the foundations of mathematics. Peirce's work on formal logic had admirers besides Ernst Schröder: Philosophical algebraist William Kingdon Clifford and logician William Ernest Johnson, both British; The Polish school of logic and foundational mathematics, including Alfred Tarski; Arthur Prior, who praised and studied Peirce's logical work in a 1964 paper and in Formal Logic (saying on page 4 that Peirce "perhaps had a keener eye for essentials than any other logician before or since."). A philosophy of logic, grounded in his categories and semiotic, can be extracted from Peirce's writings and, along with Peirce's logical work more generally, is exposited and defended in Hilary Putnam (1982); the Introduction in Nathan Houser et al. (1997); and Randall Dipert's chapter in Cheryl Misak (2004).   === ContinuaEdit === Continuity and synechism are central in Peirce's philosophy: "I did not at first suppose that it was, as I gradually came to find it, the master-Key of philosophy". From a mathematical point of view, he embraced infinitesimals and worked long on the mathematics of continua. He long held that the real numbers constitute a pseudo-continuum; that a true continuum is the real subject matter of analysis situs (topology); and that a true continuum of instants exceeds—and within any lapse of time has room for—any Aleph number (any infinite multitude as he called it) of instants. In 1908 Peirce wrote that he found that a true continuum might have or lack such room. Jérôme Havenel (2008): "It is on May 26, 1908, that Peirce finally gave up his idea that in every continuum there is room for whatever collection of any multitude. From now on, there are different kinds of continua, which have different properties."   === Probability and statisticsEdit === Peirce held that science achieves statistical probabilities, not certainties, and that spontaneity (absolute chance) is real (see Tychism on his view). Most of his statistical writings promote the frequency interpretation of probability (objective ratios of cases), and many of his writings express skepticism about (and criticize the use of) probability when such models are not based on objective randomization. Though Peirce was largely a frequentist, his possible world semantics introduced the "propensity" theory of probability before Karl Popper. Peirce (sometimes with Joseph Jastrow) investigated the probability judgments of experimental subjects, "perhaps the very first" elicitation and estimation of subjective probabilities in experimental psychology and (what came to be called) Bayesian statistics. Peirce was one of the founders of statistics. He formulated modern statistics in "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" (1877–8) and "A Theory of Probable Inference" (1883). With a repeated measures design, Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow introduced blinded, controlled randomized experiments in 1884 (Hacking 1990:205) (before Ronald A. Fisher). He invented optimal design for experiments on gravity, in which he "corrected the means". He used correlation and smoothing. Peirce extended the work on outliers by Benjamin Peirce, his father. He introduced terms "confidence" and "likelihood" (before Jerzy Neyman and Fisher). (See Stephen Stigler's historical books and Ian Hacking 1990).   == PhilosophyEdit ==  It is not sufficiently recognized that Peirce's career was that of a scientist, not a philosopher; and that during his lifetime he was known and valued chiefly as a scientist, only secondarily as a logician, and scarcely at all as a philosopher. Even his work in philosophy and logic will not be understood until this fact becomes a standing premise of Peircean studies.  Peirce was a working scientist for 30 years, and arguably was a professional philosopher only during the five years he lectured at Johns Hopkins. He learned philosophy mainly by reading, each day, a few pages of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, in the original German, while a Harvard undergraduate. His writings bear on a wide array of disciplines, including mathematics, logic, philosophy, statistics, astronomy, metrology, geodesy, experimental psychology, economics, linguistics, and the history and philosophy of science. This work has enjoyed renewed interest and approval, a revival inspired not only by his anticipations of recent scientific developments but also by his demonstration of how philosophy can be applied effectively to human problems. Peirce's philosophy includes (see below in related sections) a pervasive three-category system, belief that truth is immutable and is both independent from actual opinion (fallibilism) and discoverable (no radical skepticism), logic as formal semiotic on signs, on arguments, and on inquiry's ways—including philosophical pragmatism (which he founded), critical common-sensism, and scientific method—and, in metaphysics: Scholastic realism, e.g. John Duns Scotus, belief in God, freedom, and at least an attenuated immortality, objective idealism, and belief in the reality of continuity and of absolute chance, mechanical necessity, and creative love. In his work, fallibilism and pragmatism may seem to work somewhat like skepticism and positivism, respectively, in others' work. However, for Peirce, fallibilism is balanced by an anti-skepticism and is a basis for belief in the reality of absolute chance and of continuity, and pragmatism commits one to anti-nominalist belief in the reality of the general (CP 5.453–7). For Peirce, First Philosophy, which he also called cenoscopy, is less basic than mathematics and more basic than the special sciences (of nature and mind). It studies positive phenomena in general, phenomena available to any person at any waking moment, and does not settle questions by resorting to special experiences. He divided such philosophy into (1) phenomenology (which he also called phaneroscopy or categorics), (2) normative sciences (esthetics, ethics, and logic), and (3) metaphysics; his views on them are discussed in order below.   === Theory of categoriesEdit ===  On May 14, 1867, the 27-year-old Peirce presented a paper entitled "On a New List of Categories" to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which published it the following year. The paper outlined a theory of predication, involving three universal categories that Peirce developed in response to reading Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel, categories that Peirce applied throughout his work for the rest of his life. Peirce scholars generally regard the "New List" as foundational or breaking the ground for Peirce's "architectonic", his blueprint for a pragmatic philosophy. In the categories one will discern, concentrated, the pattern that one finds formed by the three grades of clearness in "How To Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878 paper foundational to pragmatism), and in numerous other trichotomies in his work. "On a New List of Categories" is cast as a Kantian deduction; it is short but dense and difficult to summarize. The following table is compiled from that and later works. In 1893, Peirce restated most of it for a less advanced audience.  *Note: An interpretant is an interpretation (human or otherwise) in the sense of the product of an interpretive process.   === Aesthetics and ethicsEdit === Peirce did not write extensively in aesthetics and ethics, but came by 1902 to hold that aesthetics, ethics, and logic, in that order, comprise the normative sciences. He characterized aesthetics as the study of the good (grasped as the admirable), and thus of the ends governing all conduct and thought.   == Philosophy: logic, or semioticEdit ==   === Logic as philosophicalEdit === Peirce regarded logic per se as a division of philosophy, as a normative science based on esthetics and ethics, as more basic than metaphysics, and as "the art of devising methods of research". More generally, as inference, "logic is rooted in the social principle", since inference depends on a standpoint that, in a sense, is unlimited. Peirce called (with no sense of deprecation) "mathematics of logic" much of the kind of thing which, in current research and applications, is called simply "logic". He was productive in both (philosophical) logic and logic's mathematics, which were connected deeply in his work and thought. Peirce argued that logic is formal semiotic, the formal study of signs in the broadest sense, not only signs that are artificial, linguistic, or symbolic, but also signs that are semblances or are indexical such as reactions. Peirce held that "all this universe is perfused with signs, if it is not composed exclusively of signs", along with their representational and inferential relations. He argued that, since all thought takes time, all thought is in signs and sign processes ("semiosis") such as the inquiry process. He divided logic into: (1) speculative grammar, or stechiology, on how signs can be meaningful and, in relation to that, what kinds of signs there are, how they combine, and how some embody or incorporate others; (2) logical critic, or logic proper, on the modes of inference; and (3) speculative or universal rhetoric, or methodeutic, the philosophical theory of inquiry, including pragmatism.   ==== Presuppositions of logicEdit ==== In his "F.R.L." [First Rule of Logic] (1899), Peirce states that the first, and "in one sense, the sole", rule of reason is that, to learn, one needs to desire to learn and desire it without resting satisfied with that which one is inclined to think. So, the first rule is, to wonder. Peirce proceeds to a critical theme in research practices and the shaping of theories: ...there follows one corollary which itself deserves to be inscribed upon every wall of the city of philosophy: Do not block the way of inquiry. Peirce adds, that method and economy are best in research but no outright sin inheres in trying any theory in the sense that the investigation via its trial adoption can proceed unimpeded and undiscouraged, and that "the one unpardonable offence" is a philosophical barricade against truth's advance, an offense to which "metaphysicians in all ages have shown themselves the most addicted". Peirce in many writings holds that logic precedes metaphysics (ontological, religious, and physical). Peirce goes on to list four common barriers to inquiry: (1) Assertion of absolute certainty; (2) maintaining that something is absolutely unknowable; (3) maintaining that something is absolutely inexplicable because absolutely basic or ultimate; (4) holding that perfect exactitude is possible, especially such as to quite preclude unusual and anomalous phenomena. To refuse absolute theoretical certainty is the heart of fallibilism, which Peirce unfolds into refusals to set up any of the listed barriers. Peirce elsewhere argues (1897) that logic's presupposition of fallibilism leads at length to the view that chance and continuity are very real (tychism and synechism). The First Rule of Logic pertains to the mind's presuppositions in undertaking reason and logic, presuppositions, for instance, that truth and the real do not depend on yours or my opinion of them but do depend on representational relation and consist in the destined end in investigation taken far enough (see below). He describes such ideas as, collectively, hopes which, in particular cases, one is unable seriously to doubt.   ==== Four incapacitiesEdit ====  In three articles in 1868–69, Peirce rejected mere verbal or hyperbolic doubt and first or ultimate principles, and argued that we have (as he numbered them): No power of Introspection. All knowledge of the internal world comes by hypothetical reasoning from known external facts. No power of Intuition (cognition without logical determination by previous cognitions). No cognitive stage is absolutely first in a process. All mental action has the form of inference. No power of thinking without signs. A cognition must be interpreted in a subsequent cognition in order to be a cognition at all. No conception of the absolutely incognizable. (The above sense of the term "intuition" is almost Kant's, said Peirce. It differs from the current looser sense that encompasses instinctive or anyway half-conscious inference.) Peirce argued that those incapacities imply the reality of the general and of the continuous, the validity of the modes of reasoning, and the falsity of philosophical Cartesianism (see below). Peirce rejected the conception (usually ascribed to Kant) of the unknowable thing-in-itself and later said that to "dismiss make-believes" is a prerequisite for pragmatism.   ==== Logic as formal semioticEdit ==== Peirce sought, through his wide-ranging studies through the decades, formal philosophical ways to articulate thought's processes, and also to explain the workings of science. These inextricably entangled questions of a dynamics of inquiry rooted in nature and nurture led him to develop his semiotic with very broadened conceptions of signs and inference, and, as its culmination, a theory of inquiry for the task of saying 'how science works' and devising research methods. This would be logic by the medieval definition taught for centuries: art of arts, science of sciences, having the way to the principles of all methods. Influences radiate from points on parallel lines of inquiry in Aristotle's work, in such loci as: the basic terminology of psychology in On the Soul; the founding description of sign relations in On Interpretation; and the differentiation of inference into three modes that are commonly translated into English as abduction, deduction, and induction, in the Prior Analytics, as well as inference by analogy (called paradeigma by Aristotle), which Peirce regarded as involving the other three modes. Peirce began writing on semiotic in the 1860s, around the time when he devised his system of three categories. He called it both semiotic and semeiotic. Both are current in singular and plural. He based it on the conception of a triadic sign relation, and defined semiosis as "action, or influence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative influence not being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs". As to signs in thought, Peirce emphasized the reverse:  To say, therefore, that thought cannot happen in an instant, but requires a time, is but another way of saying that every thought must be interpreted in another, or that all thought is in signs.  Peirce held that all thought is in signs, issuing in and from interpretation, where 'sign' is the word for the broadest variety of conceivable semblances, diagrams, metaphors, symptoms, signals, designations, symbols, texts, even mental concepts and ideas, all as determinations of a mind or quasi-mind, that which at least functions like a mind, as in the work of crystals or bees — the focus is on sign action in general rather than on psychology, linguistics, or social studies (fields which he also pursued). Inquiry is a kind of inference process, a manner of thinking and semiosis. Global divisions of ways for phenomena to stand as signs, and the subsumption of inquiry and thinking within inference as a sign process, enable the study of inquiry on semiotics' three levels: Conditions for meaningfulness. Study of significatory elements and combinations, their grammar. Validity, conditions for true representation. Critique of arguments in their various separate modes. Conditions for determining interpretations. Methodology of inquiry in its mutually interacting modes. Peirce uses examples often from common experience, but defines and discusses such things as assertion and interpretation in terms of philosophical logic. In a formal vein, Peirce said:  On the Definition of Logic. Logic is formal semiotic. A sign is something, A, which brings something, B, its interpretant sign, determined or created by it, into the same sort of correspondence (or a lower implied sort) with something, C, its object, as that in which itself stands to C. This definition no more involves any reference to human thought than does the definition of a line as the place within which a particle lies during a lapse of time. It is from this definition that I deduce the principles of logic by mathematical reasoning, and by mathematical reasoning that, I aver, will support criticism of Weierstrassian severity, and that is perfectly evident. The word "formal" in the definition is also defined.     —Peirce, "Carnegie Application", The New Elements of Mathematics v. 4, p. 54.   === SignsEdit ===  A list of noted writings by Peirce on signs and sign relations is at Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)#References and further reading.   ==== Sign relationEdit ==== Peirce's theory of signs is known to be one of the most complex semiotic theories due to its generalistic claim. Anything is a sign — not absolutely as itself, but instead in some relation or other. The sign relation is the key. It defines three roles encompassing (1) the sign, (2) the sign's subject matter, called its object, and (3) the sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of effect called its interpretant (a further sign, for example a translation). It is an irreducible triadic relation, according to Peirce. The roles are distinct even when the things that fill those roles are not. The roles are but three; a sign of an object leads to one or more interpretants, and, as signs, they lead to further interpretants. Extension × intension = information. Two traditional approaches to sign relation, necessary though insufficient, are the way of extension (a sign's objects, also called breadth, denotation, or application) and the way of intension (the objects' characteristics, qualities, attributes referenced by the sign, also called depth, comprehension, significance, or connotation). Peirce adds a third, the way of information, including change of information, to integrate the other two approaches into a unified whole. For example, because of the equation above, if a term's total amount of information stays the same, then the more that the term 'intends' or signifies about objects, the fewer are the objects to which the term 'extends' or applies. Determination. A sign depends on its object in such a way as to represent its object — the object enables and, in a sense, determines the sign. A physically causal sense of this stands out when a sign consists in an indicative reaction. The interpretant depends likewise on both the sign and the object — an object determines a sign to determine an interpretant. But this determination is not a succession of dyadic events, like a row of toppling dominoes; sign determination is triadic. For example, an interpretant does not merely represent something which represented an object; instead an interpretant represents something as a sign representing the object. The object (be it a quality or fact or law or even fictional) determines the sign to an interpretant through one's collateral experience with the object, in which the object is found or from which it is recalled, as when a sign consists in a chance semblance of an absent object. Peirce used the word "determine" not in a strictly deterministic sense, but in a sense of "specializes," bestimmt, involving variable amount, like an influence. Peirce came to define representation and interpretation in terms of (triadic) determination. The object determines the sign to determine another sign — the interpretant — to be related to the object as the sign is related to the object, hence the interpretant, fulfilling its function as sign of the object, determines a further interpretant sign. The process is logically structured to perpetuate itself, and is definitive of sign, object, and interpretant in general.   ==== Semiotic elementsEdit ==== Peirce held there are exactly three basic elements in semiosis (sign action): A sign (or representamen) represents, in the broadest possible sense of "represents". It is something interpretable as saying something about something. It is not necessarily symbolic, linguistic, or artificial—a cloud might be a sign of rain for instance, or ruins the sign of ancient civilization. As Peirce sometimes put it (he defined sign at least 76 times), the sign stands for the object to the interpretant. A sign represents its object in some respect, which respect is the sign's ground. An object (or semiotic object) is a subject matter of a sign and an interpretant. It can be anything thinkable, a quality, an occurrence, a rule, etc., even fictional, such as Prince Hamlet. All of those are special or partial objects. The object most accurately is the universe of discourse to which the partial or special object belongs. For instance, a perturbation of Pluto's orbit is a sign about Pluto but ultimately not only about Pluto. An object either (i) is immediate to a sign and is the object as represented in the sign or (ii) is a dynamic object, the object as it really is, on which the immediate object is founded "as on bedrock". An interpretant (or interpretant sign) is a sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of idea or effect, an interpretation, human or otherwise. An interpretant is a sign (a) of the object and (b) of the interpretant's "predecessor" (the interpreted sign) as a sign of the same object. An interpretant either (i) is immediate to a sign and is a kind of quality or possibility such as a word's usual meaning, or (ii) is a dynamic interpretant, such as a state of agitation, or (iii) is a final or normal interpretant, a sum of the lessons which a sufficiently considered sign would have as effects on practice, and with which an actual interpretant may at most coincide. Some of the understanding needed by the mind depends on familiarity with the object. To know what a given sign denotes, the mind needs some experience of that sign's object, experience outside of, and collateral to, that sign or sign system. In that context Peirce speaks of collateral experience, collateral observation, collateral acquaintance, all in much the same terms.   ==== Classes of signsEdit ==== Among Peirce's many sign typologies, three stand out, interlocked. The first typology depends on the sign itself, the second on how the sign stands for its denoted object, and the third on how the sign stands for its object to its interpretant. Also, each of the three typologies is a three-way division, a trichotomy, via Peirce's three phenomenological categories: (1) quality of feeling, (2) reaction, resistance, and (3) representation, mediation. I. Qualisign, sinsign, legisign (also called tone, token, type, and also called potisign, actisign, famisign): This typology classifies every sign according to the sign's own phenomenological category—the qualisign is a quality, a possibility, a "First"; the sinsign is a reaction or resistance, a singular object, an actual event or fact, a "Second"; and the legisign is a habit, a rule, a representational relation, a "Third". II. Icon, index, symbol: This typology, the best known one, classifies every sign according to the category of the sign's way of denoting its object—the icon (also called semblance or likeness) by a quality of its own, the index by factual connection to its object, and the symbol by a habit or rule for its interpretant. III. Rheme, dicisign, argument (also called sumisign, dicisign, suadisign, also seme, pheme, delome, and regarded as very broadened versions of the traditional term, proposition, argument): This typology classifies every sign according to the category which the interpretant attributes to the sign's way of denoting its object—the rheme, for example a term, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of quality; the dicisign, for example a proposition, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of fact; and the argument is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of habit or law. This is the culminating typology of the three, where the sign is understood as a structural element of inference. Every sign belongs to one class or another within (I) and within (II) and within (III). Thus each of the three typologies is a three-valued parameter for every sign. The three parameters are not independent of each other; many co-classifications are absent, for reasons pertaining to the lack of either habit-taking or singular reaction in a quality, and the lack of habit-taking in a singular reaction. The result is not 27 but instead ten classes of signs fully specified at this level of analysis.   === Modes of inferenceEdit ===  Borrowing a brace of concepts from Aristotle, Peirce examined three basic modes of inference — abduction, deduction, and induction — in his "critique of arguments" or "logic proper". Peirce also called abduction "retroduction", "presumption", and, earliest of all, "hypothesis". He characterized it as guessing and as inference to an explanatory hypothesis. He sometimes expounded the modes of inference by transformations of the categorical syllogism Barbara (AAA), for example in "Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis" (1878). He does this by rearranging the rule (Barbara's major premise), the case (Barbara's minor premise), and the result (Barbara's conclusion): Peirce 1883 in "A Theory of Probable Inference" (Studies in Logic) equated hypothetical inference with the induction of characters of objects (as he had done in effect before). Eventually dissatisfied, by 1900 he distinguished them once and for all and also wrote that he now took the syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical extension and comprehension as being less basic than he had thought. In 1903 he presented the following logical form for abductive inference:  The surprising fact, C, is observed; But if A were true, C would be a matter of course, Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.  The logical form does not also cover induction, since induction neither depends on surprise nor proposes a new idea for its conclusion. Induction seeks facts to test a hypothesis; abduction seeks a hypothesis to account for facts. "Deduction proves that something must be; Induction shows that something actually is operative; Abduction merely suggests that something may be." Peirce did not remain quite convinced that one logical form covers all abduction. In his methodeutic or theory of inquiry (see below), he portrayed abduction as an economic initiative to further inference and study, and portrayed all three modes as clarified by their coordination in essential roles in inquiry: hypothetical explanation, deductive prediction, inductive testing.   === PragmatismEdit ===  Peirce's recipe for pragmatic thinking, which he called pragmatism and, later, pragmaticism, is recapitulated in several versions of the so-called pragmatic maxim. Here is one of his more emphatic reiterations of it:  Consider what effects that might conceivably have practical bearings you conceive the objects of your conception to have. Then, your conception of those effects is the whole of your conception of the object.  As a movement, pragmatism began in the early 1870s in discussions among Peirce, William James, and others in the Metaphysical Club. James among others regarded some articles by Peirce such as "The Fixation of Belief" (1877) and especially "How to Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878) as foundational to pragmatism. Peirce (CP 5.11–12), like James (Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, 1907), saw pragmatism as embodying familiar attitudes, in philosophy and elsewhere, elaborated into a new deliberate method for fruitful thinking about problems. Peirce differed from James and the early John Dewey, in some of their tangential enthusiasms, in being decidedly more rationalistic and realistic, in several senses of those terms, throughout the preponderance of his own philosophical moods. In 1905 Peirce coined the new name pragmaticism "for the precise purpose of expressing the original definition", saying that "all went happily" with James's and F.C.S. Schiller's variant uses of the old name "pragmatism" and that he coined the new name because of the old name's growing use in "literary journals, where it gets abused". Yet he cited as causes, in a 1906 manuscript, his differences with James and Schiller and, in a 1908 publication, his differences with James as well as literary author Giovanni Papini's declaration of pragmatism's indefinability. Peirce in any case regarded his views that truth is immutable and infinity is real, as being opposed by the other pragmatists, but he remained allied with them on other issues. Pragmatism begins with the idea that belief is that on which one is prepared to act. Peirce's pragmatism is a method of clarification of conceptions of objects. It equates any conception of an object to a conception of that object's effects to a general extent of the effects' conceivable implications for informed practice. It is a method of sorting out conceptual confusions occasioned, for example, by distinctions that make (sometimes needed) formal yet not practical differences. He formulated both pragmatism and statistical principles as aspects of scientific logic, in his "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" series of articles. In the second one, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear", Peirce discussed three grades of clearness of conception: Clearness of a conception familiar and readily used, even if unanalyzed and undeveloped. Clearness of a conception in virtue of clearness of its parts, in virtue of which logicians called an idea "distinct", that is, clarified by analysis of just what makes it applicable. Elsewhere, echoing Kant, Peirce called a likewise distinct definition "nominal" (CP 5.553). Clearness in virtue of clearness of conceivable practical implications of the object's conceived effects, such as fosters fruitful reasoning, especially on difficult problems. Here he introduced that which he later called the pragmatic maxim. By way of example of how to clarify conceptions, he addressed conceptions about truth and the real as questions of the presuppositions of reasoning in general. In clearness's second grade (the "nominal" grade), he defined truth as a sign's correspondence to its object, and the real as the object of such correspondence, such that truth and the real are independent of that which you or I or any actual, definite community of inquirers think. After that needful but confined step, next in clearness's third grade (the pragmatic, practice-oriented grade) he defined truth as that opinion which would be reached, sooner or later but still inevitably, by research taken far enough, such that the real does depend on that ideal final opinion—a dependence to which he appeals in theoretical arguments elsewhere, for instance for the long-run validity of the rule of induction. Peirce argued that even to argue against the independence and discoverability of truth and the real is to presuppose that there is, about that very question under argument, a truth with just such independence and discoverability. Peirce said that a conception's meaning consists in "all general modes of rational conduct" implied by "acceptance" of the conception—that is, if one were to accept, first of all, the conception as true, then what could one conceive to be consequent general modes of rational conduct by all who accept the conception as true?—the whole of such consequent general modes is the whole meaning. His pragmatism does not equate a conception's meaning, its intellectual purport, with the conceived benefit or cost of the conception itself, like a meme (or, say, propaganda), outside the perspective of its being true, nor, since a conception is general, is its meaning equated with any definite set of actual consequences or upshots corroborating or undermining the conception or its worth. His pragmatism also bears no resemblance to "vulgar" pragmatism, which misleadingly connotes a ruthless and Machiavellian search for mercenary or political advantage. Instead the pragmatic maxim is the heart of his pragmatism as a method of experimentational mental reflection arriving at conceptions in terms of conceivable confirmatory and disconfirmatory circumstances—a method hospitable to the formation of explanatory hypotheses, and conducive to the use and improvement of verification. Peirce's pragmatism, as method and theory of definitions and conceptual clearness, is part of his theory of inquiry, which he variously called speculative, general, formal or universal rhetoric or simply methodeutic. He applied his pragmatism as a method throughout his work.   ==== Theory of inquiryEdit ====   ===== Critical common-sensismEdit ===== Critical common-sensism, treated by Peirce as a consequence of his pragmatism, is his combination of Thomas Reid's common-sense philosophy with a fallibilism that recognizes that propositions of our more or less vague common sense now indubitable may later come into question, for example because of transformations of our world through science. It includes efforts to work up in tests genuine doubts for a core group of common indubitables that vary slowly if at all.   ===== Rival methods of inquiryEdit ===== In The Fixation of Belief (1877), Peirce described inquiry in general not as the pursuit of truth per se but as the struggle to move from irritating, inhibitory doubt born of surprise, disagreement, and the like, and to reach a secure belief, belief being that on which one is prepared to act. That let Peirce frame scientific inquiry as part of a broader spectrum and as spurred, like inquiry generally, by actual doubt, not mere verbal, quarrelsome, or hyperbolic doubt, which he held to be fruitless. Peirce sketched four methods of settling opinion, ordered from least to most successful: The method of tenacity (policy of sticking to initial belief) — which brings comforts and decisiveness but leads to trying to ignore contrary information and others' views as if truth were intrinsically private, not public. The method goes against the social impulse and easily falters since one may well notice when another's opinion seems as good as one's own initial opinion. Its successes can be brilliant but tend to be transitory. The method of authority — which overcomes disagreements but sometimes brutally. Its successes can be majestic and long-lasting, but it cannot regulate people thoroughly enough to withstand doubts indefinitely, especially when people learn about other societies present and past. The method of the a priori — which promotes conformity less brutally but fosters opinions as something like tastes, arising in conversation and comparisons of perspectives in terms of "what is agreeable to reason." Thereby it depends on fashion in paradigms and goes in circles over time. It is more intellectual and respectable but, like the first two methods, sustains accidental and capricious beliefs, destining some minds to doubt it. The method of science — wherein inquiry supposes that the real is discoverable but independent of particular opinion, such that, unlike in the other methods, inquiry can, by its own account, go wrong (fallibilism), not only right, and thus purposely tests itself and criticizes, corrects, and improves itself. Peirce held that, in practical affairs, slow and stumbling ratiocination is often dangerously inferior to instinct and traditional sentiment, and that the scientific method is best suited to theoretical research, which in turn should not be trammeled by the other methods and practical ends; reason's "first rule" is that, in order to learn, one must desire to learn and, as a corollary, must not block the way of inquiry. Scientific method excels the others finally by being deliberately designed to arrive — eventually — at the most secure beliefs, upon which the most successful practices can be based. Starting from the idea that people seek not truth per se but instead to subdue irritating, inhibitory doubt, Peirce showed how, through the struggle, some can come to submit to truth for the sake of belief's integrity, seek as truth the guidance of potential conduct correctly to its given goal, and wed themselves to the scientific method.   ===== Scientific methodEdit ===== Insofar as clarification by pragmatic reflection suits explanatory hypotheses and fosters predictions and testing, pragmatism points beyond the usual duo of foundational alternatives: deduction from self-evident truths, or rationalism; and induction from experiential phenomena, or empiricism. Based on his critique of three modes of argument and different from either foundationalism or coherentism, Peirce's approach seeks to justify claims by a three-phase dynamic of inquiry: Active, abductive genesis of theory, with no prior assurance of truth; Deductive application of the contingent theory so as to clarify its practical implications; Inductive testing and evaluation of the utility of the provisional theory in anticipation of future experience, in both senses: prediction and control. Thereby, Peirce devised an approach to inquiry far more solid than the flatter image of inductive generalization simpliciter, which is a mere re-labeling of phenomenological patterns. Peirce's pragmatism was the first time the scientific method was proposed as an epistemology for philosophical questions. A theory that succeeds better than its rivals in predicting and controlling our world is said to be nearer the truth. This is an operational notion of truth used by scientists. Peirce extracted the pragmatic model or theory of inquiry from its raw materials in classical logic and refined it in parallel with the early development of symbolic logic to address problems about the nature of scientific reasoning. Abduction, deduction, and induction make incomplete sense in isolation from one another but comprise a cycle understandable as a whole insofar as they collaborate toward the common end of inquiry. In the pragmatic way of thinking about conceivable practical implications, every thing has a purpose, and, as possible, its purpose should first be denoted. Abduction hypothesizes an explanation for deduction to clarify into implications to be tested so that induction can evaluate the hypothesis, in the struggle to move from troublesome uncertainty to more secure belief. No matter how traditional and needful it is to study the modes of inference in abstraction from one another, the integrity of inquiry strongly limits the effective modularity of its principal components. Peirce's outline of the scientific method in §III–IV of "A Neglected Argument" is summarized below (except as otherwise noted). There he also reviewed plausibility and inductive precision (issues of critique of arguments). 1. Abductive (or retroductive) phase. Guessing, inference to explanatory hypotheses for selection of those best worth trying. From abduction, Peirce distinguishes induction as inferring, on the basis of tests, the proportion of truth in the hypothesis. Every inquiry, whether into ideas, brute facts, or norms and laws, arises from surprising observations in one or more of those realms (and for example at any stage of an inquiry already underway). All explanatory content of theories comes from abduction, which guesses a new or outside idea so as to account in a simple, economical way for a surprising or complicated phenomenon. The modicum of success in our guesses far exceeds that of random luck, and seems born of attunement to nature by developed or inherent instincts, especially insofar as best guesses are optimally plausible and simple in the sense of the "facile and natural", as by Galileo's natural light of reason and as distinct from "logical simplicity". Abduction is the most fertile but least secure mode of inference. Its general rationale is inductive: it succeeds often enough and it has no substitute in expediting us toward new truths. In 1903, Peirce called pragmatism "the logic of abduction". Coordinative method leads from abducting a plausible hypothesis to judging it for its testability and for how its trial would economize inquiry itself. The hypothesis, being insecure, needs to have practical implications leading at least to mental tests and, in science, lending themselves to scientific tests. A simple but unlikely guess, if not costly to test for falsity, may belong first in line for testing. A guess is intrinsically worth testing if it has plausibility or reasonably objective probability, while subjective likelihood, though reasoned, can be misleadingly seductive. Guesses can be selected for trial strategically, for their caution (for which Peirce gave as example the game of Twenty Questions), breadth, or incomplexity. One can discover only that which would be revealed through their sufficient experience anyway, and so the point is to expedite it; economy of research demands the leap, so to speak, of abduction and governs its art. 2. Deductive phase. Two stages: i. Explication. Not clearly premised, but a deductive analysis of the hypothesis so as to render its parts as clear as possible. ii. Demonstration: Deductive Argumentation, Euclidean in procedure. Explicit deduction of consequences of the hypothesis as predictions about evidence to be found. Corollarial or, if needed, Theorematic. 3. Inductive phase. Evaluation of the hypothesis, inferring from observational or experimental tests of its deduced consequences. The long-run validity of the rule of induction is deducible from the principle (presuppositional to reasoning in general) that the real "is only the object of the final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead"; in other words, anything excluding such a process would never be real. Induction involving the ongoing accumulation of evidence follows "a method which, sufficiently persisted in," will "diminish the error below any predesignate degree." Three stages: i. Classification. Not clearly premised, but an inductive classing of objects of experience under general ideas. ii. Probation: direct Inductive Argumentation. Crude or Gradual in procedure. Crude Induction, founded on experience in one mass (CP 2.759), presumes that future experience on a question will not differ utterly from all past experience (CP 2.756). Gradual Induction makes a new estimate of the proportion of truth in the hypothesis after each test, and is Qualitative or Quantitative. Qualitative Gradual Induction depends on estimating the relative evident weights of the various qualities of the subject class under investigation (CP 2.759; see also CP 7.114–20). Quantitative Gradual Induction depends on how often, in a fair sample of instances of S, S is found actually accompanied by P that was predicted for S (CP 2.758). It depends on measurements, or statistics, or counting. iii. Sentential Induction. "...which, by Inductive reasonings, appraises the different Probations singly, then their combinations, then makes self-appraisal of these very appraisals themselves, and passes final judgment on the whole result".   ===== Against CartesianismEdit ===== Peirce drew on the methodological implications of the four incapacities — no genuine introspection, no intuition in the sense of non-inferential cognition, no thought but in signs, and no conception of the absolutely incognizable — to attack philosophical Cartesianism, of which he said that: 1. "It teaches that philosophy must begin in universal doubt" — when, instead, we start with preconceptions, "prejudices [...] which it does not occur to us can be questioned", though we may find reason to question them later. "Let us not pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts." 2. "It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is...in the individual consciousness" — when, instead, in science a theory stays on probation till agreement is reached, then it has no actual doubters left. No lone individual can reasonably hope to fulfill philosophy's multi-generational dream. When "candid and disciplined minds" continue to disagree on a theoretical issue, even the theory's author should feel doubts about it. 3. It trusts to "a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous premisses" — when, instead, philosophy should, "like the successful sciences", proceed only from tangible, scrutinizable premisses and trust not to any one argument but instead to "the multitude and variety of its arguments" as forming, not a chain at least as weak as its weakest link, but "a cable whose fibers", soever "slender, are sufficiently numerous and intimately connected". 4. It renders many facts "absolutely inexplicable, unless to say that 'God makes them so' is to be regarded as an explanation" — when, instead, philosophy should avoid being "unidealistic", misbelieving that something real can defy or evade all possible ideas, and supposing, inevitably, "some absolutely inexplicable, unanalyzable ultimate", which explanatory surmise explains nothing and so is inadmissible.   == Philosophy: metaphysicsEdit ==  Peirce divided metaphysics into (1) ontology or general metaphysics, (2) psychical or religious metaphysics, and (3) physical metaphysics. Ontology. Peirce was a Scholastic Realist, declaring for the reality of generals as early as 1868. Regarding modalities (possibility, necessity, etc.), he came in later years to regard himself as having wavered earlier as to just how positively real the modalities are. In his 1897 "The Logic of Relatives" he wrote:  I formerly defined the possible as that which in a given state of information (real or feigned) we do not know not to be true. But this definition today seems to me only a twisted phrase which, by means of two negatives, conceals an anacoluthon. We know in advance of experience that certain things are not true, because we see they are impossible.  Peirce retained, as useful for some purposes, the definitions in terms of information states, but insisted that the pragmaticist is committed to a strong modal realism by conceiving of objects in terms of predictive general conditional propositions about how they would behave under certain circumstances. Psychical or religious metaphysics. Peirce believed in God, and characterized such belief as founded in an instinct explorable in musing over the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits — and it is a belief in God not as an actual or existent being (in Peirce's sense of those words), but all the same as a real being. In "A Neglected Argument for the Reality of God" (1908), Peirce sketches, for God's reality, an argument to a hypothesis of God as the Necessary Being, a hypothesis which he describes in terms of how it would tend to develop and become compelling in musement and inquiry by a normal person who is led, by the hypothesis, to consider as being purposed the features of the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits (for example scientific progress), such that the thought of such purposefulness will "stand or fall with the hypothesis"; meanwhile, according to Peirce, the hypothesis, in supposing an "infinitely incomprehensible" being, starts off at odds with its own nature as a purportively true conception, and so, no matter how much the hypothesis grows, it both (A) inevitably regards itself as partly true, partly vague, and as continuing to define itself without limit, and (B) inevitably has God appearing likewise vague but growing, though God as the Necessary Being is not vague or growing; but the hypothesis will hold it to be more false to say the opposite, that God is purposeless. Peirce also argued that the will is free and (see Synechism) that there is at least an attenuated kind of immortality. Physical metaphysics. Peirce held the view, which he called objective idealism, that "matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws". Peirce asserted the reality of (1) absolute chance (his tychist view), (2) mechanical necessity (anancist view), and (3) that which he called the law of love (agapist view), echoing his categories Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, respectively. He held that fortuitous variation (which he also called "sporting"), mechanical necessity, and creative love are the three modes of evolution (modes called "tychasm", "anancasm", and "agapasm") of the cosmos and its parts. He found his conception of agapasm embodied in Lamarckian evolution; the overall idea in any case is that of evolution tending toward an end or goal, and it could also be the evolution of a mind or a society; it is the kind of evolution which manifests workings of mind in some general sense. He said that overall he was a synechist, holding with reality of continuity, especially of space, time, and law.   == Science of reviewEdit ==  Peirce outlined two fields, "Cenoscopy" and "Science of Review", both of which he called philosophy. Both included philosophy about science. In 1903 he arranged them, from more to less theoretically basic, thus: Science of Discovery. Mathematics. Cenoscopy (philosophy as discussed earlier in this article—categorial, normative, metaphysical), as First Philosophy, concerns positive phenomena in general, does not rely on findings from special sciences, and includes the general study of inquiry and scientific method. Idioscopy, or the Special Sciences (of nature and mind).  Science of Review, as Ultimate Philosophy, arranges "...the results of discovery, beginning with digests, and going on to endeavor to form a philosophy of science". His examples included Humboldt's Cosmos, Comte's Philosophie positive, and Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy. Practical Science, or the Arts. Peirce placed, within Science of Review, the work and theory of classifying the sciences (including mathematics and philosophy). His classifications, on which he worked for many years, draw on argument and wide knowledge, and are of interest both as a map for navigating his philosophy and as an accomplished polymath's survey of research in his time.   == See alsoEdit == Contemporaries associated with Peirce   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography has external links throughout to such materials as biographical and overview articles on Peirce at encyclopedias, study sites, etc.; individual works by Peirce; and collections, bibliographies, and Peirce's definitions in the Baldwin dictionary. Other useful sets of links: Existential graph references and external links. Pragmatism external links. Semiotics external links. Peirce sites

Christian Wolff may refer to: Christian Wolff (philosopher) (1679–1754), German philosopher and mathematician Christian Wolff (baroque composer) (1705–1773), German composer Christian Wolff (composer) (born 1934), American composer of experimental classical music Christian Wolff (actor) (born 1938), German actor   == See also == Christian Wulff (born 1959), President of Germany, 2010–2012 Christian Wolf, board game designer

Christine Ladd-Franklin (December 1, 1847 – March 5, 1930) was an American psychologist, logician, and mathematician.   == Early life and education == Christine Ladd, sometimes known by her nickname "Kitty," was born on December 1, 1847 in Windsor, Connecticut to Eliphalet Ladd, a merchant, and Augusta Niles Ladd. During her early childhood, she lived with her parents and younger brother Henry (born 1850) in New York City. In 1853 the family moved back to Windsor, Connecticut where her sister Jane Augusta Ladd McCordia was born the following year. Throughout her childhood, Ladd's mother and aunt, Juliet Niles, often chose to bring the young Christine with them to numerous women's rights lectures and suffrage meetings because both were incredibly passionate supporters of women's rights. Augusta Ladd believed that women had every right to be in the same positions that were held by men and "belonged every place where a man should be." Ladd's mother wanted to instill these same beliefs into her impressionable daughter so that she could grow up to be successful in later life and not be held back by societal expectations. Following the death of her mother in spring 1860 to pneumonia, Ladd went to live with her paternal grandmother in Portsmouth, New Hampshire where she attended school. Ladd's father remarried in 1862 and produced her half-sister Katherine (born 1862) and half-brother George (born 1867). Ladd was a precocious child who sought to find “a mean to continue her education beyond secondary school.”. Ladd's wish was granted when her father enrolled her in a two-year program at a coeducational Welshing academy in Wilbraham, Massachusetts; she took the same courses that prepared boys in furthering their education to colleges such as Harvard. In 1865 Christine Ladd graduated as valedictorian from Welshing Academy and made the decision to pursue further education at Vassar College. This decision would not be supported by her family due to the fact that Ladd's father and grandmother believed college was unnecessary for a woman and by choosing to go to Vassar, Ladd would end up being too old to take a husband. The family saw college as a hindrance since women in the nineteenth century were expected to wed young, produce children, and stay at home to raise a family. Ladd was ultimately able to argue that she was "not attractive enough to find a husband and that there was a shortage of men as a result of the Civil War."  This argument was eventually effective in convincing her family that college was the best option for her. In the fall of 1866 Ladd enrolled in Vassar College with a loan provided by her late mother's sister. She only studied at Vassar until the end of the spring term due to financial issues. During the time that she was not attending college Ladd worked as a public school teacher until her aunt's aid allowed her to reenter Vassar and graduate in 1869. While attending Vassar, Ladd began working under the mentorship of astronomy professor, Maria Mitchell, who was famous for having been "the first woman to discover a new comet, using a telescope, in 1847" Mitchell was also a suffragette and strove to inspire women to gain more self-confidence in order to succeed in male-dominated fields during the time period. Under the guidance of Mitchell, Ladd was able to blossom and quickly developed a love for the fields of physics and mathematics. Since women in the nineteenth century were not allowed in the male dominated physics laboratories, Ladd was unable to pursue her first love of physics and chose instead to study mathematics. Later in her life, Ladd would eventually reflect back on her decision and say, "had it not been for the impossibility, in those days, in the case of women, of obtaining access to laboratory facilities" she would have eagerly gone on to study physics.    == Early career == After graduating, Ladd taught science and mathematics at secondary level in Washington, Pennsylvania. During this time, Ladd contributed seventy-seven mathematical problems and solutions to the Educational Times of London. She also published six items in The Analyst: A Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics and three in the American Journal of Mathematics.   == Graduate education == In 1878, Ladd was accepted into Johns Hopkins University with the help of James J. Sylvester, an English mathematician who remembered some of Ladd's earlier works in London's Educational Times. Ladd's application for the University fellowship was signed "C. Ladd", and Hopkins offered the fellowship to her without realizing she was a woman. When they did realize this, the board moved to revoke the offer, but Sylvester insisted that Ladd should be his student, and so she was. She held a fellowship at Hopkins for three years, but the trustees did not allow her name to be printed in circulars with those of other fellows, for fear of setting a precedent. Furthermore, dissension over her continued presence forced one of the original trustees to resign. Since Hopkins did not approve of coeducation, Ladd was initially allowed only in classes taught by Sylvester. But after displaying exceptional work in Sylvester's courses, Ladd was allowed to take courses with different professors. Even though she was awarded a stipend, she was known as a fellow student. During 1879–1880, Ladd took classes taught by Charles Sanders Peirce, who has been called the first American experimental psychologist. She wrote a dissertation "On the Algebra of Logic" with Peirce as the thesis advisor. The dissertation was published in Studies in Logic (Peirce, ed.) in 1883. Due to her studies with Peirce, Ladd became the first American woman to be involved in psychology, mathematics and logic. Since women were not allowed to graduate at Hopkins, Ladd was refused a Ph.D. in Mathematics and Logic, although she was the first woman to complete all the requirements for a PhD at Hopkins. However, Hopkins officially granted her a Ph.D. in February 22, 1926 (44 years after she had earned it) at the age of seventy-eight. In 1884 Cristine attended Kelvin's master class. She married another attendee in class, Fabian Franklin, Ph.D. (mathematics), hence she became Christine Ladd-Franklin. Ladd-Franklin had two children, one of whom died in infancy. The other, Margaret Ladd-Franklin, became a prominent member in the women's suffrage movement.   == Major contributions and achievements == After leaving Hopkins, Ladd-Franklin worked with German psychologist G. E. Müller, where she carried out experimental work in vision. Ladd-Franklin was also able to work in the laboratory of Hermann von Helmholtz, where she attended his lectures on theory of color vision. After attending these lectures, Ladd-Franklin developed her own theory of color vision. In 1929 she published Color and Color Theories.   === Ladd-Franklin's theory of color vision === One of the major contributions that Ladd-Franklin made to psychology was her theory of color vision, which was based on evolution. Ladd-Franklin noted that: "some animals are color blind and assumed that achromatic vision appeared first in evolution and color vision came later. She assumed further that the human eye carries vestiges of its earlier evolutionary development. She observed that the most highly evolved part of the eye is the fovea, where, at least in daylight, visual acuity and color sensitivity are greatest. Ladd-Franklin assumed that peripheral vision (provided by the rods of the retina) was more primitive than foveal vision (provided by the cones of the retina) because night vision and movement detection are crucial for survival."   === Stages of color vision === Ladd-Franklin concluded that color vision evolved in three stages: achromatic vision (black and white), blue-yellow sensitivity and red-green sensitivity. Since red-green sensitivity was the last to evolve it explains why many people suffer from red-green color blindness. The next one that affects a small population is blue-yellow color blindness. Since achromatic vision was the first to evolve it explains why the majority of the population are not affected by black-white color blindness.   === Mathematics and logic === Ladd-Franklin was the first woman to have a published paper in the Analyst. She was also the first woman to receive a Ph.D. in mathematics and logic. The majority of her publications were based on visual processes and logic. Her views on logic influenced Charles S. Peirce's logic and she was highly praised by Prior.   === Professional involvement === Ladd-Franklin was among the first women to be inducted into the American Psychological Association in December 1893. From 1894-1925, Ladd-Franklin presented ten papers at APA meetings. She was also one of the first female members of the Optical Society of America (OSA) in 1919. During the OSA meetings she presented six papers and two exhibits. She was also a prominent member of the women's rights movement. Ladd-Franklin was included in the Who's Who in America during 1901-1902 and 1914-1915. Ladd-Franklin remained a member of APA and OSA until her death on March 5, 1930 in New York, New York. In 1948, Bertrand Russell wrote: "I once received a letter from an eminent logician, Mrs. Christine Ladd-Franklin, saying that she was a solipsist, and was surprised that there were no others. Coming from a logician and a solipsist, her surprise surprised me."   == Published works == "Quaternions", The Analyst v. 4, n. 6, pp. 172–4 (Nov 1877). Google Books The Analyst p. 172 in n. 6 (November) in v. 4 (1877). Also JSTOR "Quaternions" first page.  (Several journals have been called "The Analyst". See The Analyst (disambiguation). Internet searches for The Analyst, the one which became The Annals of Mathematics, should use the search phrase "The Analyst" mathematics, otherwise The Analyst about chemistry will dominate search results.) "On the Algebra of Logic" in Studies in Logic, C. S. Peirce, ed., pp. 17–71, 1883. Google Books Eprint. Internet Archive Eprint. "On Some Characteristics of Symbolic Logic" in the American Journal of Psychology, v. 2, n. 4, pp. 543–567, August 1889. Google Books Eprint. Internet Archive Eprint. "Epistemology for the logician" in Verhandlungen des III. Interntionalen Kongresses fur Philosophie., pp. 64–670, 1908. Also separately as an offprint. "Charles Peirce at the Johns Hopkins", The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Methods v. 13, n. 26, 715–723, December 1916. Google Books Eprint (badly done) and seek the text. "The Reddish Blue Arcs and the Reddish Blue Glow of the Retina; an Emanation from Stimulated Nerve Fibre." in VIIIth International Congress of Psychology: Proceedings and Papers, 1926. Colour and Colour Theories, Routledge, 320 pages, 1929.   == Notes ==   == References == Furumoto, L (December 1994). "Christine Ladd-Franklin's color theory: strategy for claiming scientific authority?". Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. (UNITED STATES) 727 (1 Aspects of th): 91–100. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb27502.x. PMID 7857009.  Hurvich, Dorothea Jameson (1975), "Ladd-Franklin, Christine" Notable American Women, Vol. 2, 4th ed., The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Nubiola, Jaime and Cobo, Jesús (2000), "The Spanish Mathematician Ventura Reyes Prósper and His Connections with Charles S. Peirce and Christine Ladd-Franklin", Arisbe, Lubbock, TX. Eprint. Includes an English translation "Christine Ladd Franklin: American Mathematician and her influence on symbolic logic" of the paper "Cristina Ladd Franklin. Matemática americana y su influencia en la lógica simbólica" by Prósper published in El Progreso Matemático, 12 (1891), 297–300. Spillman, Scott, “Institutional Limits: Christine Ladd-Franklin, Fellowships, and American Women’s Academic Careers, 1880–1920,” History of Education Quarterly 52 (May 2012), 196–221. Notable Women in Mathematics, a Biographical Dictionary, edited by Charlene Morrow and Teri Perl, Greenwood Press, 1998. pp 107–113 This article incorporates material from Christine Ladd-Franklin on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution/Share-Alike License.   == External links == The Christine Ladd-Franklin Diary 1866–1873

Chrysippus of Soli (Greek: Χρύσιππος ὁ Σολεύς, Chrysippos ho Soleus; c. 279 – c. 206 BC) was a Greek Stoic philosopher. He was a native of Soli, Cilicia, but moved to Athens as a young man, where he became a pupil of Cleanthes in the Stoic school. When Cleanthes died, around 230 BC, Chrysippus became the third head of the school. A prolific writer, Chrysippus expanded the fundamental doctrines of Zeno of Citium, the founder of the school, which earned him the title of Second Founder of Stoicism. Chrysippus excelled in logic, the theory of knowledge, ethics and physics. He created an original system of propositional logic in order to better understand the workings of the universe and role of humanity within it. He adhered to a deterministic view of fate, but nevertheless sought a role for personal freedom in thought and action. Ethics, he taught, depended on understanding the nature of the universe, and he taught a therapy of extirpating the unruly passions which depress and crush the soul. He initiated the success of Stoicism as one of the most influential philosophical movements for centuries in the Greek and Roman world.   == Life == Chrysippus was the son of Apollonius of Tarsus but was himself born at Soli, Cilicia. He was slight in stature and is reputed to have trained as a long-distance runner. While still young, he lost his substantial inherited property when it was confiscated to the king's treasury. Chrysippus moved to Athens, where he became the disciple of Cleanthes, who was then the head (scholarch) of the Stoic school. It is said too that he attended the courses of Arcesilaus and his successor Lacydes, in the Platonic Academy. Chrysippus threw himself eagerly into the study of the Stoic system. His reputation for learning among his contemporaries was considerable. He was noted for intellectual audacity and self-confidence and his reliance on his own ability was shown, among other things, in the request he is supposed to have made to Cleanthes: "Give me the principles, and I will find the proofs myself." He succeeded Cleanthes as head of the Stoic school when Cleanthes died, in around 230 BC. Chrysippus was a prolific writer. He is said to rarely have gone without writing 500 lines a day and he composed more than 705 works. His desire to be comprehensive meant that he would take both sides of an argument and his opponents accused him of filling his books with the quotations of others. He was considered diffuse and obscure in his utterances and careless in his style, but his abilities were highly regarded, and he came to be seen as a preeminent authority for the school. He died during the 143rd Olympiad (208–204 BC) at the age of 73. Diogenes Laërtius gives two different accounts of his death. In the first account, Chrysippus was seized with dizziness having drunk undiluted wine at a feast, and died soon after. In the second account, he was watching a donkey eat some figs and cried out: "Now give the donkey a drink of pure wine to wash down the figs", whereupon he died in a fit of laughter. His nephew Aristocreon erected a statue in his honour in the Kerameikos. Chrysippus was succeeded as head of the Stoic school by his pupil Zeno of Tarsus. Of his written works, none have survived except as fragments quoted in the works of later authors like Cicero, Seneca, Galen, Plutarch, and others. Recently, segments from Logical Questions and On Providence were discovered among the Herculaneum papyri. A third work by Chrysippus may also be among them.   == Philosophy ==  Chrysippus had a long and successful career of resisting the attacks of the Academy and hoped not simply to defend Stoicism against the assaults of the past, but also against all possible attack in the future. He took the doctrines of Zeno and Cleanthes and crystallized them into what became the definitive system of Stoicism. He elaborated the physical doctrines of the Stoics and their theory of knowledge and he created much of their formal logic. In short, Chrysippus made the Stoic system what it was. It was said that "without Chrysippus, there would have been no Stoa".   == Logic == Chrysippus wrote much on the subject of logic and created a system of propositional logic. Aristotle's term logic had been concerned with the interrelations of terms such as "Socrates" or "man" ("all men are mortal, Socrates is a man, so Socrates is mortal"). Stoic logic, on the other hand, was concerned with the interrelations of propositions such as "it is day" ("if it is day, it is light: but it is day: so it is light"). Though the earlier Megarian dialecticians – Diodorus Cronus and Philo – had worked in this field and the pupils of Aristotle – Theophrastus and Eudemus – had investigated hypothetical syllogisms, it was Chrysippus who developed these principles into a coherent system of propositional logic.   === Propositions === Chrysippus defined a proposition as "that which is capable of being denied or affirmed as it is in itself" and gave examples of propositions such as "it is day" and "Dion is walking." He distinguished between simple and non-simple propositions, which in modern terminology are known as atomic and molecular propositions. A simple proposition is an elementary statement such as "it is day." Simple propositions are linked together to form non-simple propositions by the use of logical connectives. Chrysippus enumerated five kinds of molecular propositions according to the connective used: Thus several types of molecular propositions, familiar to modern logic, were listed by Chrysippus, including the conjunction, the disjunction, and the conditional, and Chrysippus studied their criteria of truth closely.   === Conditional propositions === The first logicians to debate conditional statements were Diodorus Cronus and his pupil Philo. Writing five-hundred years later, Sextus Empiricus refers to a debate between Diodorus and Philo. Philo regarded all conditionals as true except those which with a correct antecedent had an incorrect consequent, and this meant a proposition such as "if it is day, then I am talking," is true unless it is day and I fall silent. But Diodorus argued that a true conditional is one in which the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion – thus, because the proposition "if it is day, then I am talking" can be false, it is invalid. However, paradoxical propositions were still possible such as "if atomic elements of things do not exist, atomic elements exists." Chrysippus adopted a much stricter view regarding conditional propositions, which made such paradoxes impossible: to him, a conditional is true if denial of the consequent is logically incompatible with the antecedent. This corresponds to the modern-day strict conditional.   === Syllogistic === Chrysippus developed a syllogistic or system of deduction in which he made use of five types of basic arguments or argument forms called indemonstrable syllogisms, which played the role of axioms, and four inference rules, called themata by means of which complex syllogisms could be reduced to these axioms. The forms of the five indemonstrables were: Of the four inference rules, only two survived. One, the so-called first thema, was a rule of antilogism. The other, the third thema, was a cut rule by which chain syllogisms could be reduced to simple syllogisms. The purpose of Stoic syllogistic was not merely to create a formal system. It was also understood as the study of the operations of reason, the divine reason (logos) which governs the universe, of which human beings are a part. The goal was to find valid rules of inference and forms of proof to help people find their way in life.   === Other logical work === Chrysippus analyzed speech and the handling of names and terms. He also devoted much effort in refuting fallacies and paradoxes. According to Diogenes Laërtius, Chrysippus wrote twelve works in 23 books on the Liar paradox; seven works in 17 books on amphiboly; and another nine works in 26 books on other conundrums. In all, 28 works or 66 books were given over to puzzles or paradoxes. Chrysippus is the first Stoic for whom the third of the four Stoic categories, i.e. the category somehow disposed is attested. In the surviving evidence, Chrysippus frequently makes use of the categories of substance and quality, but makes little use of the other two Stoic categories (somehow disposed and somehow disposed in relation to something). It is not clear whether the categories had any special significance for Chrysippus, and a clear doctrine of categories may be the work of later Stoics.   === Later reception === Chrysippus came to be renowned as one of the foremost logicians of ancient Greece. When Clement of Alexandria wanted to mention one who was master among logicians, as Homer was master among poets, it was Chrysippus, not Aristotle, he chose. Diogenes Laërtius wrote: "If the gods use dialectic, they would use none other than that of Chrysippus." The logical work by Chrysippus came to be neglected and forgotten. Aristotle's logic prevailed, partly because it was seen as more practical, and partly because it was taken up by the Neoplatonists. As recently as the 19th century, Stoic logic was treated with contempt, a barren formulaic system, which was merely clothing the logic of Aristotle with new terminology. It was not until the 20th century, with the advances in logic, and the modern propositional calculus, that it became clear that Stoic logic constituted a significant achievement.   == Epistemology == For the Stoics, truth is distinguished from error by the sage who possesses right reason. Chrysippus's theory of knowledge was empirical. The senses transmit messages from the external world, and their reports are controlled not by referring them to innate ideas, but by comparing them to previous reports stored in the mind. Zeno had defined impressions of sense as "an impression in the soul" and this was interpreted literally by Cleanthes, who compared the impression on the soul to the impression made by a seal on wax. Chrysippus preferred to regard it as an alteration or change in the soul; that is, the soul receives a modification from every external object that acts upon it, just as the air receives countless strokes when many people are speaking at once. In the receipt of an impression, the soul is purely passive and the impression reveals not only its own existence, but that also of its cause—just as light displays itself and the elements that are in it. The power to name the object resides in the understanding. First must come the impression, and the understanding—having the power of utterance—expresses in speech the affection it receives from the object. True presentations are distinguished from those that are false by the use of memory, classification and comparison. If the sense organ and the mind are healthy—and provided that an external object can be really seen or heard—the presentation, due to its clearness and distinctness, has the power to extort the assent that always lies in our power, to give or to withhold. In a context in which people are understood to be rational beings, reason is developed out of these notions.   == Physics == Chrysippus insisted on the organic unity of the universe, as well as the correlation and mutual interdependence of all of its parts. He said, "the universe is its own soul and its own controlling mind." Following Zeno, Chrysippus determined fiery breath or aether to be the primitive substance of the universe. Objects are made up of inert formless matter and an informing soul, "pneuma", provides form to the undifferentiated matter. The pneuma pervades all of substance and maintains the unity of the universe and constitutes the soul—the incorporeal and, in many conceptions, immortal essence of a person or living thing—of the human being. The classical elements change into one another by a process of condensation and rarefaction. Fire first becomes solidified into air; then air into water; and lastly, water into earth. The process of dissolution takes place in the reverse order: earth being rarefied into water, water into air and air into fire. The human soul was divided by Chrysippus into eight faculties: the five senses, the power of reproduction, the power of speech, and the "ruling part" that is located in the chest rather than the head. Individual souls are perishable; but, according to the view originated by Chrysippus, the souls of wise people survive longer after their death. No individual soul can, however, survive beyond the periodic conflagration, when the universe is renewed.   === Fate === For Chrysippus, all things happen according to fate: what seems to be accidental has always some hidden cause. The unity of the world consists in the chain-like dependence of cause upon cause. Nothing can take place without a sufficient cause. According to Chrysippus, every proposition is either true or false, and this must apply to future events as well:  If any motion exists without a cause, then not every proposition will be either true or false. For that which has not efficient causes is neither true nor false. But every proposition is either true or false. Therefore, there is no motion without a cause. And if this is so, then all effects owe their existence to prior causes. And if this is so, all things happen by fate. It follows therefore that whatever happens, happens by fate.  The Stoic view of fate is entirely based on a view of the universe as a whole. Individual things and persons only come into consideration as dependent parts of this whole. Everything is, in every respect, determined by this relation, and is consequently subject to the general order of the world. If his opponents objected that, if everything is determined by destiny, there is no individual responsibility, since what has been once foreordained must happen, come what may, Chrysippus replied that there is a distinction to be made between simple and complex predestination. Becoming ill may be fated whatever happens but, if a person's recovery is linked to consulting a doctor, then consulting the doctor is fated to occur together with that person's recovery, and this becomes a complex fact. All human actions – in fact, our destiny – are decided by our relation to things, or as Chrysippus put it, events are "co-fated" to occur:  The non-destruction of one's coat, he says, is not fated simply, but co-fated with its being taken care of, and someone's being saved from his enemies is co-fated with his fleeing those enemies; and having children is co-fated with being willing to lie with a woman. ... For many things cannot occur without our being willing and indeed contributing a most strenuous eagerness and zeal for these things, since, he says, it was fated for these things to occur in conjunction with this personal effort. ... But it will be in our power, he says, with what is in our power being included in fate.  Thus our actions are predetermined, and are causally related to the overarching network of fate, but nevertheless the moral responsibility of how we respond to impressions remains our own. The one all-determining power is active everywhere, working in each particular being according to its nature, whether in rational or irrational creatures or in inorganic objects. Every action is brought about by the co-operation of causes depending on the nature of things and the character of the agent. Our actions would only be involuntary if they were produced by external causes alone, without any co-operation, on the part of our wills, with external causes. Virtue and vice are set down as things in our power, for which, consequently, we are responsible. Moral responsibility depends only on freedom of the will, and what emanates from our will is our own, no matter whether it is possible for us to act differently or not. This rather subtle position which attempts to reconcile determinism with human responsibility is known as soft-determinism, or compatibilism.   === Divination ===  Chrysippus also argued for the existence of fate based on divination, which he thought there was good evidence for. It would not be possible for diviners to predict the future if the future itself was accidental. Omens and portents, he believed, are the natural symptoms of certain occurrences. There must be countless indications of the course of providence, for the most part unobserved, the meaning of only a few having become known to humanity. To those who argued that divination was superfluous as all events are foreordained, he replied that both divination and our behaviour under the warnings which it affords are included in the chain of causation.   === God === The Stoics believed that the universe is God, and Chrysippus affirmed that "the universe itself is God and the universal outpouring of its soul." It is the guiding principle of the universe, "operating in mind and reason, together with the common nature of things and the totality which embraces all existence." Based on these beliefs, physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein identified Chrysippus as a Pandeist. Chrysippus sought to prove the existence of God, making use of a teleological argument:  If there is anything that humanity cannot produce, the being who produces it is better than humanity. But humanity cannot produce the things that are in the universe – the heavenly bodies, etc. The being, therefore, who produces them is superior to humanity. But who is there that is superior to humanity, except God? Therefore, God exists.  Chrysippus spoke of God and gods interchangeably. He interpreted the gods of traditional Greek religion by viewing them as different aspects of the one reality. Cicero tells us that "he further maintained that aether is that which people call Zeus, and that the air which permeates the seas is Poseidon, and that the earth is what is known by the name of Demeter, and he treated in similar style the names of the other gods." In addition, the universe exists for the benefit of the universal god:  We should infer in the case of a beautiful dwelling-place that it was built for its owners and not for mice; we ought, therefore, in the same way to regard the universe as the dwelling-place of the gods.   === Theodicy === In response to the question of how evil could exist in a good universe, Chrysippus replied "evil cannot be removed, nor is it well that it should be removed." Firstly, he argued, following Plato, that it was impossible for good to exist without evil, for justice could not be known without injustice, courage without cowardice, temperance without intemperance or wisdom without foolishness. Secondly, apparent evils exist as a consequent of nature's goodness, thus it was necessary for the human skull to be made from small and thin bones for reasons of utility, but this superior utility meant that the skull is vulnerable to blows. Thirdly, evils are distributed according to the rational will of Zeus, either to punish the wicked or because they are important to the world-order as a whole. Thus evil is good under disguise, and is ultimately conducive to the best. Chrysippus compared evil to the coarse jest in the comedy; for, just as the jest, though offensive in itself, improves the piece as a whole, "so too you may criticize evil regarded by itself, yet allow that, taken with all else, it has its use."   == Mathematics ==  Chrysippus regarded bodies, surfaces, lines, places, the void and time as all being infinitely divisible. He determined one of the principal features of the infinite set: since a man and a finger have an infinite number of parts as do the universe and a man, it cannot be said that a man has more parts than his finger, nor that the universe has more parts than a man. Chrysippus also responded to a problem first posed by Democritus. If a cone is divided by a plane parallel to its base, are the surfaces of the segments equal or unequal? If they are equal, then the cone becomes a cylinder; if they are unequal, then the surface of the cone must be stepped. The reply of Chrysippus was that the surfaces are both equal and unequal. Chrysippus was, in effect, negating the law of excluded middle with respect to the equal and unequal, and thus he may have anticipated an important principle of modern infinitesimal calculus, namely, the limit and the process of convergence towards a limit. Chrysippus was notable for claiming that "one" is a number. One was not always considered a number by the ancient Greeks since they viewed one as that by which things are measured. Aristotle in his Metaphysics wrote, "... a measure is not the things measured, but the measure or the One is the beginning of number." Chrysippus asserted that one had "magnitude one" (Greek: πλῆθος ἕν), although this was not generally accepted by the Greeks, and Iamblichus wrote that "magnitude one" was a contradiction in terms.   == Ethics ==  Chrysippus taught that ethics depended on physics. In his Physical Theses, he stated: "for there is no other or more appropriate way of approaching the subject of good and evil on the virtues or happiness than from the nature of all things and the administration of the universe." The goal of life, said Chrysippus, is to live in accordance with one's experience of the actual course of nature. A person's individual nature is part of the nature of the whole universe, and thus life should be lived in accordance with one's own human nature as well as that of the universe. Human nature is ethical, and humanity is akin to the Divine, emanating from the primal fire or aether, which, though material, is the embodiment of reason; and people should conduct themselves accordingly. People have freedom, and this freedom consists in emancipation from irrational desires (lust, riches, position in life, domination, etc.) and in subjecting the will to reason. Chrysippus laid the greatest stress on the worth and dignity of the individual, and on the power of will. The Stoics admitted between the good and the bad a third class of things – the indifferent (adiaphora). Of things morally indifferent, the best includes health, and riches, and honour, and the worst includes sickness and poverty. Chrysippus accepted that it was normal in ordinary usage to refer to the preferred indifferent things as "good", but the wise person, said Chrysippus, uses such things without requiring them. Practice and habit are necessary to render virtue perfect in the individual – in other words, there is such a thing as moral progress, and character has to be built up. The Stoics sought to be free of the unruly emotions, which they regarded as being contrary to nature. The passions or emotions (pathe) are the disturbing element in right judgment. Chrysippus wrote a whole book concerning the therapy of the emotions. The passions are like diseases which depress and crush the soul, thus he sought to eradicate them (apatheia). Wrong judgements turn into passions when they gather an impetus of their own, just as, when one has started running, it is difficult to stop. One cannot hope to eradicate the emotions when one is in the heat of love or anger: this can only be done when one is calm. Therefore, one should prepare in advance, and deal with the emotions in the mind as if they were present. By applying reason to emotions such as greed, pride, or lust, one can understand the harm which they cause.   == See also == Apocatastasis Deixis History of logic Lazy argument List of unusual deaths   == Notes ==   == References == Diogenes Laertius (1925), Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers. Loeb Classical Library (Book VII Lives of Zeno Cleanthes and Chrysippus) Barnes, Jonathan (1999), "The History of Hellenistic Logic", in Algra, Keimpe; Barnes, Jonathan; Mansfeld, Jaap; Schofield, Malcolm, The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-61670-0  Brunschwig, Jacques; Sedley, David (2003), "Hellenistic philosophy", in Sedley, David, The Cambridge Companion to Greek and Roman Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-77503-5  Davidson, William Leslie (1908), "Chrysippus", in Hastings, James, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 3, T. & T. Clark  Dorandi, Tiziano (1999), "Chronology", in Algra, Keimpe; Barnes, Jonathan; Mansfeld, Jaap; Schofield, Malcolm, The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-61670-0  Fitzgerald, John T. (2004), "Philodemus and the Papyri from Herculaneum", in Fitzgerald, John T.; Obbink, Dirk; Holland, Glenn Stanfield, Philodemus and the New Testament world Philosophy, BRILL, ISBN 90-04-11460-2  Gould, Josiah (1970), The Philosophy of Chrysippus, SUNY, ISBN 0-87395-064-X  Green, Peter (1993), Alexander to Actium: the historical evolution of the Hellenistic age, University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-08349-0  Heath, Thomas Little (1921), A History of Greek Mathematics, Vol 1: From Thales to Euclid, Oxford  Hicks, Robert Drew (1910), Stoic and Epicurean, C. Scribner  Hicks, Robert Drew (1911), "Stoics", in Chisholm, Hugh, The Encyclopaedia Britannica 25  Inwood, Brad; Gerson, Lloyd P. (1997), Hellenistic Philosophy: Introductory Readings, Hackett, ISBN 0-87220-378-6  Johansen, Karsten Friis; Rosenmeier, Henrik (1998), A History of Ancient Philosophy: From the Beginnings to Augustine, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-12738-6  Kenny, Anthony (2006), Ancient Philosophy, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-875273-3  O'Toole, Robert R.; Jennings, Raymond E. (2004), "The Megarians and the Stoics", in Gabbay, Dov; Woods, John, Handbook of the History of Logic: Greek, Indian, and Arabic logic, North Holland, ISBN 0-444-50466-4  Sharples, R. W. (2014), Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics: An Introduction to Hellenistic Philosophy, Routledge, pp. 67–68, ISBN 978-1134836390  Stock, St. George William Joseph (1908), Stoicism, Constable  Zeller, Eduard (1880), The Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics, Longmans    == Further reading == Bobzien, Susanne (1998), Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-199-24767-6  Susanne Bobzien, (1999), Chrysippus' Theory of Causes. In K. Ierodiakonou (ed.), Topics in Stoic Philosophy, Oxford: OUP, 196-242. ISBN 0-19924-880-X Émile Bréhier, (1951), Chrysippe et l'ancien stoicisme. Paris. ISBN 2-903925-06-2 Richard Dufour, (2004), Chrysippe. Oeuvre philosophique. Textes traduits et commentés par Richard Dufour, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2 volumes (logic and physics), ISBN 2-251-74203-4 D. E. Hahm, Chrysippus' solution to the Democritean dilemma of the cone, Isis 63 (217) (1972), 205–220. H. A. Ide, Chrysippus's response to Diodorus's Master Argument, History and Philosophy Logic 13 (2) (1992), 133–148. Christoph Jedan (2009) Stoic Virtues: Chrysippus and the Theological Foundations of Stoic Ethics. Continuum Studies in Ancient Philosophy. ISBN 1-4411-1252-9 Teun L. Tieleman (1996) Galen and Chrysippus on the Soul: Argument and Refutation in the "De Placitis" Books II–III. Philosophia Antiqua. Brill. ISBN 90-04-10520-4 Teun L. Tieleman (2003) Chrysippus' "on Affections": Reconstruction and Interpretation. Philosophia Antiqua. Brill. ISBN 90-04-12998-7   == External links ==  Diogenes Laërtius, Life of Chrysippus, translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925). Chrysippus entry by Jeremy Kirby in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Chrysippus", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Early Stoic Logic: Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes of Assos, Chrysippus of Soli an annotated bibliography on the logic of Chrysippus

Clarence Irving Lewis (April 12, 1883 – February 3, 1964), usually cited as C. I. Lewis, was an American academic philosopher and the founder of conceptual pragmatism. First a noted logician, he later branched into epistemology, and during the last 20 years of his life, he wrote much on ethics. The New York Times memorialized him as "a leading authority on symbolic logic and on the philosophic concepts of knowledge and value."   == Biography ==   === Early years === Lewis was born in Stoneham, Massachusetts. His father was a skilled worker in a shoe factory, and Lewis grew up in relatively humble circumstances. He discovered philosophy at age 13, when reading about the Greek pre-Socratics, Anaxagoras and Heraclitus in particular. The first work of philosophy Lewis recalled studying was a short history of Greek philosophy by Marshall. Immanuel Kant proved a major lifelong influence on Lewis's thinking. In his article "Logic and Pragmatism," Lewis wrote: "Nothing comparable in importance happened [in my life] until I became acquainted with Kant... Kant compelled me. He had, so I felt, followed scepticism to its inevitable last stage, and laid the foundations where they could not be disturbed." In 1905, Harvard College awarded Lewis the A.B. cum laude after a mere three years of study, during which time he supported himself with part-time jobs. He then taught English for one year in a Quincy MA high school, then two years at the University of Colorado. In 1906, he married Mable Maxwell Graves. In 1908, Lewis returned to Harvard and began a Ph.D in philosophy, which he completed in a mere two years. He then taught philosophy at the University of California, 1911–20, after which he returned again to Harvard, where he taught until his 1953 retirement, eventually filling the Edgar Pierce Chair of Philosophy. In 1929, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1933, he presided over the American Philosophical Association. For the academic year 1959-1960, he was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University.   === Career ===   ==== Logic ==== Lewis studied logic under his eventual Ph.D. thesis supervisor, Josiah Royce, and is a principal architect of modern philosophical logic. In 1912, two years after the publication of the first volume of Principia Mathematica, Lewis began publishing articles taking exception to Principia' s pervasive use of material implication, more specifically, to Bertrand Russell's reading of a→b as "a implies b." Lewis restated this criticism in his reviews of both editions of PM. Lewis's reputation as a promising young logician was soon assured. Material implication allows a true consequent to follow from a false antecedent. Lewis proposed to replace material implication with strict implication, such that a false antecedent can never strictly imply a true consequent. This strict implication was not primitive, but defined in terms of negation, conjunction, and a prefixed unary intensional modal operator, . Let X be a formula with a classical bivalent truth value. Then X can be read as "X is possibly true" (or false, as the case may be). Lewis then defined "A strictly implies B" as "(AB)". Lewis's strict implication is now a historical curiosity, but the formal modal logic in which he grounded that notion is the ancestor of all modern work on the subject. Lewis's  notation is still standard, but current practice usually takes its dual,  ("necessity"), as primitive and  as defined, in which case "A strictly implies B" is simply written as (A→B). His first logic text, A Survey of Symbolic Logic (1918), went out of print after selling only several hundred copies. At the time of its publication, it included the only discussion in English of the logical writings of Charles Peirce and only the second, after Russell's monograph of 1900, on Leibniz. While the modal logic of A Survey was soon proved inconsistent, Lewis went on to devise the modal systems S1 to S5, and to set these out in Symbolic Logic (1932) as possible formal analyses of the alethic modalities. Lewis mildly preferred S2 over the others; the amended modal system of A Survey was S3. But it is S4 and S5 that have generated sustained interest, mathematical as well as philosophical, down to the present day. S4 and S5 are the beginning of what is now called normal modal logic. On Lewis's strict implication and his modal systems S1-S5, see Hughes and Cresswell (1996: chpt. 11).   ==== Pragmatist but no positivist ==== This section follows Dayton (2004) closely. Around 1930, American philosophy began to experience a turning point because of the arrival of logical empiricism, brought by European philosophers fleeing the Third Reich. This new doctrine challenged American philosophers of a naturalistic or pragmatic bent, such as Lewis. In any event, logical empiricism, with its emphasis on scientific models of knowledge and on the logical analysis of meaning, soon emerged as a, and perhaps the, dominant tendency in American philosophy. While many saw Lewis as kin to the logical empiricists, he was never truly comfortable in such company because he declined to divorce experience from cognition. Positivism rejected value as lacking cognitive significance, also rejecting the analysis of experience in favor of physicalism. Both rejections struck him as regrettable. Indeed, his growing awareness of the pragmatic tradition led him in the opposite direction. For Lewis, it is only within experience that anything can have significance for anything, and thus he came to see value as a way of representing the significance of knowledge for future conduct. These convictions led him to reflect on the differences between pragmatism and positivism, and on the cognitive structure of value experiences. Lewis agreed that pragmatism committed one to the Peircean pragmatic test. But in a 1930 essay, "Pragmatism and Current Thought," he maintained that this commitment can be taken in either of two directions. One direction emphasises the subjectivity of experience. The other direction, and the one he took in 'his (1929), began with the Peirce's limitation of meaning to that which makes a verifiable difference in experience. Hence concepts are abstractions in which "the immediate is precisely that element which must be left out." But this claim must be properly understood. An operational account of concepts mainly eliminates the ineffable: "If your hours are felt as twice as long as mine, your pounds twice as heavy, that makes no difference, which can be tested, in our assignment of physical properties to things." Hence a concept is but a relational pattern. But it does not follow that one ought to discard the world as it is experienced:  "In one sense, that of connotation, a concept strictly comprises nothing but an abstract configuration of relations. In another sense, its denotation or empirical application, this meaning is vested in a process which characteristically begins with something given and ends with something done in the operation which translates a presented datum into an instrument of prediction and control."  Thus knowledge begins and ends in experience, keeping in mind that the beginning and ending experiences differ. Knowledge of something requires that the verifying experience be actually experienced. Thus for the pragmatist, verifiability as an operational definition (or test) of the empirical meaning of a statement requires that the speaker know how to apply the statement, and when not to apply it, and be able to trace the consequences of the statement in situations both real and hypothetical. Lewis firmly objected to the positivist conception of value statements as devoid of cognitive content, as merely expressive. For a pragmatist, all judgements are implicitly value judgements. Lewis (1946) sets out both his conception of sense meaning, and his thesis that valuation is a form of empirical cognition. In his essay "Logical Positivism and Pragmatism," Lewis revealed his disagreement with verificationism by comparing it unfavorably with his preferred pragmatic conception of empirical meaning. From the outset, he saw both pragmatism and logical positivism as forms of empiricism. At first glance, it would seem that the pragmatic conception of meaning, despite its different formulation and its focus on action, very much resembles the logical positivist verification requirement. Nevertheless, Lewis argued that there is a deep difference between the two: pragmatism ultimately grounds meaning on conceivable experience, while positivism reduces the relation between meaning and experience to a matter of logical form. For Lewis, the positivist conception of meaning omits precisely what a pragmatist would count as empirical meaning. Specifying which observation sentences follow from a given sentence helps us determine the empirical meaning of the given sentence only if the observation sentences themselves have an already understood meaning in terms of the specific qualities of experience to which the predicates of the observation sentences refer. Thus Lewis saw the logical positivists as failing to distinguish between "linguistic" meaning, namely the logical relations among terms, and "empirical" meaning, namely the relation expressions have to experience. (In the well-known terminology of Carnap and Charles W. Morris, empirical meaning falls under pragmatics, linguistic meaning under semantics.) For Lewis, the logical positivist shuts his eyes to precisely that which properly confirms a sentence, namely the content of experience.   ==== Epistemology ==== Lewis (1929), Mind and the World Order, is now seen as one of the most important 20th century works in epistemology. Lewis is now included among the American pragmatists, a belated assessment that is the major theme of Murphey (2005).   ==== Ethics and aesthetics ==== Lewis's late writings on ethics include the monographs Lewis (1955, 1957) and the posthumous collection Lewis (1969). From 1950 until his death, he wrote many drafts of chapters of a proposed treatise on ethics, which he did not live to complete. These drafts are included in the Lewis papers held at Stanford University. Lewis (1947) contains two chapters on aesthetics and the philosophy of art. He was the first to employ the term "qualia", popularized by his student Nelson Goodman, in its generally agreed modern sense.   ==== Legacy ==== Lewis's work has been relatively neglected in recent years, even though he set out his ideas at length, can be understood as both a late pragmatist and an early analytic philosopher, and had students of the calibre of Brand Blanshard, Nelson Goodman, and Roderick Chisholm. Joel Isaac, in his contribution to the 2006 Transactions of the C. S. Peirce Society symposium referenced below, believes this neglect is justified. Lewis's reputation is benefiting from the growing interest in the historical aspects of pragmatism and of American philosophy generally. Lewis's papers are kept at Stanford University.   === Personal life === Lewis's life was not free of trials. His daughter died in 1930 and he suffered a heart attack in 1932. Nevertheless, the publications of Lewis (1929) and Lewis and Langford (1932) attest to this having been a highly productive period of his life. His Harvard course on Kant's first Critique was among the most famous in undergraduate philosophy in the U.S. until he retired in 1957. Lewis accepted a visiting professorship at Stanford during 1957-1958, where he presented his lectures for the last time. The move to Menlo Park enabled him and his wife to spend his final years near their grandchildren.   == Bibliography == 1918. A Survey of Symbolic Logic. (Internet Archive Eprint.) Republished in part by Dover in 1960. 1929. Mind and the World Order: Outline of a Theory of Knowledge. Dover reprint, 1956. 1932. Symbolic Logic (with Cooper H. Langford). Dover reprint, 1959. 1946. An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation. Open Court. [2] 1955. The Ground and Nature of the Right. Columbia Univ. Press. 1957. Our Social Inheritance. Indiana Univ. Press. 1969 (John Lange, ed.). Values and Imperatives: Studies in Ethics. Stanford Univ. Press. 1970 (Goheen, J. D., and Mothershead, J. L. Jr., eds.). Collected Papers. Stanford Univ. Press.   == See also == American philosophy Pragmatism Modal logic Interior algebra List of American philosophers   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Dayton, Eric, 2006, "Clarence Irving Lewis" in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Hunter, Bruce, 2007 "Clarence Irving Lewis" in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Univ. Press. Hughes, G. E., and M.J. Cresswell (1996) A New Introduction to Modal Logic. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-12599-5 Murphey, Murray G., 2005. C. I. Lewis: The Last Great Pragmatist. SUNY Press. 2006, "Symposium on M. G. Murphey's C. I. Lewis: The Last Great Pragmatist," Transactions of the C. S. Peirce Society 42: 1-77. With contributions by S. F. Barker, John Corcoran, Eric Dayton, John Greco, Joel Isaac, Murphey, Richard S. Robin, and Naomi Zack.  Schilpp, P. A., ed., 1968. The Philosophy of C. I. Lewis (The Library of Living Philosophers, vol. 13). Open Court. Includes an autobiographical essay.   == External links == "Clarence Irving Lewis" article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online bibliography.

Conimbricenses or Collegium Conimbricense is the name by which Jesuits of the University of Coimbra in Coimbra, Portugal were known. The Conimbricenses were Jesuits who, from the end of 16th century took over the intellectual leadership of the Roman Catholic world from the Dominicans. Among those Jesuits were Luis de Molina (1535–1600) and Francisco Suárez (1548–1617). In their stricter sense the Coimbra Commentaries, also known simply as Conimbricenses, are mainly a group of eleven books on Aristotle (of which only eight are really commentaries). On the register of the college at various times appeared the names of 200 Jesuits including professors and students. Toward the end of the 16th century and the beginning of the 17th, voluminous commentaries on the philosophical writings of Aristotle went forth from the university. These commentaries were dictations to the students by the professors and as such were not intended for publication. Still they were actually published, but fraudulently. In order to interpret and disown incorrect and unauthorized editions, Father Claudius Acquaviva, the General of the Society of Jesus, assigned Father Peter Fonseca, the provincial of the Portuguese province, the task of supervising the revision of these commentaries for publication. Father Fonseca was widely known as the Aristotle of Portugal. The treatises appeared in the following order: Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in octo libros Physicorum Aristotelis Stagyritæ (Coimbra, 1591, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1984); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in quattuor libros Physicorum Aristotelis de Cœlo (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Meteororum Aristotelis Stagyritæ (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Aristotelis qui Parva naturalia appelantur (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Ethicorum Aristotelis ad Nichomachum aliquot Cursus Conimbricensis disputationes in quibus præcipua quaedam Ethicæ disciplinæ capita continentur (Coimbra, 1595); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in duos libros Aristotelis De generatione et corruptione (Coimbra, 1595, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 2003); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in tres libros Aristotelis De Anima (Coimbra, 1592 reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 2006). This treatise was published after the death of Father Emmanuel Golz (whom Father Fonseca had commissioned to publish the earlier volumes) by Father Comas Maggalliano (Magalhaens). To it he added a treatise of Father Balthazaar Alvarez De Anima Separata and his own work Tractatio aliquot problematum ad quinque Sensus Spectantium; Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu In universam dialecticam nunc primum (ed. Venice, 1606, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1976) The works commented are: In Isagogem Porphyrii, In libros Categoriarium Aristotelis, In libros Aristotelis de Interpretatione, In libros Aristotelis Stagiritae de Priori Resolutione, In primum librum Posteriorum Aristotelis, In librum primum Topicorum Aristotelis and In duos libros Elenchorum Aristotelis. To this last treatise was prefixed a forward disowning any connection whatever with the work published at Frankfurt in 1604 and claiming to be the "Commentarii Conimbricenses". The portion of the preface referred to is substantially the following: "Before we could finish the task entrusted to us of editing our Logic, to which we were bound by many promises, certain German publishers fraudulently brought out a work professing to be from us, abounding in errors and inaccuracies which were really their own. They also substituted for our commentaries certain glosses gotten furtively. It is true these writings thirty years previously were the work of one of our professors not indeed intended for publication. They were the fruit of his zeal and he never dreamed they would appear in print." The last treatise was prepared for printing by Father Sebastian Couto. The entire eight parts formed five quarto volumes, enjoyed a wide circulation, and appeared in many editions, the best known being those of Lyon, Lisbon, and Cologne. The Commentaries are in flowing Latin and are supplemented by reliable explanations of the text and exhaustive discussion of the system of Aristotle. Karl Werner said that the Jesuits of Coimbra gave the world a masterpiece, whose equal is yet to be seen and which has received the admiration it deserves. Father de Backer gives an exact list of all the editions. The later ones have added the Greek text of Aristotle.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Cassidy, John (1908). "Conimbricenses". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia 4. Robert Appleton Company.    == See also == Pedro da Fonseca (philosopher) School of Salamanca   == Original Text == In libro de generatione et corruptione, In octo libros physicorum, In libros meteorum, In libro de anima in PDF or JPEG format at University of Coimbra’s site.   == Translations == The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press 2001 (Translation with introduction and notes by John P. Doyle of the commentary to the first chapter of Aristotle's De Interpretatione).   == External links == The Latin texts of the Commentaries (PDF) Introductory note to the Commentaires by António Manuel Martins Bibliography by Mário Santiago de Carvalho

Constantin Rădulescu-Motru (born Constantin Rădulescu, he added the surname Motru in 1892; February 15, 1868 – March 6, 1957) was a Romanian philosopher, psychologist, sociologist, logician, academic, dramatist, as well as centre-left nationalist politician with a noted anti-fascist discourse. A member of the Romanian Academy after 1923, he was its vice president in 1935–1938, 1941–1944, and its president between 1938 and 1941.   == Early life == Born in Butoieşti, Mehedinţi County, he was the son of Radu Poppescu, whose natural father was Eufrosin Poteca, and Judita Butoi. His mother died during childbirth, and Radu Poppescu married Ecaterina Cernăianu, who would gave birth to Constantin's nine siblings. During his childhood, Constantin fell ill with malaria. He also fractured a leg, resulting in a permanent physical impediment. Radu Poppescu, who worked as a secretary for Poteca for part of his life, inherited a certain sum after the death of his employer and father; this was to take the form of a scholarship for Constantin Rădulescu. He ultimately refused to make use of it, indicating that he would use instead revenue from his estate in Butoieşti; the scholarship was eventually awarded to Gheorghe Ţiţeica, the renowned mathematician. In 1885, he graduated from Carol I High School in Craiova, and subsequently entered the University of Bucharest, applying to both its Faculty of Law and Faculty of Letters. He was taught by Titu Maiorescu, who was to become his mentor, and attended lectures by Constantin Dumitrescu-Iaşi, V. A. Urechia, Grigore Tocilescu, and Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu. He was part of the last generation of intellectuals to participate in the activities of the Junimea literary society (where Maiorescu had endured as the major influence). Rădulescu-Motru was awarded a Law degree magna cum laude in 1888, and passed his Philosophy exam the following year.   == Studies abroad == In the summer of 1889, he accompanied Maiorescu on a trip to Austria-Hungary, Germany, and Switzerland, notably visiting the University of Vienna and the University of Munich, establishing contacts with German academics. This brought his inclusion into the last stage of a program initiated by Maiorescu as the Kingdom of Romania's Minister of Education: alongside other important cultural and scientific figures (such as Alexandru A. Philippide, Ştefan Zeletin, Ion Rădulescu-Pogoneanu, Iorgu Iordan, Simion Mehedinţi, Nicolae Bănescu, P. P. Negulescu, Teohari Antonescu, and Constantin Litzica), he was given official assistance in order complete his education abroad (in order to provide Romania with a new generation of academics). Initially, he directed his interest towards studies in France, attending Henry Beaunis' lectures in psychology at the University of Paris during the fall of 1899. Between 1890 and 1893, Rădulescu settled in Germany – he lived in Munich and studied at the university for one semester (as a student of Carl Stumpf), and then moved to Leipzig, where he began working in the laboratory of Wilhelm Wundt at the local university. While completing his training with Wundt, he attended classes in physics, physiology, chemistry, psychiatry, and mathematics, as well as Gustav Weigand's lectures in Romanian philology. He married a German woman, who later refused to accompany him back to Romania; they eventually divorced. He took his doctorate in 1893, with a thesis on Immanuel Kant's philosophy (Zur Entwickelung von Kant's Theorie der Naturkausalität), one notably quoted by Henri Bergson in his Introduction à la Métaphysique.   == Academic and political career == After 1897, Spiru Haret, he served on the editorial board of Spiru Haret's Albina popular science magazine. On January 1, 1900, he also founded and edited Noua Revistă Română (which published articles by, among others, Nicolae Iorga, Ion Luca Caragiale, George Coşbuc, Lazăr Şăineanu, Ioan Nădejde, Ovid Densusianu, H. Sanielevici, and Garabet Ibrăileanu). Appointed to the chair of Philosophy at the University of Bucharest in 1906 (after three years of employment at the cultural foundation created by King Carol I), he was also the founder of the review Studii filosofice (later renamed Revista de filosofie), and, in 1918, became head of the National Theatre Bucharest. In 1923, Rădulescu-Motru joined Virgil Madgearu, Constantin Costa-Foru, Victor Eftimiu, Grigore Iunian, Radu Rosetti, Dem I. Dobrescu, and the socialists Constantin Titel Petrescu, Nicolae L. Lupu, and Constantin Mille, in creating Liga Drepturilor Omului (the League for Human Rights), protesting against measures taken by the National Liberal cabinet of Ion I. C. Brătianu in dealing with left-wing opposition forces. In 1925, Rădulescu-Motru, Nicolae Basilescu, and Traian Bratu were part of a government-appointed committee investigating the roles of A. C. Cuza and Corneliu Şumuleanu in the anti-Semitic violence having occurred at the University of Iaşi in 1923-1925. Initially a conservative, he became active inside the newly created National Peasants' Party towards the end of the 1920s, and adapted the group's advocacy of a peasant state that would favour small-scale agricultural property (an echo of Poporanism), while taking a more centrist stand than his friend Madgearu. A member of the party's Study Circle, he took part in drafting a new party program (a 1935 initiative taken by Ion Mihalache and Mihai Ralea, it also involved the left-wingers Ernest Ene, Mihail Ghelmegeanu, and Petre Andrei). It was at this time that his ideas on ethnicity (Romanianism) came to be debated by various figures on the Right, and were the subject of virulent criticism from intellectuals sympathetic to the fascist Iron Guard, who notably rejected his commitment to secularism and Maiorescu's Junimea tradition (Mircea Vulcănescu spoke against "his hostile attitude, shared by his Junimist colleagues, against the penetration of a new, religious spirit, inside the University [of Bucharest]"), as well as from the nationalist modernist Lucian Blaga. According to a later assessment of his work by Vulcănescu, who had since become influenced by the centrist National Peasants' Party member Dimitrie Gusti, the latter's outlook on sociology was also in disagremeent with Rădulescu-Motru's adherence to Junimist guidelines. Toward the end of the 1930s, Rădulescu-Motru was involved in a dispute with the far right philosopher Nae Ionescu, who, although appointed his assistant at the Philosophy department, had begun to criticize his views in the pro-Iron Guard journal Cuvântul; writing to Mircea Eliade in 1938, he accused Ionescu of various unacademic practices, including using lectures on Logic to promote "a sort of dilettante mysticism". The President of the Academy at the moment when Carol II assumed dictatorial powers, he chose to support the new National Renaissance Front (FRN) regime, and moved away from party politics. He remained in office after Carol's fall from power of and the establishment of the Iron Guard's National Legionary State government; in the autumn of 1940, as Madgearu and Nicolae Iorga, who had been assassinated by the Guard's armed groups, were being buried, he led the delegation of Academy members who defied the policies of Horia Sima by attending the funeral. During World War II, he was supportive of the dictatorship of Ion Antonescu and Romania's alliance with Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union. As late as 1944 he abhorred the attempts of the Romanian opposition to negotiate the country's switch to the camp of the United Nations. Even after the war, in his personal journals he continued to adopt a position sympathetic to the Romanian and Nazi war criminals, dismissing the Nuremberg Trials and the People's Tribunals.   == Communist persecution == Critical of Romania's exit from the Axis Powers during World War II (see Romania during World War II), he was alarmed by the Soviet advances and the eventual occupation; in his private notes, he deplored the fact that Romania failed to adopt the Marshall Plan. In June 1948, six months after the establishment of a communist regime, Rădulescu-Motru was among the members of the Academy purged by the new authorities (he was reinstated post-mortem in 1990). Despite his protests, his entire work was dismissed by official Stalinist rhetoric as "idealism". He was denied employment in his field of expertise, until two years before his death, when he was admitted to the minor post of researcher at the Psychology Institute; according to his biographer N. Bagdasar, his final years were marked by extreme poverty. Granted assistance following the interventions of Miron Constantinescu and Constantin Ion Parhon, Rădulescu-Motru was hospitalized in a Bucharest clinic for much of his final years. He died while in there, and was buried in Bellu cemetery.   == Philosophy and politics ==   === Outlook === Influenced by Wilhelm Wundt's theories on introspection, Rădulescu-Motru moved away from Kantian philosophy and its tenet regarding the impossibility of transcending reality as perceived through the senses. He considered metaphysics to be open to objective scrutiny, and placed their knowledge at the summit of philosophical approaches. Stating that there was, in effect, a unity between person and material nature, Rădulescu-Motru developed his own version of Personalism, which thought of the human being and its personality as the goal of evolution in nature – a theory he called Energetic Personalism. He recognized the influence of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's views on the relation between being and the whole, arguing that his idealist concept of externalization ("the belief that the world is being led by our ideal", which he deemed "transitory Personalism") had been the driving force behind all modern ideologies, from Socialism and Anarchism to Liberalism (see Right Hegelians and Left Hegelians). Owing to Wundt's Völkerpsychologie, Rădulescu-Motru dedicated much of his work to assessing and defining nationalism in Romanian social context. Concentrating his analysis on the impact of modernization and Westernization, he argued for a need to adapt forms to the Romanian ethnicity (which he defined through heredity), and represented as the true social fundament (the "community of spirit"). He supported the existence of human races and differences among them, as well as eugenics, even after the defeat of Nazi Germany led to the abandonment of such theories in the mainstream scientific world.   === Views on modernization === In his Cultura română şi politicianismul ("Romanian culture and petty politics"), he devised a hierarchy of cultures, placing Western civilization at the top of the scale, and the Far East at its bottom; he later confessed to Mircea Eliade his reticence in dealing with Hindu philosophy (conversations between the two centered instead on Indian nationalism in general and Satyagraha in particular). The system placed Romania in the margin of European progress, still subject to adopting cultural forms from Western societies:  "Nowhere have bourgeois institutions stemmed out of natural spiritual needs of the peoples, but rather out of the needs of capitalism; the complete harmonizing of these institutions with the popular psyche was a gradual, difficult enterprise, the more so in our country, where the dazzling development of capitalism has left the spiritual evolution, always more laborious, far behind."  Elsewhere, he argued that, despite a traditional pattern of individualism, Romanians lacked "initiative in economic and social life, the two characteristics traits of individualism as experienced by the cultured Western peoples and constituting bourgeois spirit"; according to him, the common folk relied on collective work, which had ensured the survival of village communities during "cursed centuries" (maintaining the mobility of villages "from plain to mountains", but preventing their actual breakup during the medieval period). In his chapters on the universal suffrage, the parliamentary system, and the Romanian Constitution of 1923, Rădulescu-Motru expanded on this fundamentally conservative thesis, arguing that such reforms had come too soon to be properly integrated. The main danger he saw in the process was the appearance of "petty politics" (politicianism), which, he argued, had a potential of destroying natural developments inside the nation. Taking in view the characteristics of this evolution towards petty politics, he vehemently rejected Mihai Eminescu's theory on the almost exclusively foreign origin of the bourgeoisie inside the post-Phanariote Old Kingdom. Instead, Rădulescu-Motru expanded on Titu Maiorescu's criticism of "forms without fundament" (in reference to the discrepancy between the Westernized facade and the underdeveloped economic and social setting), viewing the class of low-ranking boyars, increasingly attracted to Liberal currents during the 19th century, as the main agents of incoherent change – this attracted him the criticism of the Poporanist Garabet Ibrăileanu, who argued that Junimea was an exclusivist school of criticism that "has never said [of foreign models] what, how much, and when should be imported". In this context, Ibrăileanu emphasized the gestures of boyars before and during the Organic Regulation government, as indicative of a skeptical nationalist mood (rather than of a cosmopolitan ideology).   === Romanianism and secularism === With Învăţământul filosofic în România ("Philosophical education in Romania"), his 1931 essay first published in Convorbiri Literare, Rădulescu-Motru introduced a polemic that was to mark numerous other writings of his during the following period: reacting to the growth in appeal of far right magazines that claimed to follow a Romanian Orthodox philosophy – Cuvântul and Gândirea –, he made a difference between a "belletristic" trend in higher learning and a "scientific" one, arguing in favour of the latter, and presenting the former as the objective source of anti-intellectualist attitudes he observed inside the new political phenomenon (which emphasized the "human need for mystery"). In essence, the secularist Rădulescu-Motru followed the Junimea tradition of rejecting mysticism, viewing it as the unwanted characteristic of a working class mentality. He questioned the subjective approaches of Lucian Blaga, Nichifor Crainic, and Nae Ionescu: developing his Romanianism, Rădulescu-Motru stated his support for cultural and national dialogue ("and not the isolation of each people in its own ethnicity"), and for the ultimate integration of Romanian culture in the highest section of European culture. He even argued that principles supported by the Right in defining Romanian specificity were in fact being shared with other cultures (answering Blaga's emphasis on Romanian folklore, he pointed out that its themes were commonplace in neighbouring Balkan cultures; replying to Ionescu's views on allegedly particular tendencies toward theology and metaphysics inside national culture, he stated his belief that "the prestige of the metaphor, the attraction towards mystery and the ontology of the ethnos [...] only show themselves from the second quarter of the 20th century onwards, [and are under the influence of] foreign university circles [...]"; he also rejected Crainic's views on Orthodoxy as the source for specificity, arguing for Christian universalism in detriment of "nationalist spirituality" – an idea nevertheless interpreted by Crainic as evidence of "militant philosophical atheism").   === Peasant doctrine === After joining the National Peasants' Party, Rădulescu-Motru maintained a particular approach towards the group's doctrines and policies after 1935: adapting his criticism of individualism (a trait he associated with the National Liberals) to the Poporanist doctrine of the "peasant state", he defined the latter as necessarily "totalitarian":  "[It] differs from other totalitarian states in that it sets among its norms, first and foremost, the preeminence of the permanent interests of the peasant population. Unlike the Fascist, the National-Socialist, and the Soviet states, it believes that it can serve the totality of the population it is supposed to govern, not on the basis of a glorious imperialist tradition, or through the cultivation of a race relation, or through industrial structuring on the basis of a dictatorial plan, but through the creation of a healthy, moral, and labouring peasantry, ready to defend the country's borders as the geographical and historical conditions demand it."  A pro-authoritarian critic soon reproached that such an ideal, despite its aim to compete with purely nationalist trends, was in fact social class-based, and its "numerical, that is to say democratic" definition (around the argument that peasants formed the majority in Romania) was leading to "peasant anarchy". Rădulescu-Motru came to support Carol II's National Renaissance Front (FRN) and the single-party system in 1938, speaking out in favour of the kings' initiative to introduce uniforms for members of the Academy (clashing over the matter with his fellow academic Nicolae Iorga, in February 1939).   == Works == F. W. Nietzsche. Viaţa şi filosofia sa ("F. W. Nietzsche. His life and philosophy"), 1897 Problemele psihologiei ("Issues in psychology"), 1898 Ştiinţă şi energie ("Science and energy"), 1902 Cultura română şi politicianismul ("Romanian culture and petty politics"), 1904 Psihologia martorului ("The psychology of the witness"), 1906 Psihologia industriaşului ("The psychology of the industrialist"), 1907 Puterea sufletească ("Power of the spirit"), 1908 Psihologia ciocoismului ("The psychology of boyars"), 1908 Poporanismul politic şi democraţia conservatoare ("Political Poporanism and Conservative democracy), 1909 Naţionalismul cum se înţelege. Cum trebuie să se înţeleagă ("Nationalism as it is being understood. How it should be understood"), 1909 Sufletul neamului nostru. Calităţi bune şi defecte ("The spirit of our nation. Its good properties and its flaws"), 1910 Din psihologia revoluţionarului ("From the psychology of the revolutionary"), 1919 Rasa, cultura şi naţionalitatea în filosofia istoriei ("Race, culture and nationality in the philosophy of history"), 1922 Curs de psihologie ("Lectures in psychology"), 1923 Personalismul energetic ("The Energetic Personalism"), 1927 Ţărănismul. Un suflet şi o politică ("Peasant doctrine. A spirit and a policy"), 1927 Elemente de metafizică pe baza filosofiei kantiene ("Elements of metaphysics on the basis of Kantian philosophy"), 1928 Învăţământul filosofic în România ("Philosophical education in Romania"), 1931 Centenarul lui Hegel ("Hegel's centennial"), 1931 Psihologie practică ("Practical psychology"), 1931 Vocaţia, factor hotărâtor în cultura popoarelor ("Vocation - a determining factor in peoples' culture"), 1932 Ideologia statului român ("The ideology of the Romanian state"), 1934 Românismul. Catehismul unei noi spiritualităţi ("Romanianism. The Catechism of a new spirituality"), 1936 Psihologia poporului român ("Psychology of the Romanian people"), 1937 Timp şi destin ("Time and destiny"), 1940 Etnicul românesc. Comunitate de origine, limbă şi destin ("The Romanian ethnos. A community of origins, language, and destiny"), 1942   == Notes ==   == References == Texts by Rădulescu-Motru: (Romanian) Enciclopedia României article on the specificity of Romanian traits, in Ioan Scurtu, Theodora Stănescu-Stanciu, Georgiana Margareta Scurtu, Istoria românilor între anii 1918-1940 (Romanian) Excerpts from his Journal: 1947 - in Magazin Istoric (collected by Ioan Lăcustă) and 1949 - on Memoria.ro (collected by Gabriela Dumitrescu) (Romanian) Mircea Handoca, Corespondenţă Mircea Eliade – Constantin Rădulescu-Motru  (Romanian) Evreii în prima universitate din România at the Romanian Jewish community site (Romanian) Gheorghe Adamescu, Istoria literaturii române. IV: Literatura care se formează (1900-1910) (Romanian) Liviu Antonesei, Demagogie, populism şi realism politic, în strînsă legătură cu chestiunea educaţiei publice – învăţămintele istoriei (Romanian) S. M. Antonescu, Periodice româneşti de la începutul secolui al XX-lea consacrate popularizării ştiinţei Ovidiu Caraiani, National Identity and Political Legitimacy in Modern Romania (Romanian) Garabet Ibrăileanu, Spiritul critic în cultura românească: Evoluţia spiritului critic - Deosebirile dintre vechea şcoală critică moldovenească şi "Junimea"; Primul junimist: Costache Negruzzi (Romanian) Ionuţ Isac, Două paradigme filosofice în cultura românească: Kant şi Wittgenstein (Romanian) Lucian Nastasă, Universităţile germane şi formarea elitei intelectuale româneşti (1864-1944). Reflecţii memorialistice Vasile Niculae, Ion Ilincioiu, Stelian Neagoe, Doctrina ţărănistă în România. Antologie de texte, Editura Noua Alternativă, Social Theory Institute of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, 1994 Z. Ornea, Anii treizeci. Extrema dreaptă românească, Ed. Fundaţiei Culturale Române, Bucharest, 1995 (Romanian) Z. Ornea, "C. Rădulescu-Motru în 1946-1947", in România literară, 24, 1999 (Romanian) Cristinel Pantelimon, Geopoliticianismul (Romanian) Constantin Schifirneţ, C.Rădulescu-Motru. Viaţa şi faptele sale, vol. I-III, 2003–2005 (Romanian) Henri H. Stahl, Gânditori şi curente de istorie socială românească. IV: Titu Maiorescu şi criza "formelor fără fond" (Romanian) Petre Ţurlea, "Vodă da, Iorga ba", in Magazin Istoric, February 2001 Tudor Vianu, Scriitori români, Vol. II, Ed. Minerva, Bucharest, 1971 (Romanian) Mircea Vulcănescu, Şcoala sociologică a lui Dimitrie Gusti. IX: Semnificaţia generală a învăţământului gustian ("The Sociology School of Dimitrie Gusti. IX: The General Significance of Gusti's Teaching") (Romanian) Constantin Titel Petrescu at social-democrati.ro   == External links == Unesco.org: short summary of Personalismul energetic

Dag Prawitz (born 1936, Stockholm) is a Swedish philosopher and logician. He is best known for his work on proof theory and the foundations of natural deduction. Prawitz is a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, of the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters and Antiquity and the Royal Swedish Academy of Science.   == References ==   == External links == Prawitz's web page at Stockholm University

Dana Stewart Scott (born October 11, 1932) is the emeritus Hillman University Professor of Computer Science, Philosophy, and Mathematical Logic at Carnegie Mellon University; he is now retired and lives in Berkeley, California. His research career involved computer science, mathematics, and philosophy. His work on automata theory earned him the ACM Turing Award in 1976, while his collaborative work with Christopher Strachey in the 1970s laid the foundations of modern approaches to the semantics of programming languages. He has worked also on modal logic, topology, and category theory.   == Early careerEdit == He received his BA in Mathematics from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1954. He wrote his Ph.D. thesis on Convergent Sequences of Complete Theories under the supervision of Alonzo Church while at Princeton, and defended his thesis in 1958. Solomon Feferman (2005) writes of this period:  Scott began his studies in logic at Berkeley in the early 50s while still an undergraduate. His unusual abilities were soon recognized and he quickly moved on to graduate classes and seminars with Tarski and became part of the group that surrounded him, including me and Richard Montague; so it was at that time that we became friends. Scott was clearly in line to do a Ph. D. with Tarski, but they had a falling out for reasons explained in our biography. Upset by that, Scott left for Princeton where he finished with a Ph. D. under Alonzo Church. But it was not long before the relationship between them was mended to the point that Tarski could say to him, "I hope I can call you my student."  After completing his Ph.D. studies, he moved to the University of Chicago, working as an instructor there until 1960. In 1959, he published a joint paper with Michael O. Rabin, a colleague from Princeton, entitled Finite Automata and Their Decision Problem, which introduced the idea of nondeterministic machines to automata theory. This work led to the joint bestowal of the Turing Award on the two, for the introduction of this fundamental concept of computational complexity theory.   == University of California, Berkeley, 1960–1963Edit == Scott took up a post as Assistant Professor of Mathematics, back at the University of California, Berkeley, and involved himself with classical issues in mathematical logic, especially set theory and Tarskian model theory. During this period he started supervising Ph.D. students, such as James Halpern (Contributions to the Study of the Independence of the Axiom of Choice) and Edgar Lopez-Escobar (Infinitely Long Formulas with Countable Quantifier Degrees).   === Modal and tense logicEdit === Scott also began working on modal logic in this period, beginning a collaboration with John Lemmon, who moved to Claremont, California, in 1963. Scott was especially interested in Arthur Prior's approach to tense logic and the connection to the treatment of time in natural-language semantics, and began collaborating with Richard Montague (Copeland 2004), whom he had known from his days as an undergraduate at Berkeley. Later, Scott and Montague independently discovered an important generalisation of Kripke semantics for modal and tense logic, called Scott-Montague semantics (Scott 1970). John Lemmon and Scott began work on a modal-logic textbook that was interrupted by Lemmon's death in 1966. Scott circulated the incomplete monograph amongst colleagues, introducing a number of important techniques in the semantics of model theory, most importantly presenting a refinement of canonical model that became standard, and introducing the technique of constructing models through filtrations, both of which are core concepts in modern Kripke semantics (Blackburn, de Rijke, and Venema, 2001). Scott eventually published the work as An Introduction to Modal Logic (Lemmon & Scott, 1977).   == Stanford, Amsterdam and Princeton, 1963–1972Edit == Following an initial observation of Robert Solovay, Scott formulated the concept of Boolean-valued model, as Solovay and Petr Vopěnka did likewise at around the same time. In 1967 Scott published a paper, A Proof of the Independence of the Continuum Hypothesis, in which he used Boolean-valued models to provide an alternate analysis of the independence of the continuum hypothesis to that provided by Paul Cohen. This work led to the award of the Leroy P. Steele Prize in 1972.   == Oxford University, 1972–1981Edit == Scott took up a post as Professor of Mathematical Logic on the Philosophy faculty of Oxford University in 1972. He was member of Merton College while at Oxford.   === Semantics of programming languagesEdit === This period saw Scott working with Christopher Strachey, and the two managed, despite administrative pressures, to do work on providing a mathematical foundation for the semantics of programming languages, the work for which Scott is best known. Together, their work constitutes the Scott-Strachey approach to denotational semantics; it constitutes one of the pieces of work in theoretical computer science and can perhaps be regarded as founding one of the schools of computer science. One of Scott's contributions is his formulation of domain theory, allowing programs involving recursive functions and looping-control constructs to be given denotational semantics. Additionally, he provided a foundation for the understanding of infinitary and continuous information through domain theory and his theory of information systems. Scott's work of this period led to the bestowal of: The 1990 Harold Pender Award for his application of concepts from logic and algebra to the development of mathematical semantics of programming languages; The 1997 Rolf Schock Prize in logic and philosophy from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for his conceptually oriented logical works, especially the creation of domain theory, which has made it possible to extend Tarski's semantical paradigm to programming languages as well as to construct models of Curry's combinatory logic and Church's calculus of lambda conversion; and The 2001 Bolzano Prize for Merit in the Mathematical Sciences by the Czech Academy of Sciences. The 2007 EATCS Award for his contribution to theoretical computer science.   == Carnegie Mellon University 1981–2003Edit == At Carnegie Mellon University, Scott proposed the theory of equilogical spaces as a successor theory to domain theory; among its many advantages, the category of equilogical spaces is a cartesian closed category, whereas the category of domains is not. In 1994, he was inducted as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == See alsoEdit == Scott's trick Scott–Potter set theory   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Works by ScottEdit === With Michael O. Rabin, 1959. Finite Automata and Their Decision Problem. 1967. A proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis. Mathematical Systems Theory 1:89–111. 1970. 'Advice in modal logic'. In Philosophical Problems in Logic, ed. K. Lambert, pages 143–173. With John Lemmon, 1977. An Introduction to Modal Logic. Oxford: Blackwell. Gierz, G.; Hofmann, K. H.; Keimel, K.; Lawson, J. D.; Mislove, M. W.; Scott, D. S. (2003). Continuous Lattices and Domains. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications 93. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521803381.    === Other worksEdit === Blackburn, de Rijke and Venema (2001). Modal logic. Cambridge University Press. Jack Copeland (2004). Arthur Prior. In the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Solomon Feferman and Anita Burdman Feferman (2004). Alfred Tarski: life and logic. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-80240-7, ISBN 978-0-521-80240-6. Solomon Feferman (2005). Tarski's influence on computer science. Proc. LICS'05. IEEE Press. Joseph E. Stoy (1977). Denotational Semantics: The Scott-Strachey Approach to Programming Language Theory. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-19147-4   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Dana S. Scott home page DOMAIN 2002 Workshop on Domain Theory — held in honor of Scott's 70th birthday. Dana Scott at the Mathematics Genealogy Project List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search

David Hilbert (German: [ˈdaːvɪt ˈhɪlbɐt]; 23 January 1862 – 14 February 1943) was a German mathematician. He is recognized as one of the most influential and universal mathematicians of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Hilbert discovered and developed a broad range of fundamental ideas in many areas, including invariant theory and the axiomatization of geometry. He also formulated the theory of Hilbert spaces, one of the foundations of functional analysis. Hilbert adopted and warmly defended Georg Cantor's set theory and transfinite numbers. A famous example of his leadership in mathematics is his 1900 presentation of a collection of problems that set the course for much of the mathematical research of the 20th century. Hilbert and his students contributed significantly to establishing rigor and developed important tools used in modern mathematical physics. Hilbert is known as one of the founders of proof theory and mathematical logic, as well as for being among the first to distinguish between mathematics and metamathematics.   == LifeEdit ==   === Early life and educationEdit === Hilbert, the first of two children of Otto and Maria Therese (Erdtmann) Hilbert, was born in the Province of Prussia, either in Königsberg (according to Hilbert's own statement) or in Wehlau (known since 1946 as Znamensk) near Königsberg where his father worked at the time of his birth. In late 1872, Hilbert entered the Friedrichskolleg Gymnasium (Collegium fridericianum, the same school that Immanuel Kant had attended 140 years before); but, after an unhappy period, he transferred to (late 1879) and graduated from (early 1880) the more science-oriented Wilhelm Gymnasium. Upon graduation, in autumn 1880, Hilbert enrolled at the University of Königsberg, the "Albertina". In early 1882, Hermann Minkowski (two years younger than Hilbert and also a native of Königsberg but so talented he had graduated early from his gymnasium and gone to Berlin for three semesters), returned to Königsberg and entered the university. "Hilbert knew his luck when he saw it. In spite of his father's disapproval, he soon became friends with the shy, gifted Minkowski".   === CareerEdit === In 1884, Adolf Hurwitz arrived from Göttingen as an Extraordinarius (i.e., an associate professor). An intense and fruitful scientific exchange among the three began, and Minkowski and Hilbert especially would exercise a reciprocal influence over each other at various times in their scientific careers. Hilbert obtained his doctorate in 1885, with a dissertation, written under Ferdinand von Lindemann, titled Über invariante Eigenschaften spezieller binärer Formen, insbesondere der Kugelfunktionen ("On the invariant properties of special binary forms, in particular the spherical harmonic functions"). Hilbert remained at the University of Königsberg as a Privatdozent (senior lecturer) from 1886 to 1895. In 1895, as a result of intervention on his behalf by Felix Klein, he obtained the position of Professor of Mathematics at the University of Göttingen, at that time the best research center for mathematics in the world. He remained there for the rest of his life.   === The Göttingen schoolEdit === Among Hilbert's students were Hermann Weyl, chess champion Emanuel Lasker, Ernst Zermelo, and Carl Gustav Hempel. John von Neumann was his assistant. At the University of Göttingen, Hilbert was surrounded by a social circle of some of the most important mathematicians of the 20th century, such as Emmy Noether and Alonzo Church. Among his 69 Ph.D. students in Göttingen were many who later became famous mathematicians, including (with date of thesis): Otto Blumenthal (1898), Felix Bernstein (1901), Hermann Weyl (1908), Richard Courant (1910), Erich Hecke (1910), Hugo Steinhaus (1911), and Wilhelm Ackermann (1925). Between 1902 and 1939 Hilbert was editor of the Mathematische Annalen, the leading mathematical journal of the time.  "Good, he did not have enough imagination to become a mathematician".   === Later yearsEdit === Hilbert lived to see the Nazis purge many of the prominent faculty members at University of Göttingen in 1933. Those forced out included Hermann Weyl (who had taken Hilbert's chair when he retired in 1930), Emmy Noether and Edmund Landau. One who had to leave Germany, Paul Bernays, had collaborated with Hilbert in mathematical logic, and co-authored with him the important book Grundlagen der Mathematik (which eventually appeared in two volumes, in 1934 and 1939). This was a sequel to the Hilbert-Ackermann book Principles of Mathematical Logic from 1928. Hermann Weyl's successor was Helmut Hasse. About a year later, Hilbert attended a banquet and was seated next to the new Minister of Education, Bernhard Rust. Rust asked whether "the Mathematical Institute really suffered so much because of the departure of the Jews". Hilbert replied, "Suffered? It doesn't exist any longer, does it!"   By the time Hilbert died in 1943, the Nazis had nearly completely restaffed the university, as many of the former faculty had either been Jewish or married to Jews. Hilbert's funeral was attended by fewer than a dozen people, only two of whom were fellow academics, among them Arnold Sommerfeld, a theoretical physicist and also a native of Königsberg. News of his death only became known to the wider world six months after he had died. Hilbert was baptized and raised in the Reformed Protestant Church. He later on left the Church and became an agnostic. He also argued that mathematical truth was independent of the existence of God or other a priori assumptions. The epitaph on his tombstone in Göttingen consists of the famous lines he spoke at the conclusion of his retirement address to the Society of German Scientists and Physicians on 8 September 1930. The words were given in response to the Latin maxim: "Ignoramus et ignorabimus" or "We do not know, we shall not know": Wir müssen wissen. Wir werden wissen. In English: We must know. We will know. The day before Hilbert pronounced these phrases at the 1930 annual meeting of the Society of German Scientists and Physicians, Kurt Gödel—in a round table discussion during the Conference on Epistemology held jointly with the Society meetings—tentatively announced the first expression of his incompleteness theorem.   === Personal lifeEdit === In 1892, Hilbert married Käthe Jerosch (1864–1945), "the daughter of a Königsberg merchant, an outspoken young lady with an independence of mind that matched his own". While at Königsberg they had their one child, Franz Hilbert (1893–1969). Hilbert's son Franz suffered throughout his life from an undiagnosed mental illness. His inferior intellect was a terrible disappointment to his father and this misfortune was a matter of distress to the mathematicians and students at Göttingen. Minkowski — Hilbert's "best and truest friend" — died prematurely of a ruptured appendix in 1909.   == Hilbert solves Gordan's ProblemEdit == Hilbert's first work on invariant functions led him to the demonstration in 1888 of his famous finiteness theorem. Twenty years earlier, Paul Gordan had demonstrated the theorem of the finiteness of generators for binary forms using a complex computational approach. Attempts to generalize his method to functions with more than two variables failed because of the enormous difficulty of the calculations involved. In order to solve what had become known in some circles as Gordan's Problem, Hilbert realized that it was necessary to take a completely different path. As a result, he demonstrated Hilbert's basis theorem, showing the existence of a finite set of generators, for the invariants of quantics in any number of variables, but in an abstract form. That is, while demonstrating the existence of such a set, it was not a constructive proof — it did not display "an object" — but rather, it was an existence proof and relied on use of the law of excluded middle in an infinite extension. Hilbert sent his results to the Mathematische Annalen. Gordan, the house expert on the theory of invariants for the Mathematische Annalen, could not appreciate the revolutionary nature of Hilbert's theorem and rejected the article, criticizing the exposition because it was insufficiently comprehensive. His comment was: Das ist nicht Mathematik. Das ist Theologie. (This is not Mathematics. This is Theology.)  Klein, on the other hand, recognized the importance of the work, and guaranteed that it would be published without any alterations. Encouraged by Klein, Hilbert extended his method in a second article, providing estimations on the maximum degree of the minimum set of generators, and he sent it once more to the Annalen. After having read the manuscript, Klein wrote to him, saying: Without doubt this is the most important work on general algebra that the Annalen has ever published. Later, after the usefulness of Hilbert's method was universally recognized, Gordan himself would say: I have convinced myself that even theology has its merits. For all his successes, the nature of his proof stirred up more trouble than Hilbert could have imagined at the time. Although Kronecker had conceded, Hilbert would later respond to others' similar criticisms that "many different constructions are subsumed under one fundamental idea" — in other words (to quote Reid): "Through a proof of existence, Hilbert had been able to obtain a construction"; "the proof" (i.e. the symbols on the page) was "the object". Not all were convinced. While Kronecker would die soon afterwards, his constructivist philosophy would continue with the young Brouwer and his developing intuitionist "school", much to Hilbert's torment in his later years. Indeed Hilbert would lose his "gifted pupil" Weyl to intuitionism — "Hilbert was disturbed by his former student's fascination with the ideas of Brouwer, which aroused in Hilbert the memory of Kronecker". Brouwer the intuitionist in particular opposed the use of the Law of Excluded Middle over infinite sets (as Hilbert had used it). Hilbert would respond: Taking the Principle of the Excluded Middle from the mathematician ... is the same as ... prohibiting the boxer the use of his fists.   == Axiomatization of geometryEdit ==  The text Grundlagen der Geometrie (tr.: Foundations of Geometry) published by Hilbert in 1899 proposes a formal set, the Hilbert's axioms, substituting the traditional axioms of Euclid. They avoid weaknesses identified in those of Euclid, whose works at the time were still used textbook-fashion. It is difficult to specify the axioms used by Hilbert without referring to the publication history of the Grundlagen since Hilbert changed and modified them several times. The original monograph was quickly followed by a French translation, in which Hilbert added V.2, the Completeness Axiom. An English translation, authorized by Hilbert, was made by E.J. Townsend and copyrighted in 1902. This translation incorporated the changes made in the French translation and so is considered to be a translation of the 2nd edition. Hilbert continued to make changes in the text and several editions appeared in German. The 7th edition was the last to appear in Hilbert's lifetime. New editions followed the 7th, but the main text was essentially not revised. Hilbert's approach signaled the shift to the modern axiomatic method. In this, Hilbert was anticipated by Moritz Pasch's work from 1882. Axioms are not taken as self-evident truths. Geometry may treat things, about which we have powerful intuitions, but it is not necessary to assign any explicit meaning to the undefined concepts. The elements, such as point, line, plane, and others, could be substituted, as Hilbert is reported to have said to Schoenflies and Kötter, by tables, chairs, glasses of beer and other such objects. It is their defined relationships that are discussed. Hilbert first enumerates the undefined concepts: point, line, plane, lying on (a relation between points and lines, points and planes, and lines and planes), betweenness, congruence of pairs of points (line segments), and congruence of angles. The axioms unify both the plane geometry and solid geometry of Euclid in a single system.   == The 23 problemsEdit ==  Hilbert put forth a most influential list of 23 unsolved problems at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900. This is generally reckoned the most successful and deeply considered compilation of open problems ever to be produced by an individual mathematician. After re-working the foundations of classical geometry, Hilbert could have extrapolated to the rest of mathematics. His approach differed, however, from the later 'foundationalist' Russell-Whitehead or 'encyclopedist' Nicolas Bourbaki, and from his contemporary Giuseppe Peano. The mathematical community as a whole could enlist in problems, which he had identified as crucial aspects of the areas of mathematics he took to be key. The problem set was launched as a talk "The Problems of Mathematics" presented during the course of the Second International Congress of Mathematicians held in Paris. The introduction of the speech that Hilbert gave said: Who among us would not be happy to lift the veil behind which is hidden the future; to gaze at the coming developments of our science and at the secrets of its development in the centuries to come? What will be the ends toward which the spirit of future generations of mathematicians will tend? What methods, what new facts will the new century reveal in the vast and rich field of mathematical thought? He presented fewer than half the problems at the Congress, which were published in the acts of the Congress. In a subsequent publication, he extended the panorama, and arrived at the formulation of the now-canonical 23 Problems of Hilbert. The full text is important, since the exegesis of the questions still can be a matter of inevitable debate, whenever it is asked how many have been solved. Some of these were solved within a short time. Others have been discussed throughout the 20th century, with a few now taken to be unsuitably open-ended to come to closure. Some even continue to this day to remain a challenge for mathematicians.   == FormalismEdit == In an account that had become standard by the mid-century, Hilbert's problem set was also a kind of manifesto, that opened the way for the development of the formalist school, one of three major schools of mathematics of the 20th century. According to the formalist, mathematics is manipulation of symbols according to agreed upon formal rules. It is therefore an autonomous activity of thought. There is, however, room to doubt whether Hilbert's own views were simplistically formalist in this sense.   === Hilbert's programEdit ===  In 1920 he proposed explicitly a research project (in metamathematics, as it was then termed) that became known as Hilbert's program. He wanted mathematics to be formulated on a solid and complete logical foundation. He believed that in principle this could be done, by showing that: all of mathematics follows from a correctly chosen finite system of axioms; and that some such axiom system is provably consistent through some means such as the epsilon calculus. He seems to have had both technical and philosophical reasons for formulating this proposal. It affirmed his dislike of what had become known as the ignorabimus, still an active issue in his time in German thought, and traced back in that formulation to Emil du Bois-Reymond. This program is still recognizable in the most popular philosophy of mathematics, where it is usually called formalism. For example, the Bourbaki group adopted a watered-down and selective version of it as adequate to the requirements of their twin projects of (a) writing encyclopedic foundational works, and (b) supporting the axiomatic method as a research tool. This approach has been successful and influential in relation with Hilbert's work in algebra and functional analysis, but has failed to engage in the same way with his interests in physics and logic. Hilbert wrote in 1919: We are not speaking here of arbitrariness in any sense. Mathematics is not like a game whose tasks are determined by arbitrarily stipulated rules. Rather, it is a conceptual system possessing internal necessity that can only be so and by no means otherwise. Hilbert published his views on the foundations of mathematics in the 2-volume work Grundlagen der Mathematik.   === Gödel's workEdit === Hilbert and the mathematicians who worked with him in his enterprise were committed to the project. His attempt to support axiomatized mathematics with definitive principles, which could banish theoretical uncertainties, ended in failure. Gödel demonstrated that any non-contradictory formal system, which was comprehensive enough to include at least arithmetic, cannot demonstrate its completeness by way of its own axioms. In 1931 his incompleteness theorem showed that Hilbert's grand plan was impossible as stated. The second point cannot in any reasonable way be combined with the first point, as long as the axiom system is genuinely finitary. Nevertheless, the subsequent achievements of proof theory at the very least clarified consistency as it relates to theories of central concern to mathematicians. Hilbert's work had started logic on this course of clarification; the need to understand Gödel's work then led to the development of recursion theory and then mathematical logic as an autonomous discipline in the 1930s. The basis for later theoretical computer science, in Alonzo Church and Alan Turing, also grew directly out of this 'debate'.   == Functional analysisEdit == Around 1909, Hilbert dedicated himself to the study of differential and integral equations; his work had direct consequences for important parts of modern functional analysis. In order to carry out these studies, Hilbert introduced the concept of an infinite dimensional Euclidean space, later called Hilbert space. His work in this part of analysis provided the basis for important contributions to the mathematics of physics in the next two decades, though from an unanticipated direction. Later on, Stefan Banach amplified the concept, defining Banach spaces. Hilbert spaces are an important class of objects in the area of functional analysis, particularly of the spectral theory of self-adjoint linear operators, that grew up around it during the 20th century.   == PhysicsEdit == Until 1912, Hilbert was almost exclusively a "pure" mathematician. When planning a visit from Bonn, where he was immersed in studying physics, his fellow mathematician and friend Hermann Minkowski joked he had to spend 10 days in quarantine before being able to visit Hilbert. In fact, Minkowski seems responsible for most of Hilbert's physics investigations prior to 1912, including their joint seminar in the subject in 1905. In 1912, three years after his friend's death, Hilbert turned his focus to the subject almost exclusively. He arranged to have a "physics tutor" for himself. He started studying kinetic gas theory and moved on to elementary radiation theory and the molecular theory of matter. Even after the war started in 1914, he continued seminars and classes where the works of Albert Einstein and others were followed closely. By 1907 Einstein had framed the fundamentals of the theory of gravity, but then struggled for nearly 8 years with a confounding problem of putting the theory into final form. By early summer 1915, Hilbert's interest in physics had focused on general relativity, and he invited Einstein to Göttingen to deliver a week of lectures on the subject. Einstein received an enthusiastic reception at Göttingen. Over the summer Einstein learned that Hilbert was also working on the field equations and redoubled his own efforts. During November 1915 Einstein published several papers culminating in "The Field Equations of Gravitation" (see Einstein field equations). Nearly simultaneously David Hilbert published "The Foundations of Physics", an axiomatic derivation of the field equations (see Einstein–Hilbert action). Hilbert fully credited Einstein as the originator of the theory, and no public priority dispute concerning the field equations ever arose between the two men during their lives. See more at priority. Additionally, Hilbert's work anticipated and assisted several advances in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. His work was a key aspect of Hermann Weyl and John von Neumann's work on the mathematical equivalence of Werner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and Erwin Schrödinger's wave equation and his namesake Hilbert space plays an important part in quantum theory. In 1926 von Neumann showed that if atomic states were understood as vectors in Hilbert space, then they would correspond with both Schrödinger's wave function theory and Heisenberg's matrices. Throughout this immersion in physics, Hilbert worked on putting rigor into the mathematics of physics. While highly dependent on higher math, physicists tended to be "sloppy" with it. To a "pure" mathematician like Hilbert, this was both "ugly" and difficult to understand. As he began to understand physics and how physicists were using mathematics, he developed a coherent mathematical theory for what he found, most importantly in the area of integral equations. When his colleague Richard Courant wrote the now classic Methoden der mathematischen Physik (Methods of Mathematical Physics) including some of Hilbert's ideas, he added Hilbert's name as author even though Hilbert had not directly contributed to the writing. Hilbert said "Physics is too hard for physicists", implying that the necessary mathematics was generally beyond them; the Courant-Hilbert book made it easier for them.   == Number theoryEdit == Hilbert unified the field of algebraic number theory with his 1897 treatise Zahlbericht (literally "report on numbers"). He also resolved a significant number-theory problem formulated by Waring in 1770. As with the finiteness theorem, he used an existence proof that shows there must be solutions for the problem rather than providing a mechanism to produce the answers. He then had little more to publish on the subject; but the emergence of Hilbert modular forms in the dissertation of a student means his name is further attached to a major area. He made a series of conjectures on class field theory. The concepts were highly influential, and his own contribution lives on in the names of the Hilbert class field and of the Hilbert symbol of local class field theory. Results were mostly proved by 1930, after work by Teiji Takagi. Hilbert did not work in the central areas of analytic number theory, but his name has become known for the Hilbert–Pólya conjecture, for reasons that are anecdotal.   == Miscellaneous talks, essays, and contributionsEdit == Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel, a meditation on strange properties of the infinite, is often used in popular accounts of infinite cardinal numbers. He was a Foreign member of the Royal Society. He received the second Bolyai Prize in 1910. His collected works (Gesammelte Abhandlungen) have been published several times. The original versions of his papers contained "many technical errors of varying degree"; when the collection was first published, the errors were corrected and it was found that this could be done without major changes in the statements of the theorems, with one exception—a claimed proof of the Continuum hypothesis. The errors were nonetheless so numerous and significant that it took Olga Taussky-Todd three years to make the corrections.   == See alsoEdit ==   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   === Primary literature in English translationEdit === Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press. 1918. "Axiomatic thought," 1115–14. 1922. "The new grounding of mathematics: First report," 1115–33. 1923. "The logical foundations of mathematics," 1134–47. 1930. "Logic and the knowledge of nature," 1157–65. 1931. "The grounding of elementary number theory," 1148–56. 1904. "On the foundations of logic and arithmetic," 129–38. 1925. "On the infinite," 367–92. 1927. "The foundations of mathematics," with comment by Weyl and Appendix by Bernays, 464–89.  Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. Hilbert, David (1950) [first published 1902], The Foundations of Geometry [Grundlagen der Geometrie] (PDF), English translation by E.J. Townsend (2nd ed.), La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing  Hilbert, David (1990) [1971], Foundations of Geometry [Grundlagen der Geometrie], translated by Leo Unger from the 10th German edition (2nd English ed.), La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing, ISBN 0-87548-164-7  David Hilbert; Stephan Cohn-Vossen (1999), Geometry and Imagination, American Mathematical Society, ISBN 0-8218-1998-4  - an accessible set of lectures originally for the citizens of Göttingen. David Hilbert (2004), Michael Hallett and Ulrich Majer, ed., David Hilbert's Lectures on the foundations of Mathematics and Physics, 1891–1933, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, ISBN 3-540-64373-7    === Secondary literatureEdit === Bertrand, Gabriel (20 December 1943b), "Allocution", Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des séances de l'Académie des sciences (in French) (Paris) 217: 625–640 , available at Gallica. The "Address" of Gabriel Bertrand of December 20, 1943 at the French Academy: he gives biographical sketches of the lives of recently deceased members, including Pieter Zeeman, David Hilbert and Georges Giraud. Bottazzini Umberto, 2003. Il flauto di Hilbert. Storia della matematica. UTET, ISBN 88-7750-852-3 Corry, L., Renn, J., and Stachel, J., 1997, "Belated Decision in the Hilbert-Einstein Priority Dispute," Science 278: nn-nn. Dawson, John W. Jr 1997. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel. Wellesley MA: A. K. Peters. ISBN 1-56881-256-6. Folsing, Albrecht, 1998. Albert Einstein. Penguin. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Univ. Press. Gray, Jeremy, 2000. The Hilbert Challenge. ISBN 0-19-850651-1 Mancosu, Paolo (1998). From Brouwer to Hilbert, The Debate on the Foundations of Mathematics in 1920s. Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-509631-2.  Mehra, Jagdish, 1974. Einstein, Hilbert, and the Theory of Gravitation. Reidel. Piergiorgio Odifreddi, 2003. Divertimento Geometrico - Da Euclide ad Hilbert. Bollati Boringhieri, ISBN 88-339-5714-4. A clear exposition of the "errors" of Euclid and of the solutions presented in the Grundlagen der Geometrie, with reference to non-Euclidean geometry. Reid, Constance, 1996. Hilbert, Springer, ISBN 0-387-94674-8. The definitive English-language biography of Hilbert. Rowe, D. E. (1989). "Klein, Hilbert, and the Gottingen Mathematical Tradition". Osiris 5: 186–213. doi:10.1086/368687.  Sauer, Tilman, 1999, "The relativity of discovery: Hilbert's first note on the foundations of physics," Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 53: 529-75. Sieg, Wilfried, and Ravaglia, Mark, 2005, "Grundlagen der Mathematik" in Grattan-Guinness, I., ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 981-99. (in English) Thorne, Kip, 1995. Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy, W. W. Norton & Company; Reprint edition. ISBN 0-393-31276-3.   == External linksEdit == David Hilbert at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Hilbert Bernays Project Hilbert's 23 Problems Address ICMM 2014 dedicated to the memory of D.Hilbert Works by David Hilbert at Project Gutenberg Works by or about David Hilbert at Internet Archive Works by David Hilbert at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Hilbert's radio speech recorded in Königsberg 1930 (in German), with English translation Wolfram MathWorld – Hilbert'Constant O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "David Hilbert", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . 'From Hilbert's Problems to the Future', lecture by Professor Robin Wilson, Gresham College, 27 February 2008 (available in text, audio and video formats).

David Kaplan may refer to: David Kaplan (filmmaker), American film director Dave Kaplan (born 1979), American mixed martial artist David Kaplan (philosopher) (born 1933), American philosopher David Kaplan (producer) (c. 1947–1992), ABC television news producer killed in Yugoslavia David Kaplan (author) (born 1955), journalist and author David Kaplan (radio) (born 1960), American radio host David B. Kaplan (born 1958), particle physicist David E. Kaplan, theoretical particle physicist David L. Kaplan (born 1923), Canadian music professor and conductor David L. Kaplan (biomedical engineer), Tufts University professor, co-inventor of the first soft-bodied robot David A. Kaplan, American writer and journalist Dave Kaplan (talent manager) (born 1959), American talent manager Dovid Kaplan, senior lecturer at Ohr Somayach, Jerusalem, popular author and speaker



David Clement Makinson, D.Phil, (born 27 August 1941), is an Australian mathematical logician living in London, England.   == Career == Makinson began his studies at Sydney University in 1958 and was an associate of the Libertarian Society and Sydney Push. He is a Visiting Professor in the London School of Economics, University of London, and an associate member of the Centre de Recherche en Epistémologie Appliquée (CREA), École Polytechnique, Paris. He has held professorial rank positions in King's College London, University of London and in the American University of Beirut, Lebanon. From 1980 till 2001 he worked for UNESCO, Paris.   == Contribution == David Makinson is highly regarded for his work on belief revision, uncertain reasoning, and modal logic. While studying in Oxford University (Worcester College) for his D.Phil under the supervision of Michael Dummett, he identified the preface paradox. In belief revision he created the AGM account of theory change with Carlos Alchourrón and Peter Gärdenfors. In modal logic and other non-classical logics, he showed how to establish completeness results by adapting the method of maximal consistent set. In 1969 Makinson discovered the first simple and natural propositional logic lacking the finite model property.   == External links == David Makinson's website CREA, École Polytechnique, Paris

Dharmakīrti (fl. c. 7th century) was a Buddhist scholar of India. He was one of the Buddhist founders of Indian philosophical logic. He was one of the primary theorists of Buddhist atomism, according to which the only items considered to exist are momentary states of consciousness.   == History == Born around the turn of the 7th century in Sumatra, Dharmakirti was a Sailendran prince. He became a revered scholar and poet in Srivijaya and moved to India to become a teacher at the famed Buddhist monastic university of Nalanda. He built on and reinterpreted the work of Dignāga, the pioneer of Buddhist logic, and was very influential among Brahman logicians as well as Buddhists. His theories became normative in Tibet and are studied to this day as a part of the basic monastic curriculum. Collins colourfully contextualised Dharmakirti and his experience of disaffection and collegiate misunderstanding at Nalanda:  Dharmakirti's synthesis is the apex of Buddhist philosophy, at the moment when it was institutionally fading. Nalanda was still bustling, buoyed by cosmopolitan incursions of Brahmans and lay students, but the weeds were growing around the deserted stupas not just in the south but in northern India as well. Dharmakirti is the last flaming of the torch before it blows out, the owl of Minerva taking wing at dusk: the creativity of synthesis as a fading institutional base goes on the defensive. Dharmakirti himself was a lay Buddhist, not a devout monk, and his personal tone sounds like secular ambition rather than a quest for salvation. The closing stanza of his great work laments the dearth of capable intellectuals to follow his philosophy: "My work will find no one in this world who would easily grasp its deep sayings. It will be absorbed and perish in my own person, just as a river in the ocean." A Tibetan historian says that when he finished the work, his pupils showed no appreciation, and his enemies "tied up the leaves [of the palm-leaf manuscript] to the tail of a dog and let him run through the streets where the leaves became scattered" (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:35–36). In fact, Dharmakirti did end up dominating the leading philosophers of the last generations of Indian Buddhism. But his pessimism was prescient. Leaving Nalanda, he retired to his home in the south, where he founded a monastery. The next successful Brahman student from the south was to be Shankara, and when he came north, it would be to plunder the carcass of a dying [Indian] Buddhism.   == Writings == The Seven Treatises on Valid Cognition: Saṃbandhaparikṣhāvrtti (Analysis of Relations) Pramāṇaviniścaya (Ascertainment of Valid Cognition) Pramāṇavārttikakārika (Commentary on Dignaga's 'Compendium of Valid Cognition') Nyāyabinduprakaraṇa (Drop of Reasoning) Hetubindunāmaprakaraṇa (Drop of Reasons) Saṃtānāntarasiddhināmaprakaraṇa (Proof of Others' Continuums) Vādanyāyanāmaprakaraṇa (Reasoning for Debate)   == Philosophy == Dharmakirti presents most of his ideas in the guise of commentary on Dignaga's works, even if his theories go beyond what was presented by his predecessor. Some of his ideas, like his proof for the authority of the Buddha's words, are innovations, for Dignaga considered language just as fallible as inference. There has long been disagreement among Indian and Tibetan doxographers as to how to categorise Dharmakirti's thought. The Gelug school asserts that he expressed Yogacara views, most non-Gelug Tibetan commentators assert that he expressed Sautrāntika views and, according to one Tibetan source, a number of renowned later Indian Madhyamikas asserted that he expressed Madhyamaka views. Stcherbatsky relates Dharmakirti to his own understanding of Kant. He compares Dharmakirti's 'point-instant' to Kant's thing in itself.  The fundamental difference between the Kantian Thing-in-Itself and Dharmakirti's 'Own essence' consists in the clear identification of the latter with a single point instant of reality which corresponds to a moment of sensation".   === Mindstream ===  Dharmakīrti wrote a treatise on the nature of the mindstream in his Substantiation of Other Mindstreams (Saṃtānāntarasiddhi). Ratnakīrti (fl. c7–8th century), a disciple of Dharmakīrti, wrote a work that further developed and refined the themes therein, entitled: 'Refutation of Other mindstreams' (Saṃtãnãntaradusana). He did not refute the tenets of the Saṃtãnãntarasiddhi but further developed the topic from an empirical one, that is, where there are manifold minds cognised by one's experience of others' mental processes attributed through the perceived actions of other sentient beings to an absolutist view, where there is only "one mindstream" (ekacitta). Ratnakīrti's argument is that the valid cognition (pramāna) of another's mindstream is an inference (anumāna), not a direct perception (pratyakṣa). Moreover, Ratnakīrti introduced the two truths doctrine as key to the nature of the discussion as inference is trafficking with illusiory universals (samanya), the proof of the mindstreams of others, whilst empirically valid in relative truth (saṃvṛtisatya), does not hold ultimate metaphysical certainty in absolute truth (paramārthasatya). Dharmakirti held the mindstream to be beginningless yet also described the mindstream as a temporal sequence, and that as there are no true beginnings, there are no true endings, hence, the "beginningless time" motif that is frequently used to describe the concept of mindstream, as Dunne relates:  Buddhist philosophers often speak of beginninglessness. It is claimed that the minds of living beings, for example, have no beginning, and that our current [U]niverse is only one in a beginningless cycle of expansion and decay. Some Buddhist thinkers would claim that even the most mundane task can have no true beginning. That is, if a beginning occurs, there must be some moment, some "now", in which it occurs. For the present to exist, however, there must be a past and a future, for what would "now" mean if there were no time other than now? And of course, if there is a past, then how could now be a beginning? Now should instead be the end of the past. Each beginning in short, must itself have a beginning.   == See also == Buddhist atomism Critical Buddhism Dignāga William of Ockham   == Notes == ^ "The conception of Ultimate Reality as it is established in the critical school of Buddhism implies that it represents 1) the absolute particular, 2) pure existence, 3) a point instant in the stream of existence, 3) it is unique and unrelated, 5) it is dynamic, not extended and not enduring, 6) it possesses the faculty of stimulating the intellect for the production of a corresponding image, 7) it imparts vividness to the image, 8) it constitutes the assertive force of judgements, 9) it is the Thing-in-Itself, unutterable and incognizable." Stcherbatsky vol I p198 ^ P. 487 Buddhism: art, architecture, literature & philosophy, Volume 1 ^ Collins, Randall (2000). The sociology of philosophies: a global theory of intellectual change. Volume 30, Issue 2 of Philosophy of the social sciences. Harvard University Press. p. 240. ISBN 978-0-674-00187-9.  ^ Ngawang Palden in the Sautrantika chapter of his Explanation of the Conventional and the Ultimate in the Four Systems of Tenets (Grub mtha' bzhi'i lugs kyi kun rdzob dang don dam pa'i don rnam par bshad pa legs bshad dpyid kyi dpal mo'i glu dbyangs, New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1972, 39.5–39.6) says that some such as Prajñakaragupta, Suryagupta, Shantarakshita, Kamalashila, and Jetari interpret Dharmakirti’s Commentary on [Dignaga’s] Compendium of Valid Cognition (Tshad ma rnam 'grel, Pramanavarttika) as a Madhyamika treatise. Dependent-Arising and Emptiness: A Tibetan Buddhist Interpretation of Madhyamika Philosophy Emphasizing the Compatibility of Emptiness and Conventional Phenomena Napper, Elizabeth. Boston: Wisdom Publications. p. 685, note 142 ^ Stcherbatsky vol I p201 ^ Source: [1] (accessed: Wednesday 28 October 2009). There is an English translation of this work by Gupta (1969: pp.81–121) which is a rendering of Stcherbatsky's work from the Russian: Gupta, Harish C. (1969). Papers of Th. Stcherbatsky. Calcutta: Indian Studies Past and Present. (translated from Russian by Harish C. Gupta). ^ Dunne, John D. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakīrti's philosophy. Studies in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. Wisdom Publications. ISBN 978-0-86171-184-0. Source: [2] (accessed: Monday May 4, 2010), p.1   == Sources == Buddhist Logic (1932) by Fyodor Shcherbatskoy introduced the West to Buddhist logic, and more specifically to Dignaga. Although pioneering, this work is now regarded as outdated by some Buddhist scholars. — David Loy complains about viewing Buddhist philosophy "through the categories of another system – Stcherbatsky's Kant, Murti's Vedānta, Gudmundsen's Wittgenstein – which (as with earlier interpretations of nirvāṇa) reveals more about the interpreter than the interpreted." (Loy, David (1984). "How not to criticize Nāgārjuna". Philosophy East and West 34 (4): 437–445. ). Dunne, John D. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakirti's Philosophy. Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom Publications. ISBN 978-0-86171-184-0.  Dreyfus, Georges (1997). Recognizing Reality: Dharmakirti's Philosophy and Its Tibetan Interpretations. New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-3098-9.  extensive discussion of the Dharmakirti's Tibetan reception Tillemans, T. J. F. (1999). Scripture, Logic, Language: Essays on Dharmakirti and His Tibetan Successors. Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom Publications. ISBN 978-0-86171-156-7.    == External links == Dharmakirti entry by Tom Tillemans in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Dick Herman Jacobus de Jongh (born 19 October 1939, Enschede) is a Dutch logician and mathematician and a retired professor at the University of Amsterdam. He received his PhD degree in 1968 from the University of Wisconsin–Madison under supervision of Stephen Kleene with a dissertation entitled Investigations on the Intuitionistic Propositional Calculus. De Jongh is mostly known for his work on proof theory, provability logic and intuitionistic logic. De Jongh is a member of the group collectively publishing under the pseudonym L. T. F. Gamut. In 2004, on the occasion of his retirement, the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation at the University of Amsterdam published a festschrift in his honor.   == References ==  Curriculum vitae   == External links == Web page at the University of Amsterdam

Dignāga (c. 480 – c. 540 CE) was an Indian scholar and one of the Buddhist founders of Indian logic. He was born into a South Indian Brahmin family in Simhavakta near Kanchipuram and very little is known of his early years, except that he took as his spiritual preceptor Nagadatta of the Pudgalavada school before being expelled and becoming a student of Vasubandhu. This branch of Buddhist thought defended the view that there exists a kind of real personality independent of the elements or aggregates composing it. Among Dignaga's works there is Hetucakra (The wheel of reason), considered his first work on formal logic, advancing a new form of deductive reasoning. It may be regarded as a bridge between the older doctrine of trairūpya and Dignaga's own later theory of vyapti which is a concept related to the Western notion of implication. Other works include The Treatise on the Objects of Cognition (Alambana-parīkṣā), Pramāṇa-samuccaya), and The Treatise on the Correct Principles of Logic, produced in an effort to establish what were the valid sources of knowledge.   == Contribution to Buddhist logicEdit == During Dignāga's time, the Nyaya school of Hinduism had begun to hold debates using their five-step approach to making and evaluating arguments with logic. Buddhist debaters such as Dignāga wanted to engage in these debates, and also have a way to logically evaluate arguments, but a premise such as "all dogs are mammals" proved problematic for his idealist Yogacara philosophy. Dignāga was a student of Vasubandhu, and therefore believed that "the dharmas are empty." In other words, there are not universal qualities such as "dog-ness" or "mammal-ness." Such universals would have to be unchanging, and since all things are subject to change and are lacking in essential essence according to his school of philosophy, Dignāga attempted to find a way to engage in argument within the Nyaya structure without positing through the arguments that there is an essential "dog-ness," or what have you. To do this he employed what is referred to in formal logic in the West as contraposition, or in Sanskrit, Apoha, where one switches the terms and swaps them for their term complement. Therefore the example premise above, "all dogs are mammals" becomes "all non-mammals are non-dogs." These two statements are logically equivalent. Once this had been done, Dignāga could make arguments about non-mammals without explicitly positing that mammals have an essential nature. While this move gets off the ground towards his goal, reflection shows that making universal statements about non-mammals still implies that there are mammals who share an essential nature, and everything else, which lacks this "mammal-ness." Still, using this method Dignāga and other Buddhist logicians were able to further their logical discourse and felt more comfortable engaging in Nyaya structured debates.   == See alsoEdit == Buddhist logic Critical Buddhism Dharmakirti Epistemology Nyaya   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Chu, Junjie (2006).On Dignāga's theory of the object of cognition as presented in PS (V) 1, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 29 (2), 211–254 Frauwallner, Erich, Dignāga, sein Werk und seine Entwicklung. (Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens 2:83–164, 1959) Hattori Masaaki, Dignāga, On Perception, being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga's Pramāṇasamuccaya from the Sanskrit fragments and the Tibetan Versions (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968) Hayes, Richard, Dignāga on the Interpretation of Signs (Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 1982) Katsura Shoryu, Dignāga and Dharmakīrti on apoha in E. Steinkellner ed., Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition (Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1991), pp. 129–146 Mookerjee, S. The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux, an Exposition of the Philosophy of Critical Realism as expounded by the School of Dignāga (Calcutta, 1935) Sastri, N. Aiyaswami, Diṅnāga's Ālambanaparīkṣā and Vṛtti. Restored with the commentary of Dharmapāla into Sanskrit from the Tibetan and Chinese versions and edited with English translations and notes with extracts from Vinītadeva's commentary. (Madras: The Adyar Library. 1942)[1] Tucci, G The Nyāyamukha of Dignāga, the oldest Buddhist Text on Logic after Chinese and Tibetan Materials (Materialien zur Kunde des Buddhismus, 15 Heft, Heidelberg, 1930) Vidyabhusana, S.C. A History of Indian Logic – Ancient, Mediaeval and Modern Schools (Calcutta, 1921)   == External linksEdit == Dignaga's Logic of Invention, by Volker Peckhaus Das Rad der Gründe, German translation of The Wheel of Reason Vidhabhusana, Satis Chandra (1907). History of the Mediaeval School of Indian Logic. Calcutta University. 佛家因明的理性思考 蔡禮德 Hetu－Vidyā Of Rational Thinking, Choy L.T.(2008) 逻辑学(Logic)及简单枚举归纳法(Induction by Simple Enumeration) 科学方法(Scientific Method)及假设演绎法(Hypothetico-Deductive Method)  佛家因明的理性思考再探 蔡禮德 Hetu－Vidyā Of Rational Thinking(II), Choy L.T.(2009) 因明的辨义理(Meaning & Argument Analysis)方法，具有语理分析(Linguistic – conceptual Analysis)及谬误剖析(Fallacy Analysis)的元素。  佛家因明的理性思考三探 蔡禮德 Hetu－Vidyā Of Rational Thinking(III), Choy L.T.(2010) 「现量」及「比量」意谓真 「似现量」及「似比量」意谓非真。  因明邏輯真值量化的探索 李潤生、 蔡禮德 (2006) 「因明逻辑真值的量化公式」与贝尔斯学派统计学 蔡禮德 Quantification Formula Of Hetu－Vidyā Logical Truth－Value And Bayesian School Statistics, Choy L.T.(2008) 佛家因明提綱 蔡禮德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework, Choy L.T.(2013) 因明與菩薩行五明  佛家因明的概念功能與分類 蔡禮德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework(II), Choy L.T. (2013) 唯識宗的世界概念：由假說我法(一) 蔡禮德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework(III), Choy L.T.(2014) 佛家「因明」指导「内明」 蔡礼德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework(IV), Choy L.T. (2014)

Dimiter Skordev (born 1936 in Sofia) is a professor in the Department of Mathematical Logic and Applications, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the St. Kliment Ohridski University of Sofia. Chairman of the department in 1972-2000. Doyen and pioneer of mathematical logic research in Bulgaria who developed a Bulgarian school in the theory of computability, namely the algebraic (or axiomatic) recursion theory. Skordev's field of scientific interests include computability and complexity in analysis, mathematical logic, generalized recursion theory, and theory of programs and computation. Skordev has more than 45 years of lecturing experience in calculus, mathematical logic, logic programming, discrete mathematics, and computer science. He authored about 90 scientific publications including two monographs, and was one of the authors of the new Bulgarian phonetic keyboard layout proposed (but rejected) to become a state standard in 2006.   == References == Dimiter Skordev Historical notes on the development of mathematical logic in Sofia

Diodorus Cronus (Greek: Διόδωρος Κρόνος; died c. 284 BCE) was a Greek philosopher and dialectician connected to the Megarian school. He was most notable for logic innovations, including his master argument formulated in response to Aristotle's discussion of future contingents.   == Life == Diodorus was a son of Ameinias of Iasus in Caria. He lived at the court of Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy I Soter, who is said to have given him the surname of Cronus ("old fogey") on account of his inability to solve at once some dialectic problem proposed by Stilpo, when the two philosophers were dining with the king. Diodorus is said to have taken that disgrace so much to heart that after his return from the meal, and writing a treatise on the problem, he died in despair. However, according to Strabo, Diodorus himself adopted the surname of Cronus from his teacher, Apollonius Cronus. Diodorus is thought to have died around 284 BCE; his date of birth is unknown. It was once thought that he was old enough to have influenced Aristotle (384–322 BCE), but there is no strong evidence for this. Diodorus was particularly celebrated for his great dialectic skill, for which he was called The Dialectician. This effectively became his surname, and descended even to his five daughters, Menexene, Argia, Theognis, Artemesia, and Pantaclea, who were likewise distinguished as dialecticians. His pupils included Philo the Dialectician, and Zeno of Citium — the founder of the Stoic school. Although influenced by the Megarian school it is not clear how closely Diodorus and his fellow dialecticians were connected to that particular philosophical school.   == Philosophy == On the doctrines of Diodorus we possess only fragmentary information, and not even the titles of his works are known. He seems to have fully developed the dialectic art of the Megarian school. He was much occupied with the theory of proof and of hypothetical propositions. In the same manner as he rejected in logic the divisibility of the fundamental notion, he also maintained, in his physical doctrines, that space was indivisible, and consequently that motion was impossible. He further denied the coming into existence and all multiplicity both in time and in space; but he considered the things that fill up space as one whole composed of an infinite number of indivisible particles. Diodorus made use of the Sorites paradox, and is said to have invented two others of the same kind, viz. The Masked Man and The Horns, which are, however, also ascribed to Eubulides. He also rejected the view that words are ambiguous, any uncertainty in understanding was always due to speakers expressing themselves obscurely.   === Master Argument ===  Aristotle, in his work On Interpretation, had wrestled with the problem of future contingents. In particular whether one can meaningfully regard future contingents as true or false now, if the future is open, and if so, how? In response, Diodorus maintained that possible was identical with necessary (e.g., not contingent); so that the future is as certain and defined as the past. Alexander of Aphrodisias tells us that Diodorus believed that that alone is possible which either is happening now, or will happen at some future time. When speaking about facts of an unrecorded past, we know well that a given fact either occurred or did not occur, yet without knowing which of the two is true — and therefore we affirm only that the fact may have occurred: so also about the future, either the assertion that a given fact will at some time occur, is positively true, or the assertion that it will never occur, is positively true: the assertion that it may or may not occur some time or other, represents only our ignorance, which of the two is true. That which will never at any time occur, is impossible. Diodorus went on to formulate an argument that became known as the Master Argument (or Ruling Argument: ho kurieuôn logos). The most succinct description of it is provided by Epictetus:  The argument called the Master Argument appears to have been proposed from such principles as these: there is in fact a common contradiction between one another in these three propositions, each two being in contradiction to the third. The propositions are: (1) every past truth must be necessary; (2) that an impossibility does not follow a possibility; (3) something is possible which neither is nor will be true. Diodorus observing this contradiction employed the probative force of the first two for the demonstration of this proposition: That nothing is possible which is not true and never will be.  Epictetus' description of the Master Argument is not in the form as it would have been presented by Diodorus, which makes it difficult to know the precise nature of his argument. To modern logicians, it is not obvious why these three premises are inconsistent, or why the first two should lead to the rejection of the third. Modern interpretations therefore assume that there must have been extra premises in the argument tacitly assumed by Diodorus and his contemporaries. One possible reconstruction is as follows: For Diodorus, if a future event is not going to happen, then it was true in the past that it would not happen. Since every past truth is necessary (proposition 1), it was necessary that in the past it would not happen. Since the impossible cannot follow from the possible (proposition 2), it must have always been impossible for the event to occur. Therefore if something will not be true, it will never be possible for it to be true, and thus proposition 3 is shown to be false. Epictetus goes on to point out that Panthoides, Cleanthes, and Antipater of Tarsus made use of the second and third proposition to demonstrate that the first proposition was false. Chrysippus, on the other hand, agreed with Diodorus that everything true as an event in the past is necessary, but attacked Diodorus' view that the possible must be either what is true or what will be true. He thus made use of the first and third proposition to demonstrate that the second proposition was false.   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Gaskin, Richard, The Sea-Battle and the Master Argument. Aristotle and Diodorus Cronus on the Metaphysics of the Future. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter, 1995. Sedley, David. Diodorus Cronus and Hellenistic Philosophy. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society 203, N.S. 23 (1977), P. 74-120. Vuillemin, Jules. Nécessité ou contingence. L'aporie de Diodore et les systèmes philosophiques. Paris 1984. (English translation: Necessity or Contingency. The Master Argument, Stanford: CSLI Publications, 1996. ISBN 1-881526-86-0, paperback ISBN 1-881526-85-2).   == External links == Diodorus Cronus entry by David Sedley in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Dialectical School entry by Susanne Bobzien in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Selected Bibliography on the "Master Argument", Diodorus Cronus, Philo the Dialectician with a bibliography on the problem of future contingents

Dirk van Dalen (born 20 December 1932, Amsterdam) is a Dutch mathematician and historian of science. Van Dalen studied mathematics and physics and astronomy at the University of Amsterdam. Inspired by the work of LEJ Brouwer and Arend Heyting, he received his Ph.D. in 1963 from the University of Amsterdam for the thesis Extension problems in intuitionistic plane Projective geometry. From 1964 to 1966 Van Dalen taught logic and mathematics at MIT, and later Oxford. From 1967 he was professor at the University of Utrecht. In 2003 Dirk van Dalen was awarded the Academy Medal 2003 of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences for bringing the works of Brouwer to international attention.   == Works == Foundations of Set Theory, in samenwerking met Yehoshua Bar-Hillel en Azriel Levy, uitgeverij North Holland Amsterdam, 1958. Extension problems in intuitionistic plane projective geometry, 1963. Structure and Logic, Springer Universitext, 1980. ISBN 3-540-20879-8 Brouwer's Cambridge Lectures on Intuitionism, Dirk van Dalen (redactie), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981. Troelstra, Anne; van Dalen, Dirk (1988). Constructivism in Mathematics, Vol. 2. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. ISBN 0-444-70358-6.  Zermelo and the Skolem Paradox, Dirk van Dalen en Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus in: The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, Volume 6, Nr 2, Juni 2000. Intuitionistic Logic, in: The Blackwell Guide to Philosophical Logic, Lou Goble (redactie), Blackwell New York, 2001. L.E.J. Brouwer - Topologist, Institionalist, Philosopher, Dirk van Dalen, Springer-Verlag, London, 2013.   == References == The article was originally created as a translation (Google) of the corresponding article in Dutch Wikipedia.   == Further reading == Dirk van Dalen Festschrift, Henk Barendregt en anderen (redactie), University of Utrecht, Department of Philosophy, 1993 Special issue: a tribute to Dirk van Dalen, Yuri Gurevich (redactie), uitgeverij North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1995.   == External links == Koninklijke bibliotheek over Dirk van Dalen Homepage aan de Universiteit van Utrecht Persbericht KNAW 2003 Dirk van Dalen at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Donald A. (Tony) Martin (born December 24, 1940) is an American set theorist and philosopher of mathematics at UCLA, where he is a member of the faculty of mathematics and philosophy. Among Martin's most notable work are the proofs of analytic determinacy (from the existence of a measurable cardinal), Borel determinacy (from ZFC alone), the proof (with John R. Steel) of projective determinacy (from suitable large cardinal axioms), and his work on Martin's axiom. Martin measure on Turing degrees is also named after Martin. Martin is a Harvard junior fellow. In 2014, he became a Fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == List of publications UCLA Logic center

Dov M. Gabbay is Augustus De Morgan Professor Emeritus of Logic at the Group of Logic, Language and Computation, Department of Computer Science, King's College London. He has authored over four hundred and fifty research papers and over thirty research monographs. He is editor of several international Journals, and many reference works and Handbooks of Logic, including the Handbook of Philosophical Logic, the Handbook of Logic in Computer Science (with Samson Abramsky and T. S. E. Maibaum), and the Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming. He is Chairman and founder of several international conferences, executive of the European Foundation of Logic, Language and Information and President of the International IGPL Logic Group. He is founder, and joint President of the International Federation of Computational Logic, (UK Charity, Number 1112512). He is also one of the four founders and council member for many years of FoLLI, the Association of Logic, Language and Information, from which he is now retired. He remains a life member. He is co-founder with Jane Spurr of College Publications, a not-for-profit, start-up academic publisher, intended to compete with major expensive publishers at affordable prices, and not requiring copyright assignment from authors.   == Regular positions == 1968–1970 Instructor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem 1970–1973 Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Stanford University 1973–1975 Associate Professor of Philosophy, Stanford University 1975–1977 Associate Professor, Bar-Ilan University 1977–1983 Lady Davis Professor of Logic, Bar-Ilan University 1983–1998 Professor of Computing, Imperial College, London 1998–present Professor of Computing, Professor of Philosophy, Augustus De Morgan Professor of Logic, King's College, London 2009–present Special Professor Bar Ilan University 2015-present Professor of Logics, Ashkelon Academic College   == See also == Gabbay's separation theorem   == References ==   == External links == Home page

H. Dugald Macpherson is a mathematician and logician. He is Professor of Pure Mathematics at the University of Leeds. He obtained his DPhil from the University of Oxford in 1983 for his thesis entitled "Enumeration of Orbits of Infinite Permutation Groups" under the supervision of Peter Cameron. In 1997 he was awarded the Junior Berwick Prize by the London Mathematical Society. He continues to research into permutation groups and model theory. He is scientist in charge of the MODNET team at the University of Leeds. He co-authored the book "Notes on Infinite Permutation Groups"   == References ==   == External links == Prof. Macpherson's homepage

Edward Nelson (May 4, 1932 – September 10, 2014) was a professor in the Mathematics Department at Princeton University. He was known for his work on mathematical physics and mathematical logic. In mathematical logic, he was noted especially for his internal set theory, and his controversial views on ultrafinitism and the consistency of arithmetic. He also wrote on the relationship between religion and mathematics.   == CareerEdit == Nelson was born in Decatur, Georgia. He received his Ph.D. in 1955 from the University of Chicago, where he worked with Irving Segal. He was a member of the Institute for Advanced Study from 1956 to 1959. He held a position at Princeton University starting in 1959, attaining the rank of professor there in 1964 and retiring in 2013. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. He died in Princeton, New Jersey on September 10, 2014.   == Early workEdit == Nelson made contributions to the theory of infinite-dimensional group representations, the mathematical treatment of quantum field theory, the use of stochastic processes in quantum mechanics, and the reformulation of probability theory in terms of non-standard analysis. For many years he worked on mathematical physics and probability theory, and he retained a residual interest in these fields, particularly in connection with possible extensions of stochastic mechanics to field theory. In 1950, Nelson formulated a popular variant of the four color problem: What is the chromatic number, denoted , of the plane? In more detail, what is the smallest number of colors sufficient for coloring the points of the Euclidean plane in such a way that no two points of the same color are unit distance apart? We know by simple arguments that 4 ≤ χ ≤ 7. The problem was introduced to a wide mathematical audience by Martin Gardner in his October 1960 Mathematical Games column. The chromatic number problem, also now known as the Hadwiger–Nelson problem, was a favorite of Paul Erdős, who mentioned it frequently in his problems lectures.   == Work on foundationsEdit == In the later part of his career, he worked on mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics. One of his goals was to extend IST (Internal Set Theory—a version of a portion of Abraham Robinson's non-standard analysis) in a natural way to include external functions and sets, in a way that provides an external function with specified properties unless there is a finitary obstacle to its existence. Other work centered on fragments of arithmetic, studying the divide between those theories interpretable in Raphael Robinson's Arithmetic and those that are not; computational complexity, including the problem of whether P is equal to NP or not; and automated proof checking. In September 2011, Nelson announced that he had proved that Peano arithmetic was logically inconsistent. An error was found in the proof, and he retracted the claim.   == PublicationsEdit == Dynamical theory of Brownian motion. Princeton University Press 1967 Topics in Dynamics 1: Flows. Princeton University Press 1969 Tensor analysis. Princeton University Press 1967 Quantum Fluctuations. Princeton University Press, 1985 Predicative Arithmetic. Princeton University Press, 1986 Radically elementary probability theory. Annals of Mathematical Studies, Princeton 1987   == NotesEdit ==   == See alsoEdit == Influence of non-standard analysis   == ReferencesEdit == Curriculum Vitae Mathematics and Faith (PDF) "Professor Emeritus Edward Nelson Passed Away September 10th". Princeton University.  Obituary: Katz, Mikhail; Kutateladze, Semen (2015), "Edward Nelson (1932-2014)", Review of Symbolic Logic: 886–904, doi:10.1017/S1755020315000015 .   == External linksEdit == Edward Nelson's Homepage

Ehud Hrushovski (Hebrew: אהוד הרושובסקי‎; born 1959) is a mathematical logician. He is a Professor of Mathematics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He earned his PhD from the University of California, Berkeley in 1986 under Leo Harrington He was Professor of Mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology until 1998 before he went to Jerusalem. His father, Benjamin Harshav (né Hruszowski; 1928-2015), was a literary theorist, a Yiddish and Hebrew poet and a translator, Professor at Yale University and Tel Aviv University in comparative literature. Hrushovski is well known for many fundamental and important contributions to model theory, in particular in the branch that has become known as geometric model theory, and its applications. His PhD thesis revolutionized stable model theory (a part of model theory arising from the stability theory introduced by Saharon Shelah). Shortly afterwards he found counterexamples to the Trichotomy Conjecture of Boris Zilber and his method of proof has become well known as Hrushovski constructions and found many other applications since. In 1996, Hrushovski found a proof the geometric Mordell–Lang conjecture in all characteristics using model theory. This deep proof was a landmark in logic and geometry. He has had many other famous results in model theory and applications to Diophantine geometry. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2007), and Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities (2008).   == See also == Zariski geometry   == References ==   == External links == Ehud Hrushovski at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Emil Leon Post (February 11, 1897 – April 21, 1954) was a Polish-born American mathematician and logician. He is best known for his work in the field that eventually became known as computability theory.   == Early work == Post was born in Augustów, Suwałki Governorate, Russian Empire (now Poland) into a Polish-Jewish family that immigrated to America when he was a child. His parents were Arnold and Pearl Post. He attended the Townsend Harris High School and continued on to graduate from City College of New York in 1917 with a B.S. in Mathematics. After completing his Ph.D. in mathematics at Columbia University, he did a post-doctorate at Princeton University. While at Princeton, he came very close to discovering the incompleteness of Principia Mathematica, which Kurt Gödel proved in 1931. Post then became a high school mathematics teacher in New York City. In his doctoral thesis, Post proved, among other things, that the propositional calculus of Principia Mathematica was complete: all tautologies are theorems, given the Principia axioms and the rules of substitution and modus ponens. Post also devised truth tables independently of Wittgenstein and C.S. Peirce and put them to good mathematical use. Jean Van Heijenoort's well-known source book on mathematical logic (1966) reprinted Post's classic article setting out these results. In 1936, he was appointed to the mathematics department at the City College of New York. He died in 1954 of a heart attack following electroshock treatment for depression; he was 57.   == Recursion theory == In 1936, Post developed, independently of Alan Turing, a mathematical model of computation that was essentially equivalent to the Turing machine model. Intending this as the first of a series of models of equivalent power but increasing complexity, he titled his paper Formulation 1. This model is sometimes called "Post's machine" or a Post-Turing machine, but is not to be confused with Post's tag machines or other special kinds of Post canonical system, a computational model using string rewriting and developed by Post in the 1920s but first published in 1943. Post's rewrite technique is now ubiquitous in programming language specification and design, and so with Church's lambda-calculus is a salient influence of classical modern logic on practical computing. Post devised a method of 'auxiliary symbols' by which he could canonically represent any Post-generative language, and indeed any computable function or set at all. The unsolvability of his Post correspondence problem turned out to be exactly what was needed to obtain unsolvability results in the theory of formal languages. In an influential address to the American Mathematical Society in 1944, he raised the question of the existence of an uncomputable recursively enumerable set whose Turing degree is less than that of the halting problem. This question, which became known as Post's problem, stimulated much research. It was solved in the affirmative in the 1950s by the introduction of the powerful priority method in recursion theory.   == Polyadic groups == Post made a fundamental and still influential contribution to the theory of polyadic, or n-ary, groups in a long paper published in 1940. His major theorem showed that a polyadic group is the iterated multiplication of elements of a normal subgroup of a group, such that the quotient group is cyclic of order n − 1. He also demonstrated that a polyadic group operation on a set can be expressed in terms of a group operation on the same set. The paper contains many other important results.   == Selected papers == Post, Emil Leon (1936). "Finite Combinatory Processes - Formulation 1". Journal of Symbolic Logic 1: 103–105.  Post, Emil Leon (1940). "Polyadic groups". Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 48: 208–350.  Post, Emil Leon (1943). "Formal Reductions of the General Combinatorial Decision Problem". American Journal of Mathematics 65: 197–215.  Post, Emil Leon (1944). "Recursively enumerable sets of positive integers and their decision problems". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 50: 284–316.  Introduces the important concept of many-one reduction.   == See also == Arithmetical hierarchy Functional completeness List of multiple discoveries Post's inversion formula Post's lattice Post's theorem   == Notes ==   == References == Urquhart, Alasdair (2008). "Emil Post" (PDF). In Gabbay, Dov M.; Woods, John Woods. Logic from Russell to Church. Handbook of the History of Logic 5. Elsevier BV.    == Further reading == Anshel, Iris Lee; Anshel, Michael (November 1993). "From the Post-Markov Theorem Through Decision Problems to Public-Key Cryptography". The American Mathematical Monthly (Mathematical Association of America) 100 (9): 835–844.  Dedicated to Emil Post and contains special material on Post. This includes "Post's Relation to the Cryptology and Cryptographists of his Era: ... Steven Brams, the noted game theorist and political scientist, has remarked to us that the life and legacy of Emil Post represents one aspect of New York intellectual life during the first half of the twentieth century that is very much in need of deeper exploration. The authors hope that this paper serves to further this pursuit". (pp. 842–843)  Davis, Martin, ed. (1993). The Undecidable. Dover. pp. 288–406. ISBN 0-486-43228-9.  Reprints several papers by Post.  Davis, Martin (1994). "Emil L. Post: His Life and Work". Solvability, Provability, Definability: The Collected Works of Emil L. Post. Birkhäuser. pp. xi—xxviii.  A biographical essay.  Jackson, Allyn (May 2008). "An interview with Martin Davis". Notices of the AMS 55 (5): 560–571.  Much material on Emil Post from his first-hand recollections.   == External links == Emil Leon Post at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Emil Leon Post Papers 1927-1991, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

English may refer to: English, an adjective referring to something of, from, or related to England English language English studies, the study of English language and literature English language in England, a variant of the English language List of dialects of the English language  English people, a nation and ethnic group English national identity, an identity and common culture  English, Indiana, town in USA English, Kentucky, an unincorporated community English (surname), a list of notable people with the surname English English (film), a 2013 Indian Malayalam film English (cue sports term) English, a query language developed by Microdata Corporation English, an Amish term for non-Amish, regardless of ethnicity   == See also == Terminology of the British Isles Englisc Englisch British (disambiguation) England (disambiguation) All pages beginning with "English" All pages with titles containing "English"

For the actor, see Ernst Schröder (actor). Friedrich Wilhelm Karl Ernst Schröder (25 November 1841 in Mannheim, Baden, Germany – 16 June 1902 in Karlsruhe, Germany) was a German mathematician mainly known for his work on algebraic logic. He is a major figure in the history of mathematical logic (a term he may have invented), by virtue of summarizing and extending the work of George Boole, Augustus De Morgan, Hugh MacColl, and especially Charles Peirce. He is best known for his monumental Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Lectures on the algebra of logic), in 3 volumes, which prepared the way for the emergence of mathematical logic as a separate discipline in the twentieth century by systematizing the various systems of formal logic of the day.   == LifeEdit == Schröder learned mathematics at Heidelberg, Königsberg, and Zürich, under Otto Hesse, Gustav Kirchhoff, and Franz Neumann. After teaching school for a few years, he moved to the Technische Hochschule Darmstadt in 1874. Two years later, he took up a chair in mathematics at the Polytechnische Schule in Karlsruhe, where he spent the remainder of his life. He never married.   == WorkEdit == Schröder's early work on formal algebra and logic was written in ignorance of the British logicians George Boole and Augustus De Morgan. Instead, his sources were texts by Ohm, Hankel, Hermann Grassmann, and Robert Grassmann (Peckhaus 1997: 233–296). In 1873, Schröder learned of Boole's and De Morgan's work on logic. To their work he subsequently added several important concepts due to Charles Sanders Peirce, including subsumption and quantification. Schröder also made original contributions to algebra, set theory, lattice theory, ordered sets and ordinal numbers. Along with Georg Cantor, he codiscovered the Cantor–Bernstein–Schröder theorem, although Schröder's proof (1898) is flawed. Felix Bernstein (1878–1956) subsequently corrected the proof as part of his Ph.D. dissertation.  Schröder (1877) was a concise exposition of Boole's ideas on algebra and logic, which did much to introduce Boole's work to continental readers. The influence of the Grassmanns, especially Robert's little-known Formenlehre, is clear. Unlike Boole, Schröder fully appreciated duality. John Venn and Christine Ladd-Franklin both warmly cited this short book of Schröder's, and Charles Sanders Peirce used it as a text while teaching at Johns Hopkins University. Schröder's masterwork, his Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik, was published in three volumes between 1890 and 1905, at the author's expense. Vol. 2 is in two parts, the second published posthumously, edited by Eugen Müller. The Vorlesungen was a comprehensive and scholarly survey of "algebraic" (today we would say "symbolic") logic up to the end of the 19th century, one that had a considerable influence on the emergence of mathematical logic in the 20th century. The Vorlesungen is a prolix affair, only a small part of which has been translated into English. That part, along with an extended discussion of the entire Vorlesungen, is in Brady (2000). Also see Grattan-Guinness (2000: 159–76). Schröder said his aim was:   == InfluenceEdit == Schröder's influence on the early development of the predicate calculus, mainly by popularising C. S. Peirce's work on quantification, is at least as great as that of Frege or Peano. For an example of the influence of Schröder's work on English-speaking logicians of the early 20th century, see Clarence Irving Lewis (1918). The relational concepts that pervade Principia Mathematica are very much owed to the Vorlesungen, cited in Principia's Preface and in Bertrand Russell's Principles of Mathematics. Frege (1960) dismissed Schröder's work, and admiration for Frege's pioneering role has dominated subsequent historical discussion. Contrasting Frege with Schröder and C. S. Peirce, however, Hilary Putnam (1982) writes:   == See alsoEdit == Schröder's equation Schröder number   == ReferencesEdit == Primary Schröder, E., 1877. Der Operationskreis des Logikkalküls. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. Schröder, E., 1890–1905. Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik, 3 vols. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. Reprints: 1966, Chelsea; 2000, Thoemmes Press. Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik) Volume 1, Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik) Volume 2, Abt. 1 Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik) Volume 2, Abt. 2 Algebra und Logik der Relative, der Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik 3 Volume 3, Abt. 1  Schröder, E., 1898. "Über zwei Definitionen der Endlichkeit und G. Cantor'sche Sätze", Abh. Kaiserl. Leop.-Car. Akad. Naturf 71: 301–362.  Both Primary and Secondary Brady, Geraldine, 2000. From Peirce to Skolem. North Holland. Includes an English translation of parts of the Vorlesungen.  Secondary Anellis, I. H., 1990–91, "Schröder Materials at the Russell Archives," Modern Logic 1: 237–247. Dipert, R. R., 1990/91. "The life and work of Ernst Schröder," Modern Logic 1: 117–139. Frege, G., 1960, "A critical elucidation of some points in E. Schröder's Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik", translated by Geach, in Geach & Black, Translations from the philosophical writings of Gottlob Frege. Blackwell: 86–106. Original: 1895, Archiv fur systematische Philosophie 1: 433–456. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Clarence Irving Lewis, 1960 (1918). A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Dover. Peckhaus, V., 1997. Logik, Mathesis universalis und allgemeine Wissenschaft. Leibniz und die Wiederentdeckung der formalen Logik im 19. Jahrhundert. Akademie-Verlag. Peckhaus, V., 1999, "19th Century Logic between Philosophy and Mathematics," Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5: 433–450. Reprinted in Glen van Brummelen and Michael Kinyon, eds., 2005. Mathematics and the Historian's Craft. The Kenneth O. May Lectures. Springer: 203–220. Online here or here. Peckhaus, V., 2004. "Schröder's Logic" in Gabbay, Dov M., and John Woods, eds., Handbook of the History of Logic. Vol. 3: The Rise of Modern Logic: From Leibniz to Frege. North Holland: 557–609. Hilary Putnam, 1982, "Peirce the Logician," Historia Mathematica 9: 290–301. Reprinted in his 1990 Realism with a Human Face. Harvard University Press: 252–260. Online fragment. Thiel, C., 1981. "A portrait, or, how to tell Frege from Schröder," History and Philosophy of Logic 2: 21–23.   == External linksEdit == http://intranet.woodvillehs.sa.edu.au/pages/resources/maths/History/Schrdr.htm (requires login, unprovided) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Ernst Schröder", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Ernst Schröder at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Ernst Friedrich Ferdinand Zermelo (German: [ʦɛrˈmeːlo]; 27 July 1871 – 21 May 1953) was a German logician and mathematician, whose work has major implications for the foundations of mathematics. He is known for his role in developing Zermelo–Fraenkel axiomatic set theory and his proof of the well-ordering theorem.   == Life ==  Ernst Zermelo graduated from Berlin's Luisenstädtisches Gymnasium in 1889. He then studied mathematics, physics and philosophy at the universities of Berlin, Halle and Freiburg. He finished his doctorate in 1894 at the University of Berlin, awarded for a dissertation on the calculus of variations (Untersuchungen zur Variationsrechnung). Zermelo remained at the University of Berlin, where he was appointed assistant to Planck, under whose guidance he began to study hydrodynamics. In 1897, Zermelo went to Göttingen, at that time the leading centre for mathematical research in the world, where he completed his habilitation thesis in 1899. In 1910, Zermelo left Göttingen upon being appointed to the chair of mathematics at Zurich University, which he resigned in 1916. He was appointed to an honorary chair at Freiburg im Breisgau in 1926, which he resigned in 1935 because he disapproved of Adolf Hitler's regime. At the end of World War II and at his request, Zermelo was reinstated to his honorary position in Freiburg.   == Research in set theory == In 1900, in the Paris conference of the International Congress of Mathematicians, David Hilbert challenged the mathematical community with his famous Hilbert's problems, a list of 23 unsolved fundamental questions which mathematicians should attack during the coming century. The first of these, a problem of set theory, was the continuum hypothesis introduced by Cantor in 1878, and in the course of its statement Hilbert mentioned also the need to prove the well-ordering theorem. Zermelo began to work on the problems of set theory under Hilbert's influence and in 1902 published his first work concerning the addition of transfinite cardinals. By that time he had also discovered the so-called Russell paradox. In 1904, he succeeded in taking the first step suggested by Hilbert towards the continuum hypothesis when he proved the well-ordering theorem (every set can be well ordered). This result brought fame to Zermelo, who was appointed Professor in Göttingen, in 1905. His proof of the well-ordering theorem, based on the powerset axiom and the axiom of choice, was not accepted by all mathematicians, mostly because the axiom of choice was a paradigm of non-constructive mathematics. In 1908, Zermelo succeeded in producing an improved proof making use of Dedekind's notion of the "chain" of a set, which became more widely accepted; this was mainly because that same year he also offered an axiomatization of set theory. Zermelo began to axiomatize set theory in 1905; in 1908, he published his results despite his failure to prove the consistency of his axiomatic system. See the article on Zermelo set theory for an outline of this paper, together with the original axioms, with the original numbering. In 1922, Adolf Fraenkel and Thoralf Skolem independently improved Zermelo's axiom system. The resulting 8 axiom system, now called Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms (ZF), is now the most commonly used system for axiomatic set theory.   == Zermelo's navigation problem == Proposed in 1931, the Zermelo's navigation problem is a classic optimal control problem. The problem deals with a boat navigating on a body of water, originating from a point O to a destination point D. The boat is capable of a certain maximum speed, and we want to derive the best possible control to reach D in the least possible time. Without considering external forces such as current and wind, the optimal control is to follow a straight line segment from O to D. With consideration of current and wind, the shortest path from O to D is in fact, not the optimal solution.   == Bibliography == Primary literature in English translation: Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. 1904. "Proof that every set can be well-ordered," 139−41. 1908. "A new proof of the possibility of well-ordering," 183–98. 1908. "Investigations in the foundations of set theory I," 199–215.  1913. "On an Application of Set Theory to the Theory of the Game of Chess" in Rasmusen E., ed., 2001. Readings in Games and Information, Wiley-Blackwell: 79–82. 1930. "On boundary numbers and domains of sets: new investigations in the foundations of set theory" in Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 vols. Oxford University Press: 1219–33. Other books: Zermelo's Axiom of Choice, Its Origins, Development, & Influence, Volume 8 of Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, Springer Verlag, New York, 1982.   == See also == Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory Zermelo set theory Well-ordering theorem Zermelo's theorem (game theory) 14990 Zermelo, asteroid   == References == Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (2000) The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Kanamori, Akihiro (2004). "Zermelo and set theory". The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 10 (4): 487–553. doi:10.2178/bsl/1102083759. MR 2136635.  Schwalbe, Ulrich; Walker, Paul (2001). Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory (PDF). Games and Economic Behavior 34 (1). pp. 123–137. doi:10.1006/game.2000.0794.  Ebbinghaus, Heinz-Dieter (2007) Ernst Zermelo: An Approach to His Life and Work. Springer. ISBN 3-642-08050-2   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Ernst Zermelo", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Ernst Zermelo at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Zermelo Navigation

Evert Willem Beth (7 July 1908 – 12 April 1964) was a Dutch philosopher and logician, whose work principally concerned the foundations of mathematics.   == Biography == Beth was born in Almelo, a small town in the eastern Netherlands. His father had studied mathematics and physics at the University of Amsterdam, where he had been awarded a Ph.D. Evert Beth studied the same subjects at Utrecht University, but then also studied philosophy and psychology. His 1935 Ph.D. was in philosophy. In 1946, he became professor of logic and the foundations of mathematics in Amsterdam. Apart from two brief interruptions – a stint in 1951 as a research assistant to Alfred Tarski, and in 1957 as a visiting professor at Johns Hopkins University – he held the post in Amsterdam continuously until his death in 1964. His was the first academic post in his country in logic and the foundations of mathematics, and during this time he contributed actively to international cooperation in establishing logic as an academic discipline. In 1953 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He died in Amsterdam.   == Contributions to logic ==   === Definition theorem === The definition theorem states that a predicate (or function or constant) is implicitly definable if and only if it is explicitly definable. Further explanation is provided under Beth definability   === Semantic tableaux === Semantic tableaux are a proof method for formal systems. Cf. Gentzen's natural deduction and sequent calculus, or even J. Alan Robinson's resolution and Hilbert's axiomatic systems. It is considered by many to be intuitively simple, particularly for students not acquainted with the study of logic (Wilfrid Hodges for example presents semantic tableaux in his introductory textbook, Logic, and Melvin Fitting does the same in his presentation of first-order logic for computer scientists, First-order logic and automated theorem proving). One starts out with the intention of proving that a certain set  of formulae imply another formula , given a set of rules determined by the semantics of the formulae's connectives (and quantifiers, in first-order logic). The method is to assume the concurrent truth of every member of  and of  (the negation of ), and then to apply the rules to branch this list into a tree-like structure of (simpler) formulae until every possible branch contains a contradiction. At this point it will have been established that  is inconsistent, and thus that the formulae of  together imply .   === Beth models === These are a class of relational models for non-classical logic (cf. Kripke semantics).   == See also == Gerrit Mannoury Method of analytic tableaux   == Books == Evert W. Beth, The foundations of mathematics. A study in the philosophy of science. XXVΊ + 722 pp. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1959. Evert W. Beth, Epistemologie mathematique et psychologie (with J. Piaget). 352 pp. Paris P.U.F. 1961. Evert W. Beth, Formal Methods: An introduction to symbolic logic and to the study of effective operations in arithmetic and logic. D. Reidel Publishing Company / Dordecht-Holland, 1962. Evert W. Beth, Aspects of Modern Logic. D. Reidel Publishing Company / Dordecht-Holland, 1971.   == References ==   == External links == Beth Prize 2013 Evert Willem Beth Foundation

Franco Petri Burgersdijk or Franciscus Burgersdicius, born Franck Pieterszoon Burgersdijk (3 May 1590 – 19 February 1635), was a Dutch logician.   == Life == Burgersdijk was born in De Lier. He was a student of Jacchaeus (Gilbert Jack). Burgersdijk finished his studies at the University of Leiden in 1610. He left to further study theology at the University of Saumur, where he became professor of philosophy in 1614. After five years he returned to Leiden, where he accepted the chair of logic and moral philosophy, and afterwards that of natural philosophy. He died in Leiden.   == Works == Institutionum logicarum libri duo (Leiden 1626, 1635, 1646) (at one time widely used) Institutionum metaphysicarum libri duo (Leiden 1647, 1653, 1657) Idea philosophiae moralis (in Latin). Bonaventura Elzevier, Abraham Elzevier. 1644.  Idea philosophiae naturalis, sive Methodus definitionum et controversiarum phisicarum (in Latin). Bonaventura Elzevier, Abraham Elzevier. 1652.    == References == Egbert P. Bos, Franco Burgersdijk (1590-1635) Neo-aristotelian in Leiden, Editions Rodopi 1993, ISBN 90-5183-374-1. Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Burgersdyk, Francis". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == Notes ==   == External links == Works by Franco Burgersdijk at Post-Reformation Digital Library



Frederick Rowbottom (16 January 1938 – 12 October 2009) was a British logician and mathematician. The large cardinal notion of Rowbottom cardinals is named after him.   == Biography == After graduating from Cambridge University, Rowbottom studied under Howard Jerome Keisler at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, earning his Ph.D. degree in 1964, with a thesis entitled Large Cardinals and Small Constructible Sets, under the supervision of Jerome Keisler. With a recommendation from Georg Kreisel, he took a position at the University of Bristol in 1965, where he spent the rest of his professional career. He published a paper called "Some strong axioms of infinity incompatible with the axiom of constructibility" in the Annals of Mathematical Logic, 3 1971. This paper, together with his thesis, "showed that Ramsey cardinals were weaker than measurable cardinals, and that their existence implied the constructible real continuum was countable; he further proved that this followed also from weaker partition and two cardinal properties." The large cardinal notion of Rowbottom cardinals is named after him, as is the notion of a Rowbottom ultrafilter. Keith Devlin studied set theory under Rowbottom. In 1992 he and a student, Jonathan Chapman, wrote a textbook on topos theory, Relative Category Theory and Geometric Morphisms: A Logical Approach, published in Oxford Logic Guides, No. 16. Rowbottom retired in 1993 at the age of 55. Rowbottom died of heart failure in Hadfield, England, on 12 October 2009, aged 71.   == References ==

Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (November 30, 1802 – January 24, 1872) was a German philosopher and philologist.   == Early life == He was born at Eutin, near Lübeck. He was educated at the universities of Kiel, Leipzig, and Berlin. He became more and more attracted to the study of Plato and Aristotle, and his doctoral dissertation (1826) was an attempt to reach through Aristotle's criticisms a more accurate knowledge of the Platonic philosophy (Platonis de ideis et numeris doctrina ex Aristotele illustrata). He declined the offer of a classical chair at Kiel, and accepted a post as tutor to the son of an intimate friend of Karl vom Stein zum Altenstein, the Prussian minister of education. He held this position for seven years (1826–1833), occupying his leisure time with the preparation of a critical edition of Aristotle's De anima (1833; 2nd ed. by Christian Belger, 1877). In 1833 Altenstein appointed Trendelenburg extraordinary professor in Berlin, and four years later he was advanced to an ordinary professorship.   == Teaching == For nearly 40 years, he proved himself markedly successful as a teacher, during the greater part of which time he had to examine in philosophy and pedagogics all candidates for the scholastic profession in Prussia. His teaching method was highly regarded by Søren Kierkegaard who called him "one of the most sober philosophical philologists I know." In 1865 he became involved in an acrimonious controversy on the interpretation of Kant's doctrine of space with Kuno Fischer, whom he attacked in Kuno Fischer und sein Kant (1869), which drew forth the reply Anti-Trendelenburg (1870). He died at age 69. His son, Friedrich Trendelenburg, was a prominent surgeon; several medical techniques and matters are named for him.   == As philosopher == Trendelenburg's philosophizing is conditioned throughout by his loving study of Plato and Aristotle, whom he regards not as opponents but as building jointly on the broad basis of idealism. His own standpoint may be called a modern version of Aristotelianism. While denying the possibility of an absolute method and an absolute philosophy, as contended for by Hegel and others, Trendelenburg was emphatically an idealist in the ancient or Platonic sense; his whole work was devoted to the demonstration of the ideal in the real. But he maintained that the procedure of philosophy must be analytic, rising from the particular facts to the universal in which we find them explained. We divine the system of the whole from the part we know, but the process of reconstruction must remain approximative. Our position forbids the possibility of a final system. Instead, therefore, of constantly beginning afresh in speculation, it should be our duty to attach ourselves to what may be considered the permanent results of historic developments. The classical expression of these results Trendelenburg finds mainly in the Platonico-Aristotelian system. The philosophical question is stated thus: How are thought and being united in knowledge? How does thought get at being? And how does being enter into thought? Proceeding on the principle that like can only be known by like, Trendelenburg next reaches a doctrine peculiar to himself (though based upon Aristotle) that plays a central part in his speculations. Motion is the fundamental fact common to being and thought; the actual motion of the external world has its counterpart in the constructive motion involved in every instance of perception or thought. From motion he proceeds to deduce time, space and the categories of mechanics and natural science. These, being thus derived, are at once subjective and objective in their scope. It is true that matter can never be completely resolved into motion, but the irreducible remainder may be treated, like Aristotle, as an abstraction we asymptotically approach but never reach. The facts of existence, however, are not adequately explained by the mechanical categories. The ultimate interpretation of the universe can only be found in the higher category of End or final cause. Here Trendelenburg finds the dividing line, between philosophical systems. On the one side stand those that acknowledge none but efficient causes, which make force prior to thought, and explain the universe, as it were, a tergo [from the back]. This may be called, typically, Democritism. On the other side stands the organic or teleological view of the world, which interprets the parts through the idea of the whole, and sees in the efficient causes only the vehicle of ideal ends. This may be called in a wide sense Platonism. Systems like Spinozism, which seem to form a third class, neither sacrificing force to thought nor thought to force, yet by their denial of final causes inevitably fall back into the Democritic or essentially materialistic standpoint, leaving us with the great antagonism of the mechanical and the organic systems of philosophy. The latter view, which receives its first support in the facts of life, or organic nature as such, finds its culmination and ultimate verification in the ethical world, which essentially consists in the realization of ends. Trendelenburg's Naturrecht [The right of nature] may, therefore, be taken as in a manner the completion of his system, his working out of the ideal as present in the real. The ethical end is taken to be the idea of humanity, not in the abstract as formulated by Kant, but in the context of the state and of history. Law is treated throughout as the vehicle of ethical requirements. In Trendelenburg's treatment of the state, as the ethical organism in which the individual (the potential man) may be said first to emerge into actuality, we may trace his nurture on the best ideas of Hellenic antiquity.   == Works == Trendelenburg was also the author of the following: Elementa Logices Aristotelicae (1836; 9th ed., 1892; Eng. trans., 1881), a selection of passages from the Organon with Latin translation and notes, containing the substance of Aristotle's logical doctrine, supplemented by Erlauterungen zu den Elementen der Aristotelischen Logik (1842; 3rd ed. 1876). Logische Untersuchungen (1840; 3rd ed. 1870), and Die logische Frage in Hegels System (1843), important factors in the reaction against Hegel. Historische Beitrage zur Philosophie (1846–1867), in three volumes, the first of which (Geschichte der Kategorienlehre) contains a history of the doctrine of the Categories. Geschichte der Kategorienlehre I: Aristotle Kategorienlehre; II: Die Kategorienlehre in der Geschichte der Philosophie, (1846, reprint: Hildesheim, Olms, 1979). Des Naturrecht aufdem Grunde der Ethik (1860). Lücken im Völkerrecht (1870), a treatise on the defects of international law, occasioned by the war of 1870. Kleine Schriften (1871), papers dealing with non-philosophical, chiefly national and educational subjects.   == Notes ==   == References == Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg, A Contribution to the History of the Word Person: A Posthumous Treatise, Open Court Pub. Co., 1910 Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg, Outlines of Logic: An English Translation of Trendelenburg's Elementa ... (1898) Archive.org Frederick Beiser Late German Idealism: Trendelenburg and Lotze, Oxford University Press, 2013: is currently the most complete discussion of Trendelenburg's philosophy Graham Bird A Companion to Kant, John Wiley and Sons, 2009 p. 486ff has an article about Trendelenburg's dipute with Fisher over Kant's definition of space Hermann Bonitz, Zur Erinnering an Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (Berlin, 1872) Buchholtz, Georg (1904). Die ethischen Grundgedanken Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburgs. Blankenhain: Schlimper.  Ernst Bratuschek, Adolf Trendelenburg (Berlin, 1873) George Sylvester Morris in the New Englander (1874), xxxiii. Paul Kleinert, Grabrede (Berlin, 1872) Carl von Prantl, Gedächtnisrede (Munich, 1873)  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Fyodor Ippolitovich Shcherbatskoy or Stcherbatsky (Фёдор Ипполи́тович Щербатско́й) (1 October 1866 – 18 March 1942), often referred to in the literature as F. Th. Stcherbatsky, was a Russian Indologist who, in large part, was responsible for laying the foundations in the Western world for the scholarly study of Buddhism and Buddhist philosophy. He was born in Kielce, Poland (Russian Empire), and died at the Borovoye Resort in northern Kazakhstan. Stcherbatsky studied in the famous Tsarskoye Selo Lyceum (graduating in 1884), and later in the Historico-Philological Faculty of Saint Petersburg University (graduating in 1889), where Ivan Minayeff and Serge Oldenburg were his teachers. Subsequently sent abroad, he studied Indian poetry with Georg Bühler in Vienna, and Buddhist philosophy with Hermann Jacobi in Bonn. In 1897, he and Oldenburg inaugurated Bibliotheca Buddhica, a library of rare Buddhist texts. Returning from a trip to India and Mongolia, in 1903 Stcherbatsky published (in Russian) the first volume of Theory of Knowledge and Logic of the Doctrine of Later Buddhists ( 2 vols., St. Petersburg, 1903-1909 ). In 1928 he established the Institute of Buddhist Culture in Leningrad. His The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana (Leningrad, 1927), written in English, caused a sensation in the West. He followed suit with his main work in English, Buddhist Logic (2 vols., 1930–32), which has exerted an immense influence on Buddhology. Although Stcherbatsky remained less well known in his own country, his extraordinary fluency in Sanskrit and Tibetan languages won him the admiration of Jawaharlal Nehru and Rabindranath Tagore. According to Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, "Stcherbatsky did help us – the Indians – to discover our own past and to restore the right perspective of our own philosophical heritage." The Encyclopædia Britannica (2004 edition) acclaimed Stcherbatsky as "the foremost Western authority on Buddhist philosophy".   == References ==   == Bibliography == Bapat, P. V. (1943), Fedore Ippolitorich Stcherbatsky, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 24 (3/4), 284-285  – via JSTOR (subscription required) Ruegg, D. Seyfort (1971, Dedication to Th. Stcherbatsky, Journal of Indian Philosophy 1 (3), 213-216  – via JSTOR (subscription required)   == External links == The Scholarly Activity of Fyodor Stcherbatsky – an Epoch in World Buddhology (in English) Bibliotheca Buddhica (in English) Stcherbatsky's biography (in Russian)

Gaisi Takeuti (竹内 外史, Takeuchi Gaishi, born January 25, 1926) is a Japanese mathematician, known for his work in proof theory. After graduating from Tokyo University, he went to Princeton to study under Kurt Gödel. He later became a professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Takeuti was president (2003-2009) of the Kurt Gödel Society, having worked on the respected book Memoirs of a Proof Theorist: Godel and Other Logicians. His goal was to prove the consistency of the real numbers. To this end, Takeuti's conjecture speculates that a sequent formalisation of second-order logic has cut-elimination. He is also known for his work on ordinal diagrams with Akiko Kino.   == Notes == ^ Takeuti 2013. ^ Takeuti 1953. An erratum to this article was published in the same journal (24:149–156, 1954).   == References == Takeuti, Gaisi (1953). "On a generalized logic calculus". Japanese Journal of Mathematics 23: 39–96. ISSN 0075-3432.  Takeuti, Gaisi (2013) [1975]. Proof theory (Second ed.). Mineola, New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-49073-1.    == External links ==  Presidents of the Kurt Gödel Society Takeuti Symposium (contains relevant birthdate information) Google Books preview of Memoirs of a Proof Theorist: Godel and Other Logicians Logic Colloqium ’98 Proceedings (contains biography) at the Wayback Machine (archived September 26, 2006) Gaisi Takeuti at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Garlandus Compotista also known as Garland the Computist was an early medieval logician of the eleventh-century school of Liège. Little is known of his life; the Dialectica published under his name by L. M. de Rijk is now commonly attributed to Gerlandus of Besançon (early 12th century): see John Marenbon, Medieval Philosophy. An Historical and Philosophical Introduction, NY: Routledge, 2007, p. 133.   == Works == Dialectica, ed. L .M. De Rijk, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1959.   == References == Henry, D. P., That Most Subtle Question Manchester 1984 William Kneale and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic (1962), pp. 199–200

Gary R. Mar is an American philosopher specializing in Logic, the Philosophy of Mathematics, contemporary analytic philosophy, Asian American Philosophy and the Philosophy of Religion . He was the last dissertation student of the 20th century logician Alonzo Church and currently teaches at Stony Brook University. Gary Mar is co-author with Donald Kalish and Richard Montague of Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning (second edition). He is also co-author of The Philosophical Computer with Patrick Grim and Paul St. Denis. An article on the fractal images in the semantics of paradox is contained in Logic, Meaning and Computation: Essays in Memory of Alonzo Church. This work has been discussed by Ian Stewart ('A Partly True Story,' in Scientific American(Feb. 1993),110-112). This research was also presented at the Kurt Gödel Centenary Symposium, Horizons of Truth at the University of Vienna in April 2006. Gary Mar is the founding director of the Stony Brook Philosophy Department Logic Lab at Stony Brook and the founding director of the Asian American Center at Stony Brook, after being the catalyst for the donation of the Charles B. Wang Asian American Center at Stony Brook University, which at that time was the largest donation in the history of the public education system in New York State. In 2003 he co-taught a graduate seminar with Noam Chomsky through the President's Rotating Stars Program, and in 2005 he was instrumental in the awarding of an honorary doctorate awarded the documentary filmmaker Loni Ding, whose landmark series Ancestors in the Americas [1] is the only in-depth documentary on the history of Asians in the Americas. Gary Mar has been the recipient of the Chancellor’s and President’s Award for Excellence in Teaching (1993), the Alumni Association Outstanding Professor Award (1995), a Pew Foundation Research Fellowship (1995-1996), and Stony Brook’s Academy of Scholar-Teachers (1996).   == Publications == Books Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning(second edition), co-authored with Donald Kalish and Richard Montague (HBJ, 1980, republished by Oxford University Press, 2000) The Philosophical Computer: Exploratory Essays in Philosophical Computer Modeling co-authored with Patrick Grim and Paul St. Denis (M.I.T. Press, 1998) Selected articles on logic, philosophical logic and game theory 'Gödel Incompleteness, Complexity and Chaos', proceedings from the Kurt Gödel Centenary Symposium, Senate Hall, University of Vienna, April 28-29th, 2006, Collegium Logicum of the Kurt Gödel Society. 'Church’s Theorem and Randomness, Logic, Meaning and Computation: Essays In Memory of Alonzo Church,' edited by C. Anthony Anderson and Mikhail Zeleny, Kluwer Academic Publishers: Netherlands, 2001, 479-90. 'Evolutionary Game Theory, Morality and Darwinism,' a commentary on Brian Skyrm’s paper in Evolutionary Origins of Morality: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives, edited by Leonard D. Katz, Imprint Academic, 2000. 'What the Liar Taught Achilles,' The Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 28, 1999, 29-46. 'Chaos in Cooperation: Continuous-Valued Prisoner’s Dilemmas in Infinite-Valued Logic,' in the International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, no. 4 (1994), 943-958. 'Real Life' in the International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, vol. 6, no. 11, 1996, 2077-2086. 'Pattern and Chaos: New Images in the Semantics of Paradox,' in Noûs. vol. XXV (Dec. 1991), 659-693. Selected articles on Asian American philosophy Editor, 'Approaching the Tenth Anniversary of 9/11 Through Asian American Eyes', American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 10, no. 2, Spring 2011, with articles by George Lipsitz, “Affinities, Affiliations, and Alliances: Why Asian American Perspectives Matter Now”, Mary Watkins, “The Shame of Forcibly Displacing Others: 9/11 and the Criminalization of Immigration”, and Gary Okihiro, “The Alien: Reflections on the Border Ten Years After 9/11”. 'Angel Island Reflections,' American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 10, no. 1, Fall 2010. 'New Media and New Pedagogy in Asian American Studies: Strategies for Transforming Knowledge into a Pedagogy of Empowerment', American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 3, no. 1, Fall 2003, 19-32. 'What Does Asian American Studies Have to Do With Philosophy?', American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 2, no. 2, Spring 2003, 27-30. Selected articles in the philosophy of religion 'The Modal Unity of Anselm’s Proslogion,' in Faith and Philosophy, vol. 13, no. 1 (Jan. 1996), 50-67. 'Why ‘Cantorian’ Arguments Against the Existence of God Do Not Work', in the International Philosophical Quarterly, vol. XXXIII (Dec. 1993), 429-442. 'What Euthyphro Couldn’t Have Said,' in Faith and Philosophy no. 4 (July 1987), 241-261.   == External links == Faculty Page


Georg Henrik von Wright (Swedish: [ˈjeːɔrj ˈhɛnːrɪk fɔnˈvrɪkːt], 14 June 1916 – 16 June 2003) was a Finnish philosopher, who succeeded Ludwig Wittgenstein as professor at the University of Cambridge. He published in English, Finnish, German, and in Swedish, having belonged to the Swedish-speaking minority of Finland. Von Wright was of both Finnish and 17th-century Scottish ancestry. Von Wright's writings come under two broad categories. The first is analytic philosophy and philosophical logic in the Anglo-American vein. His 1951 books, An Essay in Modal Logic and Deontic Logic, were landmarks in the postwar rise of formal modal logic and its deontic version. He was an authority on Wittgenstein, editing his later works. He was the leading figure in the Finnish philosophy of his time, specializing in philosophical logic, philosophical analysis, philosophy of action, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, and the close study of Charles Sanders Peirce. The other vein in von Wright's writings is moralist and pessimist. During the last twenty years of his life, under the influence of Oswald Spengler, Jürgen Habermas and the Frankfurt School's reflections about modern Rationality, he wrote prolifically. His best known article from this period is entitled The Myth of Progress, and it questions whether our apparent material and technological progress can really be considered "progress". In the last year of his life, among his other honorary degrees, he held an honorary degree at the University of Bergen.   == Works ==  The Logical Problem of Induction, PhD thesis, 31 May 1941 Den logiska empirismen (Logical Empirism), in Swedish, 1945 Über Wahrscheinlichkeit (On Chance), in German, 1945 An Essay in Modal Logic, 1951 A Treatise on Induction and Probability, 1951 Deontic Logic, 1951 Tanke och förkunnelse (Thought and Preaching), in Swedish, 1955 Logical Studies, 1957 Logik, filosofi och språk (Logic, philosophy and language), in Swedish, 1957 The Varieties of Goodness, 1963. (1958-60 Gifford Lectures in the University of St. Andrews, online) He considered this his best and most personal work. Norm and Action, 1963 (1958-60 Gifford Lectures, St. Andrews, online) The Logic of Preference, 1963 Essay om naturen, människan och den vetenskaplig-tekniska revolutionen (Essay on Nature, Man and the Scientific-Technological Revolution), in Swedish, 1963 An Essay in Deontic Logic, 1968 Time, Change and Contradiction, 1969 Tieteen filosofian kaksi perinnettä (The Two Traditions of the Philosophy of Science), in Finnish, 1970 Explanation and Understanding, 1971 Causality and Determinism, 1974 Handlung, Norm und Intention (Action, Norm and Intention), in German, 1977 Humanismen som livshållning (Humanism as an approach to Life), in Swedish, 1978 Freedom and Determination, 1980 Wittgenstein, 1982 Philosophical Papers I-III, 1983–1984 Of Human Freedom, 1984. (1984 Tanner Lectures at the University of Helsinki, online) Filosofisia tutkielmia (Philosophical Dissertations), in Finnish, 1985 Vetenskapen och förnuftet (Science and Reason), in Swedish, 1986 Minervan Pöllö (The Owl of Minerva), in Finnish, 1991 Myten om framsteget (The Myth of Progress), in Swedish, 1993 The Tree of Knowledge, 1993 Att förstå sin samtid (To Understand one's own Time), in Swedish, 1994 Six Essays in Philosophical Logic, 1996 Viimeisistä ajoista. Ajatusleikki (On the End Times. A Thought Experiment.), in Finnish, 1997 Logiikka ja humanismi (Logic and Humanism), in Finnish, 1998 In the Shadow of Descartes, 1998 Mitt liv som jag minns det (My Life as I Remember it), in Swedish, 2001 Von Wright edited posthumous publications by Wittgenstein, which were published by Blackwell (unless otherwise stated): 1961. Notebooks 1914-1916. 1967. Zettel (Translated into English as Culture and Value). 1969. On Certainty. 1971. ProtoTractatus—An Early Version of Tractatus Logico- Philosophicus. Cornell University Press. 1973. Letters to C.K. Ogden with Comments on the English Translation of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. 1974. Letters to Russell, Keynes and Moore. 1978 (1956). Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. 1980. Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology. Vols 1,2. 1980. Culture and Value (English translation of Zettel). 1982. Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology, Vol. 1. Vol. 2, 1992.   == References ==   == See also == Georg Henrik von Wright in 375 humanists – 13 May 2015. Faculty of Arts, University of Helsinki.

Georg Kreisel FRS (September 15, 1923 – March 1, 2015) was an Austrian-born mathematical logician who studied and worked in Great Britain and America. Kreisel was born in Graz and came from a Jewish background; his family sent him to the United Kingdom before the Anschluss, where he studied mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, and then, during World War II, worked on military subjects. After the war he returned to Cambridge and received his doctorate. He taught at the University of Reading until 1954 and then worked at the Institute for Advanced Study from 1955 to 1957. Subsequently he taught at Stanford University and the University of Paris. Kreisel was appointed a professor at Stanford University in 1962 and remained on the faculty there until he retired in 1985. Kreisel worked in various areas of logic, and especially in proof theory, where he is known for his so-called "unwinding" program, whose aim was to extract constructive content from superficially non-constructive proofs. Kreisel was elected to the Royal Society in 1966; Kreisel remained a close friend of Francis Crick whom he had met in the Royal Navy during WWII. While a student at Cambridge, Kreisel was the student most respected by Ludwig Wittgenstein. Ray Monk writes, "In 1944--when Kreisel was still only twenty-one--Wittgenstein shocked Rush Rhees by declaring Kreisel to be the most able philosopher he had ever met who was also a mathematician." Kreisel was also a close friend of the Anglo-Irish philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch. They met at Cambridge in 1947 during Murdoch's year of study there. Peter Conradi reports that Murdoch transcribed Kreisel's letters into her journals over the next fifty years. According to Conradi, "For half a century she nonetheless records variously Kreisel's brilliance, wit and sheer 'dotty' solipsistic strangeness, his amoralism, cruelty, ambiguous vanity and obscenity." Murdoch dedicated her 1971 novel An Accidental Man to Kreisel and he became a (partial) model for several characters in other novels, including Marcus Vallar in The Message to the Planet and Guy Openshaw in Nuns and Soldiers.* After retirement Kreisel lived in Salzburg, Austria. He wrote several biographies of mathematicians including Kurt Gödel, Bertrand Russell and Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer. He died in Salzburg, aged 91.   == Anecdotes == While teaching at The University of Reading, he would frequently take the train into London. There was a particularly fast train that was timed just right for the shows in London, and he would go to the station at that time. He checked the timetable one day, and that train was canceled. But out of habit one day he showed up at the station at the usual time and the train was there. It seems that it was going from Bristol to London, stopping at Reading only to get water. He got on the train anyway, and from then on took that train regularly. One day he was accosted by the conductor after he got on. "The train doesn't stop here sir!" "In that case I didn't get on here."    == References ==   == External links and further reading == Kreiseliana: About and Around George Kreisel, Piergiorgio Odifreddi, ed., Wellesley, Massachusetts: A. K. Peters, 1996. ISBN 1-56881-061-X. Kreisel, lambda calculus, a windmill and a castle Contains personal recollections about Kreisel by his student Henk Barendregt. Georg Kreisel at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (/ˈheɪɡəl/; German: [ˈɡeɔɐ̯k ˈvɪlhɛlm ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈheːɡəl]; August 27, 1770 – November 14, 1831) was a German philosopher of the late Enlightenment. He achieved wide renown in his day and, while primarily influential within the continental tradition of philosophy, has become increasingly influential in the analytic tradition as well. Although he remains a divisive figure, his canonical stature within Western philosophy is universally recognized. Hegel's principal achievement is his development of a distinctive articulation of idealism sometimes termed "absolute idealism," in which the dualisms of, for instance, mind and nature and subject and object are overcome. His philosophy of spirit conceptually integrates psychology, the state, history, art, religion, and philosophy. His account of the master–slave dialectic has been highly influential, especially in 20th-century France. Of special importance is his concept of spirit (Geist: sometimes also translated as "mind") as the historical manifestation of the logical concept and the "sublation" (Aufhebung: integration without elimination or reduction) of seemingly contradictory or opposing factors; examples include the apparent opposition between nature and freedom and between immanence and transcendence. Hegel has been seen in the 21st century as the originator of the thesis, antithesis, synthesis triad; however this originated with Johann Fichte.  Hegel has influenced many thinkers and writers whose own positions vary widely. Karl Barth described Hegel as a "Protestant Aquinas," while Maurice Merleau-Ponty wrote that "All the great philosophical ideas of the past century—the philosophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existentialism, and psychoanalysis—had their beginnings in Hegel."   == Life ==   === Early years ===   ==== Childhood ==== Hegel was born on August 27, 1770 in Stuttgart, in the Duchy of Württemberg in southwestern Germany. Christened Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, he was known as Wilhelm to his close family. His father, Georg Ludwig, was Rentkammersekretär (secretary to the revenue office) at the court of Karl Eugen, Duke of Württemberg. Hegel's mother, Maria Magdalena Louisa (née Fromm), was the daughter of a lawyer at the High Court of Justice at the Württemberg court. She died of a "bilious fever" (Gallenfieber) when Hegel was thirteen. Hegel and his father also caught the disease but narrowly survived. Hegel had a sister, Christiane Luise (1773–1832), and a brother, Georg Ludwig (1776–1812), who was to perish as an officer in Napoleon's Russian campaign of 1812. At the age of three Hegel went to the "German School." When he entered the "Latin School" two years later, he already knew the first declension, having been taught it by his mother. In 1776, Hegel entered Stuttgart's Gymnasium Illustre. During his adolescence Hegel read voraciously, copying lengthy extracts in his diary. Authors he read include the poet Klopstock and writers associated with the Enlightenment, such as Christian Garve and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. Hegel's studies at the Gymnasium were concluded with his Abiturrede ("graduation speech") entitled "The abortive state of art and scholarship in Turkey."   ==== Tübingen (1788–93) ==== At the age of eighteen Hegel entered the Tübinger Stift (a Protestant seminary attached to the University of Tübingen), where two fellow students were to become vital to his development - poet Friedrich Hölderlin, and philosopher-to-be Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling. Sharing a dislike for what they regarded as the restrictive environment of the Seminary, the three became close friends and mutually influenced each other's ideas. All greatly admired Hellenic civilization, and Hegel additionally steeped himself in Rousseau and Lessing during this time. They watched the unfolding of the French Revolution with shared enthusiasm. Schelling and Hölderlin immersed themselves in theoretical debates on Kantian philosophy, from which Hegel remained aloof. Hegel at this time envisaged his future as that of a Popularphilosoph, i.e., a "man of letters" who serves to make the abstruse ideas of philosophers accessible to a wider public; his own felt need to engage critically with the central ideas of Kantianism did not come until 1800.   ==== Bern (1793–96) and Frankfurt (1797–1801) ==== Having received his theological certificate (Konsistorialexamen) from the Tübingen Seminary, Hegel became Hofmeister (house tutor) to an aristocratic family in Bern (1793–96). During this period he composed the text which has become known as the "Life of Jesus" and a book-length manuscript titled "The Positivity of the Christian Religion." His relations with his employers becoming strained, Hegel accepted an offer mediated by Hölderlin to take up a similar position with a wine merchant's family in Frankfurt, where he moved in 1797. Here Hölderlin exerted an important influence on Hegel's thought. While in Frankfurt Hegel composed the essay "Fragments on Religion and Love." In 1799, he wrote another essay entitled "The Spirit of Christianity and Its Fate," unpublished during his lifetime. Also in 1797, the unpublished and unsigned manuscript of "The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism" was written. It was written in Hegel's hand but thought to have been authored by Hegel, Schelling, Hölderlin, or by all three.   === Career years ===   ==== Jena, Bamberg and Nuremberg: 1801–1816 ==== In 1801, Hegel came to Jena with the encouragement of his old friend Schelling, who held the position of Extraordinary Professor at the University there. Hegel secured a position at the University as a Privatdozent (unsalaried lecturer) after submitting a Habilitationsschrift (dissertation) on the orbits of the planets. Later in the year Hegel's first book, The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy, was completed. He lectured on "Logic and Metaphysics" and gave joint lectures with Schelling on an "Introduction to the Idea and Limits of True Philosophy" and held a "Philosophical Disputorium." In 1802, Schelling and Hegel founded a journal, the Kritische Journal der Philosophie ("Critical Journal of Philosophy"), to which they each contributed pieces until the collaboration was ended when Schelling left for Würzburg in 1803. In 1805, the University promoted Hegel to the position of Extraordinary Professor (unsalaried), after Hegel wrote a letter to the poet and minister of culture Johann Wolfgang Goethe protesting at the promotion of his philosophical adversary Jakob Friedrich Fries ahead of him. Hegel attempted to enlist the help of the poet and translator Johann Heinrich Voß to obtain a post at the newly renascent University of Heidelberg, but failed; to his chagrin, Fries was later in the same year made Ordinary Professor (salaried) there.  His finances drying up quickly, Hegel was now under great pressure to deliver his book, the long-promised introduction to his System. Hegel was putting the finishing touches to this book, the Phenomenology of Spirit, as Napoleon engaged Prussian troops on October 14, 1806, in the Battle of Jena on a plateau outside the city. On the day before the battle, Napoleon entered the city of Jena. Hegel recounted his impressions in a letter to his friend Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer:  I saw the Emperor – this world-soul – riding out of the city on reconnaissance. It is indeed a wonderful sensation to see such an individual, who, concentrated here at a single point, astride a horse, reaches out over the world and masters it ... this extraordinary man, whom it is impossible not to admire.  Although Napoleon chose not to close down Jena as he had other universities, the city was devastated and students deserted the university in droves, making Hegel's financial prospects even worse. The following February Hegel's landlady Christiana Burkhardt (who had been abandoned by her husband) gave birth to their son Georg Ludwig Friedrich Fischer (1807–31). In March 1807, aged 37, Hegel moved to Bamberg, where Niethammer had declined and passed on to Hegel an offer to become editor of a newspaper, the Bamberger Zeitung. Hegel, unable to find more suitable employment, reluctantly accepted. Ludwig Fischer and his mother (whom Hegel may have offered to marry following the death of her husband) stayed behind in Jena. He was then, in November 1808, again through Niethammer, appointed headmaster of a Gymnasium in Nuremberg, a post he held until 1816. While in Nuremberg Hegel adapted his recently published Phenomenology of Spirit for use in the classroom. Part of his remit being to teach a class called "Introduction to Knowledge of the Universal Coherence of the Sciences," Hegel developed the idea of an encyclopedia of the philosophical sciences, falling into three parts (logic, philosophy of nature, and philosophy of spirit). Hegel married Marie Helena Susanna von Tucher (1791–1855), the eldest daughter of a Senator, in 1811. This period saw the publication of his second major work, the Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik; 3 vols., 1812, 1813, 1816), and the birth of his two legitimate sons, Karl Friedrich Wilhelm (1813–1901) and Immanuel Thomas Christian (1814–1891).   ==== Heidelberg and Berlin: 1816–1831 ==== Having received offers of a post from the Universities of Erlangen, Berlin, and Heidelberg, Hegel chose Heidelberg, where he moved in 1816. Soon after, in April 1817, his illegitimate son Ludwig Fischer (now ten years old) joined the Hegel household, having thus far spent his childhood in an orphanage. (Ludwig's mother had died in the meantime.) Hegel published The Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline (1817) as a summary of his philosophy for students attending his lectures at Heidelberg.  In 1818, Hegel accepted the renewed offer of the chair of philosophy at the University of Berlin, which had remained vacant since Johann Gottlieb Fichte's death in 1814. Here he published his Philosophy of Right (1821). Hegel devoted himself primarily to delivering his lectures; his lecture courses on aesthetics, the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of history, and the history of philosophy were published posthumously from lecture notes taken by his students. His fame spread and his lectures attracted students from all over Germany and beyond. Hegel was appointed Rector of the University in 1830, when he was 60. He was deeply disturbed by the riots for reform in Berlin in that year. In 1831, Frederick William III decorated him for his service to the Prussian state. In August 1831 a cholera epidemic reached Berlin and Hegel left the city, taking up lodgings in Kreuzberg. Now in a weak state of health, Hegel seldom went out. As the new semester began in October, Hegel returned to Berlin, with the (mistaken) impression that the epidemic had largely subsided. By November 14 Hegel was dead. The physicians pronounced the cause of death as cholera, but it is likely he died from a different gastrointestinal disease. He is said to have uttered the last words "And he didn't understand me" before expiring. In accordance with his wishes, Hegel was buried on November 16 in the Dorotheenstadt cemetery next to Fichte and Solger. Hegel's son Ludwig Fischer had died shortly before while serving with the Dutch army in Batavia; the news of his death never reached his father. Early the following year Hegel's sister Christiane committed suicide by drowning. Hegel's remaining two sons - Karl, who became a historian, and Immanuel, who followed a theological path - lived long and safeguarded their father's Nachlaß and produced editions of his works.   == Thought ==   === Freedom === Hegel's thinking can be understood as a constructive development within the broad tradition that includes Plato and Immanuel Kant. To this list one could add Proclus, Meister Eckhart, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Plotinus, Jakob Böhme, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. What all these thinkers share, which distinguishes them from materialists like Epicurus, the Stoics, and Thomas Hobbes, and from empiricists like David Hume, is that they regard freedom or self-determination both as real and as having important ontological implications, for soul or mind or divinity. This focus on freedom is what generates Plato's notion (in the Phaedo, Republic, and Timaeus) of the soul as having a higher or fuller kind of reality than inanimate objects possess. While Aristotle criticizes Plato's "Forms," he preserves Plato's cornerstones of the ontological implications for self-determination: ethical reasoning, the soul's pinnacle in the hierarchy of nature, the order of the cosmos, and an assumption with reasoned arguments for a prime mover. Kant imports Plato's high esteem of individual sovereignty to his considerations of moral and noumenal freedom, as well as to God. All three find common ground on the unique position of humans in the scheme of things, known by the discussed categorical differences from animals and inanimate objects. In his discussion of "Spirit" in his Encyclopedia, Hegel praises Aristotle's On the Soul as "by far the most admirable, perhaps even the sole, work of philosophical value on this topic." In his Phenomenology of Spirit and his Science of Logic, Hegel's concern with Kantian topics such as freedom and morality, and with their ontological implications, is pervasive. Rather than simply rejecting Kant's dualism of freedom versus nature, Hegel aims to subsume it within "true infinity," the "Concept" (or "Notion:" Begriff), "Spirit," and "ethical life" in such a way that the Kantian duality is rendered intelligible, rather than remaining a brute "given." The reason why this subsumption takes place in a series of concepts is that Hegel's method, in his Science of Logic and his Encyclopedia, is to begin with basic concepts like Being and Nothing, and to develop these through a long sequence of elaborations, including those already mentioned. In this manner, a solution that is reached, in principle, in the account of "true infinity" in the Science of Logic's chapter on "Quality," is repeated in new guises at later stages, all the way to "Spirit" and "ethical life," in the third volume of the Encyclopedia. In this way, Hegel intends to defend the germ of truth in Kantian dualism against reductive or eliminative programs like those of materialism and empiricism. Like Plato, with his dualism of soul versus bodily appetites, Kant pursues the mind's ability to question its felt inclinations or appetites and to come up with a standard of "duty" (or, in Plato's case, "good") which transcends bodily restrictiveness. Hegel preserves this essential Platonic and Kantian concern in the form of infinity going beyond the finite (a process that Hegel in fact relates to "freedom" and the "ought"), the universal going beyond the particular (in the Concept), and Spirit going beyond Nature. And Hegel renders these dualities intelligible by (ultimately) his argument in the "Quality" chapter of the "Science of Logic." The finite has to become infinite in order to achieve reality. The idea of the absolute excludes multiplicity so the subjective and objective must achieve synthesis to become whole. This is because, as Hegel suggests by his introduction of the concept of "reality," what determines itself—rather than depending on its relations to other things for its essential character—is more fully "real" (following the Latin etymology of "real:" more "thing-like") than what does not. Finite things don't determine themselves, because, as "finite" things, their essential character is determined by their boundaries, over against other finite things. So, in order to become "real," they must go beyond their finitude ("finitude is only as a transcending of itself" The result of this argument is that finite and infinite—and, by extension, particular and universal, nature and freedom—don't face one another as two independent realities, but instead the latter (in each case) is the self-transcending of the former. Rather than stress the distinct singularity of each factor that complements and conflicts with others—without explanation—the relationship between finite and infinite (and particular and universal, and nature and freedom) becomes intelligible as a progressively developing and self-perfecting whole.   === Progress === The obscure writings of Böhme had a strong effect on Hegel. Böhme had written that the Fall of Man was a necessary stage in the evolution of the universe. This evolution was, itself, the result of God's desire for complete self-awareness. Hegel was fascinated by the works of Kant, Rousseau, and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and by the French Revolution. Modern philosophy, culture, and society seemed to Hegel fraught with contradictions and tensions, such as those between the subject and object of knowledge, mind and nature, self and Other, freedom and authority, knowledge and faith, the Enlightenment and Romanticism. Hegel's main philosophical project was to take these contradictions and tensions and interpret them as part of a comprehensive, evolving, rational unity that, in different contexts, he called "the absolute idea" or absolute knowledge. According to Hegel, the main characteristic of this unity was that it evolved through and manifested itself in contradiction and negation. Contradiction and negation have a dynamic quality that at every point in each domain of reality—consciousness, history, philosophy, art, nature, society—leads to further development until a rational unity is reached that preserves the contradictions as phases and sub-parts by lifting them up (Aufhebung) to a higher unity. This whole is mental because it is mind that can comprehend all of these phases and sub-parts as steps in its own process of comprehension. It is rational because the same, underlying, logical, developmental order underlies every domain of reality and is ultimately the order of self-conscious rational thought, although only in the later stages of development does it come to full self-consciousness. The rational, self-conscious whole is not a thing or being that lies outside of other existing things or minds. Rather, it comes to completion only in the philosophical comprehension of individual existing human minds who, through their own understanding, bring this developmental process to an understanding of itself. Hegel's thought is revolutionary to the extent that it is a philosophy of absolute negation: as long as absolute negation is at the center, systematization remains open, and makes it possible for human beings to become subjects. "Mind" and "Spirit" are the common English translations of Hegel's use of the German "Geist." Some have argued that either of these terms overly "psychologize" Hegel, implying a kind of disembodied, solipsistic consciousness like ghost or "soul." Geist combines the meaning of spirit—as in god, ghost or mind—with an intentional force. In Hegel's early philosophy of nature (draft manuscripts written during his time at the University of Jena), Hegel's notion of "Geist" was tightly bound to the notion of "Aether" from which Hegel also derived the concepts of space and time; however in his later works (after Jena) Hegel did not explicitly use his old notion of "Aether" any more. Central to Hegel's conception of knowledge and mind (and therefore also of reality) was the notion of identity in difference, that is that mind externalizes itself in various forms and objects that stand outside of it or opposed to it, and that, through recognizing itself in them, is "with itself" in these external manifestations, so that they are at one and the same time mind and other-than-mind. This notion of identity in difference, which is intimately bound up with his conception of contradiction and negativity, is a principal feature differentiating Hegel's thought from that of other philosophers.   === Civil society ===  Hegel made the distinction between civil society and state in his Elements of the Philosophy of Right. In this work, civil society (Hegel used the term "bürgerliche Gesellschaft" though it is now referred to as Zivilgesellschaft in German to emphasize a more inclusive community) was a stage in the dialectical relationship that occurs between Hegel's perceived opposites, the macro-community of the state and the micro-community of the family. Broadly speaking, the term was split, like Hegel's followers, to the political left and right. On the left, it became the foundation for Karl Marx's civil society as an economic base; to the right, it became a description for all non-state aspects of society, including culture, society and politics. This liberal distinction between political society and civil society was followed by Alexis de Tocqueville. In fact, Hegel's distinctions as to what he meant by civil society are often unclear. For example, while it seems to be the case that he felt that a civil-society such as the German society in which he lived was an inevitable movement of the dialectic, he made way for the crushing of other types of "lesser" and not fully realized types of civil society, as these societies were not fully conscious or aware, as it were, as to the lack of progress in their societies. Thus, it was perfectly legitimate in the eyes of Hegel for a conqueror, such as Napoleon, to come along and destroy that which was not fully realized.   === Heraclitus === According to Hegel, "Heraclitus is the one who first declared the nature of the infinite and first grasped nature as in itself infinite, that is, its essence as process. The origin of philosophy is to be dated from Heraclitus. His is the persistent Idea that is the same in all philosophers up to the present day, as it was the Idea of Plato and Aristotle." For Hegel, Heraclitus's great achievements were to have understood the nature of the infinite, which for Hegel includes understanding the inherent contradictoriness and negativity of reality, and to have grasped that reality is becoming or process, and that "being" and "nothingness" are mere empty abstractions. According to Hegel, Heraclitus's "obscurity" comes from his being a true (in Hegel's terms "speculative") philosopher who grasped the ultimate philosophical truth and therefore expressed himself in a way that goes beyond the abstract and limited nature of common sense and is difficult to grasp by those who operate within common sense. Hegel asserted that in Heraclitus he had an antecedent for his logic: "... there is no proposition of Heraclitus which I have not adopted in my logic." Hegel cites a number of fragments of Heraclitus in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy. One to which he attributes great significance is the fragment he translates as "Being is not more than Non-being," which he interprets to mean  Sein und Nichts sei dasselbe Being and non-being are the same.  Heraclitus does not form any abstract nouns from his ordinary use of "to be" and "to become" and in that fragment seems to be opposing any identity A to any other identity B, C, etc., which is not-A. Hegel, however, interprets not-A as not existing at all, not nothing at all, which cannot be conceived, but indeterminate or "pure" being without particularity or specificity. Pure being and pure non-being or nothingness are for Hegel pure abstractions from the reality of becoming, and this is also how he interprets Heraclitus. This interpretation of Heraclitus cannot be ruled out, but even if present is not the main gist of his thought. For Hegel, the inner movement of reality is the process of God thinking, as manifested in the evolution of the universe of nature and thought; that is, Hegel argued that, when fully and properly understood, reality is being thought by God as manifested in a person's comprehension of this process in and through philosophy. Since human thought is the image and fulfillment of God's thought, God is not ineffable (so incomprehensible as to be unutterable) but can be understood by an analysis of thought and reality. Just as humans continually correct their concepts of reality through a dialectical process, so God himself becomes more fully manifested through the dialectical process of becoming. For his god Hegel does not take the logos of Heraclitus but refers rather to the nous of Anaxagoras, although he may well have regarded them the same, as he continues to refer to god's plan, which is identical to God. Whatever the nous thinks at any time is actual substance and is identical to limited being, but more remains to be thought in the substrate of non-being, which is identical to pure or unlimited thought. The universe as becoming is therefore a combination of being and non-being. The particular is never complete in itself but to find completion is continually transformed into more comprehensive, complex, self-relating particulars. The essential nature of being-for-itself is that it is free "in itself;" that is, it does not depend on anything else, such as matter, for its being. The limitations represent fetters, which it must constantly be casting off as it becomes freer and more self-determining. Although Hegel began his philosophizing with commentary on the Christian religion and often expresses the view that he is a Christian, his ideas of God are not acceptable to some Christians, although he has had a major influence on 19th- and 20th-century theology. At the same time, an atheistic version of his thought was adopted instead by some Marxists, who, stripping away the concepts of divinity, styled what was left dialectical materialism, which some saw as originating in Heraclitus.   === Religion === As a graduate of a Protestant seminary, Hegel's theological concerns were reflected in many of his writings and lectures. Hegel's thoughts on the person of Jesus Christ stood out from the theologies of the Enlightenment. In his posthumously published, Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Part 3, Hegel is shown as being particularly interested with the demonstrations of God's existence and the ontological proof. He espouses that, "God is not an abstraction but a concrete God ... God, considered in terms of his eternal Idea, has to generate the Son, has to distinguish himself from himself; he is the process of differentiating, namely, love and Spirit." This means that Jesus as the Son of God is posited by God over against himself as other. Hegel sees both a relational unity and a metaphysical unity between Jesus and God the Father. To Hegel, Jesus is both divine and Human. Hegel further attests that God (as Jesus) not only died, but "... rather, a reversal takes place: God, that is to say, maintains himself in the process, and the latter is only the death of death. God rises again to life, and thus things are reversed." Walter Kaufmann has argued that there was great stress on the sharp criticisms of traditional Christianity appearing in Hegel's so-called early theological writings. Kaufmann admits that Hegel treated many distinctively Christian themes, and "sometimes could not resist equating" his conception of spirit (Geist) "with God, instead of saying clearly: in God I do not believe; spirit suffices me." Kaufmann also points out that Hegel's references to God or to the divine—and also to spirit—drew on classical Greek as well as Christian connotations of the terms. Kaufmann goes on:  "In addition to his beloved Greeks, Hegel saw before him the example of Spinoza and, in his own time, the poetry of Goethe, Schiller, and Hölderlin, who also liked to speak of gods and the divine. So he, too, sometimes spoke of God and, more often, of the divine; and because he occasionally took pleasure in insisting that he was really closer to this or that Christian tradition than some of the theologians of his time, he has sometimes been understood to have been a Christian"  According to Hegel himself, his philosophy was consistent with Christianity. This led Hegelian Carl Friedrich Göschel to prepare a treatise to demonstrate the presence of the doctrine of immortality in Hegel's philosophy.   == Works == Hegel published four books during his lifetime: the Phenomenology of Spirit (or Phenomenology of Mind), his account of the evolution of consciousness from sense-perception to absolute knowledge, published in 1807; the Science of Logic, the logical and metaphysical core of his philosophy, in three volumes, published in 1812, 1813, and 1816 (with a revised Book One published in 1831); Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, a summary of his entire philosophical system, which was originally published in 1816 and revised in 1827 and 1830; and the Elements of the Philosophy of Right, his political philosophy, published in 1820. During the last ten years of his life, he did not publish another book but thoroughly revised the Encyclopedia (second edition, 1827; third, 1830). In his political philosophy, he criticized Karl Ludwig von Haller's reactionary work, which claimed that laws were not necessary. He also published some articles early in his career and during his Berlin period. A number of other works on the philosophy of history, religion, aesthetics, and the history of philosophy were compiled from the lecture notes of his students and published posthumously.   == Legacy ==  There are views of Hegel's thought as a representation of the summit of early 19th-century Germany's movement of philosophical idealism. It would come to have a profound impact on many future philosophical schools, including schools that opposed Hegel's specific dialectical idealism, such as Existentialism, the historical materialism of Marx, historism, and British Idealism. Hegel's influence was immense both within philosophy and in the other sciences. Throughout the 19th century many chairs of philosophy around Europe were held by Hegelians, and Søren Kierkegaard, Ludwig Feuerbach, Marx, and Friedrich Engels—among many others—were all deeply influenced by, but also strongly opposed to, many of the central themes of Hegel's philosophy. Scholars continue to find and point out Hegelian influences and approaches in a wide range of theoretical and/or learned works, such as Carl von Clausewitz's magnum opus on strategic thought, On War (1831). After less than a generation, Hegel's philosophy was suppressed and even banned by the Prussian right-wing, and was firmly rejected by the left-wing in multiple official writings. After the period of Bruno Bauer, Hegel's influence did not make itself felt again until the philosophy of British Idealism and the 20th century Hegelian Western Marxism that began with György Lukács. The more recent movement of communitarianism has a strong Hegelian influence.   === Reading Hegel === Some of Hegel's writing were intended for those with advanced knowledge of philosophy, although his Encyclopedia was intended as a textbook in a university course. Nevertheless, Hegel assumes that his readers are well-versed in Western philosophy. Especially crucial are Aristotle, Kant, and Kant's immediate successors, most prominently Fichte, and Schelling. Those without this background would be well-advised to begin with one of the many general introductions to his thought. As is always the case, difficulties are magnified for those reading him in translation. In fact, Hegel himself argues in his Science of Logic that the German language was particularly conducive to philosophical thought. One especially difficult aspect of Hegel's work is his innovation in logic. In response to Immanuel Kant's challenge to the limits of pure reason, Hegel develops a radically new form of logic, which he called speculative. The difficulty in reading Hegel was perceived in Hegel's own day, and persists into the 21st century. To understand Hegel fully requires paying attention to his critique of standard logic, such as the law of contradiction and the law of the excluded middle. Many philosophers who came after Hegel and were influenced by him, whether adopting or rejecting his ideas, did so without fully absorbing his new speculative or dialectical logic. According to Walter Kaufmann, the basic idea of Hegel's works, especially the Phenomenology of the Spirit is that a philosopher should not "confine him or herself to views that have been held but penetrate these to the human reality they reflect." In other words, it is not enough to consider propositions, or even the content of consciousness; "it is worthwhile to ask in every instance what kind of spirit would entertain such propositions, hold such views, and have such a consciousness. Every outlook in other words, is to be studied not merely as an academic possibility but as an existential reality."   === Left and Right Hegelianism === Some historians have spoken of Hegel's influence as represented by two opposing camps. The Right Hegelians, the allegedly direct disciples of Hegel at the Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, advocated a Protestant orthodoxy and the political conservatism of the post-Napoleon Restoration period. The Left Hegelians, also known as the Young Hegelians, interpreted Hegel in a revolutionary sense, leading to an advocation of atheism in religion and liberal democracy in politics. In more recent studies, however, this paradigm has been questioned. No Hegelians of the period ever referred to themselves as "Right Hegelians;" that was a term of insult originated by David Strauss, a self-styled Left Hegelian. Critiques of Hegel offered from the Left Hegelians radically diverted Hegel's thinking into new directions and eventually came to form a disproportionately large part of the literature on and about Hegel. The Left Hegelians also spawned Marxism, which inspired global movements, encompassing the Russian Revolution, the Chinese Revolution, and myriad revolutionary practices up until the present moment. Twentieth-century interpretations of Hegel were mostly shaped by British Idealism, logical positivism, Marxism, and Fascism. The Italian Fascist Giovanni Gentile, according to Benedetto Croce, "... holds the honor of having been the most rigorous neo-Hegelian in the entire history of Western philosophy and the dishonor of having been the official philosopher of Fascism in Italy." However, since the fall of the USSR, a new wave of Hegel scholarship arose in the West, without the preconceptions of the prior schools of thought. Walter Jaeschke and Otto Pöggeler in Germany, as well as Peter Hodgson and Howard Kainz in America are notable for their recent contributions to post-USSR thinking about Hegel.   === Triads ===  In previous modern accounts of Hegelianism (to undergraduate classes, for example), especially those formed prior to the Hegel renaissance, Hegel's dialectic was most often characterized as a three-step process, "thesis, antithesis, synthesis;" namely, that a "thesis" (e.g. the French Revolution) would cause the creation of its "antithesis" (e.g. the Reign of Terror that followed), and would eventually result in a "synthesis" (e.g. the constitutional state of free citizens). However, Hegel used this classification only once, and he attributed the terminology to Kant. The terminology was largely developed earlier by Fichte. It was spread by Heinrich Moritz Chalybäus in accounts of Hegelian philosophy, and since then the terms have been used as descriptive of this type of framework. The "thesis-antithesis-synthesis" approach gives the sense that things or ideas are contradicted or opposed by things that come from outside them. To the contrary, the fundamental notion of Hegel's dialectic is that things or ideas have internal contradictions. From Hegel's point of view, analysis or comprehension of a thing or idea reveals that underneath its apparently simple identity or unity is an underlying inner contradiction. This contradiction leads to the dissolution of the thing or idea in the simple form in which it presented itself and to a higher-level, more complex thing or idea that more adequately incorporates the contradiction. The triadic form that appears in many places in Hegel (e.g. being-nothingness-becoming, immediate-mediate-concrete, abstract-negative-concrete) is about this movement from inner contradiction to higher-level integration or unification. For Hegel, reason is but "speculative," not "dialectical." Believing that the traditional description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of thesis-antithesis-synthesis was mistaken, a few scholars, like Raya Dunayevskaya, have attempted to discard the triadic approach altogether. According to their argument, although Hegel refers to "the two elemental considerations: first, the idea of freedom as the absolute and final aim; secondly, the means for realising it, i.e. the subjective side of knowledge and will, with its life, movement, and activity" (thesis and antithesis) he doesn't use "synthesis" but instead speaks of the "Whole": "We then recognised the State as the moral Whole and the Reality of Freedom, and consequently as the objective unity of these two elements." Furthermore, in Hegel's language, the "dialectical" aspect or "moment" of thought and reality, by which things or thoughts turn into their opposites or have their inner contradictions brought to the surface, what he called "Aufhebung," is only preliminary to the "speculative" (and not "synthesizing") aspect or "moment," which grasps the unity of these opposites or contradiction. It is widely admitted today that the old-fashioned description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of "thesis-antithesis-synthesis" is inaccurate. Nevertheless, such is the persistence of this misnomer that the model and terminology survive in a number of scholarly works.   === Renaissance === In the last half of the 20th century, Hegel's philosophy underwent a major renaissance. This was due to (a) the rediscovery and reevaluation of Hegel as a possible philosophical progenitor of Marxism by philosophically oriented Marxists, (b) a resurgence of the historical perspective that Hegel brought to everything, and (c) an increasing recognition of the importance of his dialectical method. Lukács' History and Class Consciousness (1923) helped to reintroduce Hegel into the Marxist canon. This sparked a renewed interest in Hegel reflected in the work of Herbert Marcuse, Adorno, Ernst Bloch, Dunayevskaya, Alexandre Kojève and Gotthard Günther among others. Marcuse, in Reason and Revolution (1941), made the case for Hegel as a revolutionary and criticized Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse's thesis that Hegel was a totalitarian. The Hegel renaissance also highlighted the significance of Hegel's early works, i.e., those written before the Phenomenology of Spirit. The direct and indirect influence of Kojève's lectures and writings (on the Phenomenology of Spirit, in particular) mean that it is not possible to understand most French philosophers from Jean-Paul Sartre to Jacques Derrida without understanding Hegel. U.S. neoconservative political theorist Francis Fukuyama's controversial book The End of History and the Last Man (1992) was heavily influenced by Kojève. The Swiss theologian Hans Küng has also advanced contemporary scholarship in Hegel studies. Beginning in the 1960s, Anglo-American Hegel scholarship has attempted to challenge the traditional interpretation of Hegel as offering a metaphysical system: this has also been the approach of Z.A. Pelczynski and Shlomo Avineri. This view, sometimes referred to as the 'non-metaphysical option', has had a decided influence on many major English language studies of Hegel in the past 40 years. Late 20th-century literature in Western Theology that is friendly to Hegel includes works by such writers as Walter Kaufmann (1966), Dale M. Schlitt (1984), Theodore Geraets (1985), Philip M. Merklinger (1991), Stephen Rocker (1995), and Cyril O'Regan (1995). Recently, two prominent American philosophers, John McDowell and Robert Brandom (sometimes referred to as the Pittsburgh Hegelians), have produced philosophical works exhibiting a marked Hegelian influence. Each is avowedly influenced by the late Wilfred Sellars, also of Pittsburgh, who referred to his seminal work, Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind (1956) as a series of "incipient Méditations Hegeliennes" (in homage to Edmund Husserl's 1931 treatise, Meditations Cartesiennes). Beginning in the 1990s, after the fall of the USSR, a fresh reading of Hegel took place in the West. For these scholars, fairly well represented by the Hegel Society of America and in cooperation with German scholars such as Otto Pöggeler and Walter Jaeschke, Hegel's works should be read without preconceptions. Marx plays little-to-no role in these new readings. Some American philosophers associated with this movement include Lawrence Stepelevich, Rudolf Siebert, Richard Dien Winfield, and Theodore Geraets.   === Criticism === Criticism of Hegel has been widespread in the 19th and the 20th centuries; a diverse range of individuals including Arthur Schopenhauer, Marx, Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Bertrand Russell, G. E. Moore, Eric Voegelin and A. J. Ayer have challenged Hegelian philosophy from a variety of perspectives. Among the first to take a critical view of Hegel's system was the 19th Century German group known as the Young Hegelians, which included Feuerbach, Marx, Engels, and their followers. In Britain, the Hegelian British Idealism school (members of which included Francis Herbert Bradley, Bernard Bosanquet, and, in the United States, Josiah Royce) was challenged and rejected by analytic philosophers Moore and Russell; Russell, in particular, considered "almost all" of Hegel's doctrines to be false. Regarding Hegel's interpretation of history, Russell commented, "Like other historical theories, it required, if it was to be made plausible, some distortion of facts and considerable ignorance." Logical positivists such as Ayer and the Vienna Circle criticized both Hegelian philosophy and its supporters, such as Bradley. Hegel's contemporary Schopenhauer was particularly critical, and wrote of Hegel's philosophy as "a pseudo-philosophy paralyzing all mental powers, stifling all real thinking." Kierkegaard criticized Hegel's 'absolute knowledge' unity. Scientist Ludwig Boltzmann also criticized the obscure complexity of Hegel's works, referring to Hegel's writing as an "unclear thoughtless flow of words." In a similar vein, Robert Pippin wrote that Hegel had "the ugliest prose style in the history of the German language." Russell stated in his Unpopular Essays (1950) and A History of Western Philosophy (1945) that Hegel was "the hardest to understand of all the great philosophers." Karl Popper wrote that "there is so much philosophical writing (especially in the Hegelian school) which may justly be criticized as meaningless verbiage." Popper also makes the claim in the second volume of The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) that Hegel's system formed a thinly veiled justification for the absolute rule of Frederick William III, and that Hegel's idea of the ultimate goal of history was to reach a state approximating that of 1830s Prussia. Popper further proposed that Hegel's philosophy served not only as an inspiration for communist and fascist totalitarian governments of the 20th century, whose dialectics allow for any belief to be construed as rational simply if it could be said to exist. Scholars such as Kaufmann and Shlomo Avineri have criticized Popper's theories about Hegel. Isaiah Berlin listed Hegel as one of the six architects of modern authoritarianism who undermined liberal democracy, along with Rousseau, Claude Adrien Helvétius, Fichte, Saint-Simon, and Joseph de Maistre. Walter Kaufmann has argued that as unlikely as it may sound, it is not the case that Hegel was unable to write clearly, but that Hegel felt that "he must and should not write in the way in which he was gifted." Voegelin argued that Hegel should be understood not as a philosopher, but as a "sorcerer" -- i.e., as a mystic and Hermetic thinker. This concept of Hegel as a Hermetic thinker was elaborated by Glenn Alexander Magee who argued that interpreting Hegel's body of work as an expression of mysticism and Hermetic ideas leads to a more accurate understanding of Hegel.   == Selected works ==   === Published during Hegel's lifetime === Differenz des Fichteschen und Schellingschen Systems der Philosophie, 1801 The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy, tr. H. S. Harris and Walter Cerf, 1977 Phänomenologie des Geistes, 1807 Phenomenology of Mind, tr. J. B. Baillie, 1910; 2nd ed. 1931 Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, tr. A. V. Miller, 1977 Phenomenology of Spirit, translated by Terry Pinkard, 2012 Wissenschaft der Logik, 1812, 1813, 1816, "Doctrine of Being" revised 1831 Science of Logic, tr. W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers, 2 vols., 1929; tr. A. V. Miller, 1969; tr. George di Giovanni, 2010 Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften, 1817; 2nd ed. 1827; 3rd ed. 1830 (Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences) (Pt. I:) The Logic of Hegel, tr. William Wallace, 1874, 2nd ed. 1892; tr. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting and H. S. Harris, 1991; tr. Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel O. Dahlstrom 2010 (Pt. II:) Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, tr. A. V. Miller, 1970 (Pt. III:) Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, tr. William Wallace, 1894; rev. by A. V. Miller, 1971; rev. 2007 by Michael Inwood Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, 1821 Elements of the Philosophy of Right, tr. T. M. Knox, 1942; tr. H. B. Nisbet, ed. Allen W. Wood, 1991   === Published posthumously === Lectures on Aesthetics Lectures on the Philosophy of History (also translated as Lectures on the Philosophy of World History) 1837 Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Lectures on the History of Philosophy   == See also ==   == Notes ==   == Further reading == The secondary literature on Hegel is vast. The following references provide only a small selection of introductory English-language texts. (For a more complete listing, see the External links section or the Library resources box to the right.)   == External links == Andrew Chitty's (University of Sussex) Hegel Bibliography « Der Instinkt der Vernünftigkeit » and other texts - Works on Hegel in Université du Québec site (in French) Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Hegel, as the National Philosopher of Germany (1874) Karl Rosenkranz, Granville Stanley Hall, William Torrey Harris, Gray, Baker & Co. 1874 Hegel page in 'The History Guide' Hegel.net - freely available resources (under the GNU FDL) Hegel's Aesthetics entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Lowenberg J., (1913) "The Life of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel". in German classics of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. New York: German Publication Society.   === Audio === Works by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)    === Video === Hegel: The First Cultural Psychologist 2007 from Vimeo Andy Blunden   === Societies === The Hegel Society of America The Hegel Society of Great Britain   === Hegel texts online === Works by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at Internet Archive Philosophy of History Introduction Hegel's The Philosophy of Right Hegel's The Philosophy of History Hegel by HyperText, reference archive on Marxists.org Phenomenology of Spirit. translated by Terry Pinkard (2012)

George Boole (/ˈbuːl/; 2 November 1815 – 8 December 1864) was an English mathematician, educator, philosopher and logician. He worked in the fields of differential equations and algebraic logic, and is best known as the author of The Laws of Thought (1854) which contains Boolean algebra. Boolean logic is credited with laying the foundations for the information age. Boole maintained that:  No general method for the solution of questions in the theory of probabilities can be established which does not explicitly recognise, not only the special numerical bases of the science, but also those universal laws of thought which are the basis of all reasoning, and which, whatever they may be as to their essence, are at least mathematical as to their form.   == Early lifeEdit ==  Boole was born in Lincoln, Lincolnshire, England, the son of John Boole (1779–1848), a shoemaker and Mary Ann Joyce. He had a primary school education, and received lessons from his father, but had little further formal and academic teaching. William Brooke, a bookseller in Lincoln, may have helped him with Latin, which he may also have learned at the school of Thomas Bainbridge. He was self-taught in modern languages. At age 16 Boole became the breadwinner for his parents and three younger siblings, taking up a junior teaching position in Doncaster at Heigham's School. He taught briefly in Liverpool. Boole participated in the local Mechanics Institute, the Lincoln Mechanics' Institution, which was founded in 1833. Edward Bromhead, who knew John Boole through the institution, helped George Boole with mathematics books and he was given the calculus text of Sylvestre François Lacroix by the Rev. George Stevens Dickson of St Swithin's Lincoln. Without a teacher, it took him many years to master calculus. At age 19, Boole successfully established his own school in Lincoln. Four years later he took over Hall's Academy in Waddington, outside Lincoln, following the death of Robert Hall. In 1840 he moved back to Lincoln, where he ran a boarding school. Boole became a prominent local figure, an admirer of John Kaye, the bishop. He took part in the local campaign for early closing. With E. R. Larken and others he set up a building society in 1847. He associated also with the Chartist Thomas Cooper, whose wife was a relation.  From 1838 onwards Boole was making contacts with sympathetic British academic mathematicians and reading more widely. He studied algebra in the form of symbolic methods, as these were understood at the time, and began to publish research papers.   == Professor at CorkEdit ==  Boole's status as mathematician was recognised by his appointment in 1849 as the first professor of mathematics at Queen's College, Cork (now University College Cork (UCC)) in Ireland. He met his future wife, Mary Everest, there in 1850 while she was visiting her uncle John Ryall who was Professor of Greek. They married some years later in 1855. He maintained his ties with Lincoln, working there with E. R. Larken in a campaign to reduce prostitution.   == Honours and awardsEdit == Boole was awarded the Keith Medal by the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1855  and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1857. He received honorary degrees of LL.D. from the University of Dublin and the University of Oxford.   == DeathEdit == In late November 1864, Boole walked, in heavy rain, from his home at Lichfield Cottage in Ballintemple to the university, a distance of three miles, and lectured wearing his wet clothes. He soon became ill, developing a severe cold and high fever. As his wife believed that remedies should resemble their cause, she put her husband to bed and poured buckets of water over him – the wet having brought on his illness. Boole's condition worsened and on 8 December 1864, he died of fever-induced pleural effusion. He was buried in the Church of Ireland cemetery of St Michael's, Church Road, Blackrock (a suburb of Cork). There is a commemorative plaque inside the adjoining church.   == WorksEdit == Boole's first published paper was Researches in the theory of analytical transformations, with a special application to the reduction of the general equation of the second order, printed in the Cambridge Mathematical Journal in February 1840 (Volume 2, no. 8, pp. 64–73), and it led to a friendship between Boole and Duncan Farquharson Gregory, the editor of the journal. His works are in about 50 articles and a few separate publications. In 1841 Boole published an influential paper in early invariant theory. He received a medal from the Royal Society for his memoir of 1844, On A General Method of Analysis. It was a contribution to the theory of linear differential equations, moving from the case of constant coefficients on which he had already published, to variable coefficients. The innovation in operational methods is to admit that operations may not commute. In 1847 Boole published The Mathematical Analysis of Logic , the first of his works on symbolic logic.   === Differential equationsEdit === Boole completed two systematic treatises on mathematical subjects during his lifetime. The Treatise on Differential Equations appeared in 1859, and was followed, the next year, by a Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences, a sequel to the former work.   === AnalysisEdit === In 1857, Boole published the treatise On the Comparison of Transcendents, with Certain Applications to the Theory of Definite Integrals, in which he studied the sum of residues of a rational function. Among other results, he proved what is now called Boole's identity:  for any real numbers ak > 0, bk, and t > 0. Generalisations of this identity play an important role in the theory of the Hilbert transform.   === Symbolic logicEdit ===  In 1847 Boole published the pamphlet Mathematical Analysis of Logic. He later regarded it as a flawed exposition of his logical system, and wanted An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities to be seen as the mature statement of his views. Contrary to widespread belief, Boole never intended to criticise or disagree with the main principles of Aristotle's logic. Rather he intended to systematise it, to provide it with a foundation, and to extend its range of applicability. Boole's initial involvement in logic was prompted by a current debate on quantification, between Sir William Hamilton who supported the theory of "quantification of the predicate", and Boole's supporter Augustus De Morgan who advanced a version of De Morgan duality, as it is now called. Boole's approach was ultimately much further reaching than either sides' in the controversy. It founded what was first known as the "algebra of logic" tradition. Among his many innovations is his principle of wholistic reference, which was later, and probably independently, adopted by Gottlob Frege and by logicians who subscribe to standard first-order logic. A 2003 article provides a systematic comparison and critical evaluation of Aristotelian logic and Boolean logic; it also reveals the centrality of wholistic reference in Boole's philosophy of logic.   ==== Boole's 1854 definition of universe of discourseEdit ==== In every discourse, whether of the mind conversing with its own thoughts, or of the individual in his intercourse with others, there is an assumed or expressed limit within which the subjects of its operation are confined. The most unfettered discourse is that in which the words we use are understood in the widest possible application, and for them the limits of discourse are co-extensive with those of the universe itself. But more usually we confine ourselves to a less spacious field. Sometimes, in discoursing of men we imply (without expressing the limitation) that it is of men only under certain circumstances and conditions that we speak, as of civilised men, or of men in the vigour of life, or of men under some other condition or relation. Now, whatever may be the extent of the field within which all the objects of our discourse are found, that field may properly be termed the universe of discourse. Furthermore, this universe of discourse is in the strictest sense the ultimate subject of the discourse.   ==== Treatment of addition in logicEdit ==== Boole conceived of "elective symbols" of his kind as an algebraic structure. But this general concept was not available to him: he did not have the segregation standard in abstract algebra of postulated (axiomatic) properties of operations, and deduced properties. His work was a beginning to the algebra of sets, again not a concept available to Boole as a familiar model. His pioneering efforts encountered specific difficulties, and the treatment of addition was an obvious difficulty in the early days. Boole replaced the operation of multiplication by the word 'and' and addition by the word 'or'. But in Boole's original system, + was a partial operation: in the language of set theory it would correspond only to disjoint union of subsets. Later authors changed the interpretation, commonly reading it as exclusive or, or in set theory terms symmetric difference; this step means that addition is always defined. In fact there is the other possibility, that + should be read as disjunction, This other possibility extends from the disjoint union case, where exclusive or and non-exclusive or both give the same answer. Handling this ambiguity was an early problem of the theory, reflecting the modern use of both Boolean rings and Boolean algebras (which are simply different aspects of one type of structure). Boole and Jevons struggled over just this issue in 1863, in the form of the correct evaluation of x + x. Jevons argued for the result x, which is correct for + as disjunction. Boole kept the result as something undefined. He argued against the result 0, which is correct for exclusive or, because he saw the equation x + x = 0 as implying x = 0, a false analogy with ordinary algebra.   === Probability theoryEdit === The second part of the Laws of Thought contained a corresponding attempt to discover a general method in probabilities. Here the goal was algorithmic: from the given probabilities of any system of events, to determine the consequent probability of any other event logically connected with those events.   == LegacyEdit == Boolean algebra is named after him, as is the crater Boole on the Moon. The keyword Bool represents a Boolean datatype in many programming languages, though Pascal and Java, among others, both use the full name Boolean. The library, underground lecture theatre complex and the Boole Centre for Research in Informatics at University College Cork are named in his honour. A road called Boole Heights in Bracknell, Berkshire is named after him.   === 19th-century developmentEdit === Boole's work was extended and refined by a number of writers, beginning with William Stanley Jevons. Augustus De Morgan had worked on the logic of relations, and Charles Sanders Peirce integrated his work with Boole's during the 1870s. Other significant figures were Platon Sergeevich Poretskii, and William Ernest Johnson. The conception of a Boolean algebra structure on equivalent statements of a propositional calculus is credited to Hugh MacColl (1877), in work surveyed 15 years later by Johnson. Surveys of these developments were published by Ernst Schröder, Louis Couturat, and Clarence Irving Lewis.   === 20th-century developmentEdit ===  In 1921 the economist John Maynard Keynes published a book on probability theory, A Treatise of Probability. Keynes believed that Boole had made a fundamental error in his definition of independence which vitiated much of his analysis. In his book The Last Challenge Problem, David Miller provides a general method in accord with Boole's system and attempts to solve the problems recognised earlier by Keynes and others. Theodore Hailperin showed much earlier that Boole had used the correct mathematical definition of independence in his worked out problems  Boole's work and that of later logicians initially appeared to have no engineering uses. Claude Shannon attended a philosophy class at the University of Michigan which introduced him to Boole's studies. Shannon recognised that Boole's work could form the basis of mechanisms and processes in the real world and that it was therefore highly relevant. In 1937 Shannon went on to write a master's thesis, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in which he showed how Boolean algebra could optimise the design of systems of electromechanical relays then used in telephone routing switches. He also proved that circuits with relays could solve Boolean algebra problems. Employing the properties of electrical switches to process logic is the basic concept that underlies all modern electronic digital computers. Victor Shestakov at Moscow State University (1907–1987) proposed a theory of electric switches based on Boolean logic even earlier than Claude Shannon in 1935 on the testimony of Soviet logicians and mathematicians Sofya Yanovskaya, Gaaze-Rapoport, Roland Dobrushin, Lupanov, Medvedev and Uspensky, though they presented their academic theses in the same year, 1938. But the first publication of Shestakov's result took place only in 1941 (in Russian). Hence, Boolean algebra became the foundation of practical digital circuit design; and Boole, via Shannon and Shestakov, provided the theoretical grounding for the Information Age.   === 21st-century celebrationEdit ===  2015 sees the 200th anniversary of George Boole's birth, in 1815. To mark the bicentenary year, University College Cork will join admirers of Boole around the world to celebrate his life and legacy. UCC's George Boole 200 project, features events, student outreach activities and academic conferences on Boole's legacy in the digital age, including a new edition of Desmond MacHale's 1985 biography The Life and Work of George Boole: A Prelude to the Digital Age (Cork University Press, 2014). The search engine Google marked the 200th anniversary of his birth on 2 November 2015 with an algebraic reimaging of its Google Doodle.   == ViewsEdit == Boole's views were given in four published addresses: The Genius of Sir Isaac Newton; The Right Use of Leisure; The Claims of Science; and The Social Aspect of Intellectual Culture. The first of these was from 1835, when Charles Anderson-Pelham, 1st Earl of Yarborough gave a bust of Newton to the Mechanics' Institute in Lincoln. The second justified and celebrated in 1847 the outcome of the successful campaign for early closing in Lincoln, headed by Alexander Leslie-Melville, of Branston Hall. The Claims of Science was given in 1851 at Queen's College, Cork. The Social Aspect of Intellectual Culture was also given in Cork, in 1855 to the Cuvierian Society. Though his biographer Des MacHale describes Boole as an "agnostic deist", Boole read a wide variety of Christian theology. Combining his interests in mathematics and theology, he compared the Christian trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost with the three dimensions of space, and was attracted to the Hebrew conception of God as an absolute unity. Boole considered converting to Judaism but in the end was said to have chosen Unitarianism. Boole came to speak against a what he saw as "prideful" scepticism, and instead, favoured the belief in a "Supreme Intelligent Cause", He also declared "I firmly believe, for the accomplishment of a purpose of the Divine Mind." In addition, he stated that he perceived "teeming evidences of surrounding design" and concluded that "the course of this world is not abandoned to chance and inexorable fate." Two influences on Boole were later claimed by his wife, Mary Everest Boole: a universal mysticism tempered by Jewish thought, and Indian logic. Mary Boole stated that an adolescent mystical experience provided for his life's work:  My husband told me that when he was a lad of seventeen a thought struck him suddenly, which became the foundation of all his future discoveries. It was a flash of psychological insight into the conditions under which a mind most readily accumulates knowledge [...] For a few years he supposed himself to be convinced of the truth of "the Bible" as a whole, and even intended to take orders as a clergyman of the English Church. But by the help of a learned Jew in Lincoln he found out the true nature of the discovery which had dawned on him. This was that man's mind works by means of some mechanism which "functions normally towards Monism."  In Ch. 13 of Laws of Thought Boole used examples of propositions from Baruch Spinoza and Samuel Clarke. The work contains some remarks on the relationship of logic to religion, but they are slight and cryptic. Boole was apparently disconcerted at the book's reception just as a mathematical toolset:  George afterwards learned, to his great joy, that the same conception of the basis of Logic was held by Leibnitz, the contemporary of Newton. De Morgan, of course, understood the formula in its true sense; he was Boole's collaborator all along. Herbert Spencer, Jowett, and Robert Leslie Ellis understood, I feel sure; and a few others, but nearly all the logicians and mathematicians ignored [953] the statement that the book was meant to throw light on the nature of the human mind; and treated the formula entirely as a wonderful new method of reducing to logical order masses of evidence about external fact.  Mary Boole claimed that there was profound influence — via her uncle George Everest — of Indian thought on George Boole, as well as on Augustus De Morgan and Charles Babbage:  Think what must have been the effect of the intense Hinduizing of three such men as Babbage, De Morgan, and George Boole on the mathematical atmosphere of 1830–65. What share had it in generating the Vector Analysis and the mathematics by which investigations in physical science are now conducted?   == FamilyEdit == In 1855 he married Mary Everest (niece of George Everest), who later wrote several educational works on her husband's principles. The Booles had five daughters: Mary Lucy Margret (1856–1908) who married the mathematician and author Charles Howard Hinton and had four children: George (1882–1943), Eric (*1884), William (1886–1909) and Sebastian (1887–1923) inventor of the Jungle gym. Sebastian had three children: Jean Hinton (married name Rosner) (1917–2002) peace activist. William H. Hinton (1919–2004) visited China in the 1930s and 40s and wrote an influential account of the Communist land reform. Joan Hinton (1921–2010) worked for the Manhattan Project and lived in China from 1948 until her death on 8 June 2010; she was married to Sid Engst.  Margaret, (1858 – 1935) married Edward Ingram Taylor, an artist. Their elder son Geoffrey Ingram Taylor became a mathematician and a Fellow of the Royal Society. Their younger son Julian was a professor of surgery.  Alicia (1860–1940), who made important contributions to four-dimensional geometry Lucy Everest (1862–1904), who was first female professor of chemistry in England Ethel Lilian (1864–1960), who married the Polish scientist and revolutionary Wilfrid Michael Voynich and was the author of the novel The Gadfly.   == See alsoEdit ==  Boolean algebra, a logical calculus of truth values or set membership Boolean algebra (structure), a set with operations resembling logical ones Boolean circuit, a mathematical model for digital logical circuits. Boolean data type is a data type, having two values (usually denoted true and false) Boolean expression, an expression in a programming language that produces a Boolean value when evaluated Boolean function, a function that determines Boolean values or operators Boolean model (probability theory), a model in stochastic geometry Boolean network, a certain network consisting of a set of Boolean variables whose state is determined by other variables in the network Boolean processor, a 1-bit variables computing unit Boolean satisfiability problem Boole's syllogistic is a logic invented by 19th-century British mathematician George Boole, which attempts to incorporate the "empty set." List of Boolean algebra topics   == ReferencesEdit ==   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Roger Parsons' article on Boole George Boole: A 200-Year View by Stephen Wolfram. Works by George Boole at Project Gutenberg Works by or about George Boole at Internet Archive George Boole's work as first Professor of Mathematics in University College, Cork, Ireland George Boole Website Author profile in the database zbMATH

George Stephen Boolos (September 4, 1940 – May 27, 1996) was an American philosopher and a mathematical logician who taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   == LifeEdit == Boolos graduated from Princeton University in 1961 with an A.B. in mathematics. Oxford University awarded him the B.Phil in 1963. In 1966, he obtained the first Ph.D. in philosophy ever awarded by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, under the direction of Hilary Putnam. After teaching three years at Columbia University, he returned to MIT in 1969, where he spent the rest of his career until his death from cancer. A charismatic speaker well known for his clarity and wit, he once delivered a lecture (1994b) giving an account of Gödel's second incompleteness theorem, employing only words of one syllable. At the end of his viva, Hilary Putnam asked him, "And tell us, Mr. Boolos, what does the analytical hierarchy have to do with the real world?" Without hesitating Boolos replied, "It's part of it". An expert on puzzles of all kinds, in 1993 Boolos reached the London Regional Final of The Times crossword competition. His score was one of the highest ever recorded by an American. He wrote a paper on "the hardest logic puzzle ever"—one of many puzzles created by Raymond Smullyan.   == WorkEdit == Boolos coauthored with Richard Jeffrey the first three editions of the classic university text on mathematical logic, Computability and Logic. The book is now in its fifth edition, the last two editions updated by John P. Burgess. Kurt Gödel wrote the first paper on provability logic, which applies modal logic—the logic of necessity and possibility—to the theory of mathematical proof, but Gödel never developed the subject to any significant extent. Boolos was one of its earliest proponents and pioneers, and he produced the first book-length treatment of it, The Unprovability of Consistency, published in 1979. The solution of a major unsolved problem some years later led to a new treatment, The Logic of Provability, published in 1993. The modal-logical treatment of provability helped demonstrate the "intensionality" of Gödel's Second Incompleteness Theorem, meaning that the theorem's correctness depends on the precise formulation of the provability predicate. These conditions were first identified by David Hilbert and Paul Bernays in their Grundlagen der Arithmetik. The unclear status of the Second Theorem was noted for several decades by logicians such as Georg Kreisel and Leon Henkin, who asked whether the formal sentence expressing "This sentence is provable" (as opposed to the Gödel sentence, "This sentence is not provable") was provable and hence true. Martin Löb showed Henkin's conjecture to be true, as well as identifying an important "reflection" principle also neatly codified using the modal logical approach. Some of the key provability results involving the representation of provability predicates had been obtained earlier using very different methods by Solomon Feferman. Boolos was an authority on the 19th-century German mathematician and philosopher Gottlob Frege. Boolos proved a conjecture due to Crispin Wright (and also proved, independently, by others), that the system of Frege's Grundgesetze, long thought vitiated by Russell's paradox, could be freed of inconsistency by replacing one of its axioms, the notorious Basic Law V with Hume's Principle. The resulting system has since been the subject of intense work. Boolos argued that if one reads the second-order variables in monadic second-order logic plurally, then second-order logic can be interpreted as having no ontological commitment to entities other than those over which the first-order variables range. The result is plural quantification. David Lewis employed plural quantification in his Parts of Classes to derive a system in which Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory and the Peano axioms were all theorems. While Boolos is usually credited with plural quantification, Peter Simons (1982) has argued that the essential idea can be found in the work of Stanislaw Leśniewski. Shortly before his death, Boolos chose 30 of his papers to be published in a book. The result is perhaps his most highly regarded work, his posthumous Logic, Logic, and Logic. This book reprints much of Boolos's work on the rehabilitation of Frege, as well as a number of his papers on set theory, second-order logic and nonfirstorderizability, plural quantification, proof theory, and three short insightful papers on Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem. There are also papers on Dedekind, Cantor, and Russell.   == PublicationsEdit ==   === BooksEdit === 1979. The Unprovability of Consistency: An Essay in Modal Logic. Cambridge University Press. 1990 (editor). Meaning and Method: Essays in Honor of Hilary Putnam. Cambridge University Press. 1993. The Logic of Provability. Cambridge University Press. 1998 (Richard Jeffrey and John P. Burgess, eds.). Logic, Logic, and Logic. Harvard University Press. 2007 (1974) (with Richard Jeffrey and John P. Burgess). Computability and Logic, 4th ed. Cambridge University Press.   === ArticlesEdit === LLL = reprinted in Logic, Logic, and Logic. FPM = reprinted in Demopoulos, W., ed., 1995. Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard Univ. Press. 1968 (with Hilary Putnam), "Degrees of unsolvability of constructible sets of integers," Journal of Symbolic Logic 33: 497-513. 1969, "Effectiveness and natural languages" in Sidney Hook, ed., Language and Philosophy. New York University Press. 1970, "On the semantics of the constructible levels," ' 16: 139-148. 1970a, "A proof of the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 11: 76-78. 1971, "The iterative conception of set," Journal of Philosophy 68: 215-231. Reprinted in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam, eds.,1984. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, 2nd ed. Cambridge Univ. Press: 486-502. LLL 1973, "A note on Evert Willem Beth's theorem," Bulletin de l'Academie Polonaise des Sciences 2: 1-2. 1974, "Arithmetical functions and minimization," Zeitschrift für mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 20: 353-354. 1974a, "Reply to Charles Parsons' 'Sets and classes'." First published in LLL. 1975, "Friedman's 35th problem has an affirmative solution," Notices of the American Mathematical Society 22: A-646. 1975a, "On Kalmar's consistency proof and a generalization of the notion of omega-consistency," Archiv für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 17: 3-7. 1975b, "On second-order logic," Journal of Philosophy 72: 509-527. LLL. 1976, "On deciding the truth of certain statements involving the notion of consistency," Journal of Symbolic Logic 41: 779-781. 1977, "On deciding the provability of certain fixed point statements," Journal of Symbolic Logic 42: 191-193. 1979, "Reflection principles and iterated consistency assertions," Journal of Symbolic Logic 44: 33-35. 1980, "Omega-consistency and the diamond," Studia Logica 39: 237-243. 1980a, "On systems of modal logic with provability interpretations," Theoria 46: 7-18. 1980b, "Provability in arithmetic and a schema of Grzegorczyk," Fundamenta Mathematicae 106: 41-45. 1980c, "Provability, truth, and modal logic," Journal of Philosophical Logic 9: 1-7. 1980d, Review of Raymond M. Smullyan, What is the Name of This Book? The Philosophical Review 89: 467-470. 1981, "For every A there is a B," Linguistic Inquiry 12: 465-466. 1981a, Review of Robert M. Solovay, Provability Interpretations of Modal Logic," Journal of Symbolic Logic 46: 661-662. 1982, "Extremely undecidable sentences," Journal of Symbolic Logic 47: 191-196. 1982a, "On the nonexistence of certain normal forms in the logic of provability," Journal of Symbolic Logic 47: 638-640. 1984, "Don't eliminate cut," Journal of Philosophical Logic 13: 373-378. LLL. 1984a, "The logic of provability," American Mathematical Monthly 91: 470-480. 1984b, "Nonfirstorderizability again," Linguistic Inquiry 15: 343. 1984c, "On 'Syllogistic inference'," Cognition 17: 181-182. 1984d, "To be is to be the value of a variable (or some values of some variables)," Journal of Philosophy 81: 430-450. LLL. 1984e, "Trees and finite satisfiability: Proof of a conjecture of John Burgess," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 25: 193-197. 1984f, "The justification of mathematical induction," PSA 2: 469-475. LLL. 1985, "1-consistency and the diamond," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 26: 341-347. 1985a, "Nominalist Platonism," The Philosophical Review 94: 327-344. LLL. 1985b, "Reading the Begriffsschrift," Mind 94: 331-344. LLL; FPM: 163-81. 1985c (with Giovanni Sambin), "An incomplete system of modal logic," Journal of Philosophical Logic 14: 351-358. 1986, Review of Yuri Manin, A Course in Mathematical Logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 829-830. 1986-87, "Saving Frege from contradiction," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 87: 137-151. LLL; FPM 438-52. 1987, "The consistency of Frege's Foundations of Arithmetic" in J. J. Thomson, ed., 1987. On Being and Saying: Essays for Richard Cartwright. MIT Press: 3-20. LLL; FPM: 211-233. 1987a, "A curious inference," Journal of Philosophical Logic 16: 1-12. LLL. 1987b, "On notions of provability in provability logic," Abstracts of the 8th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science 5: 236-238. 1987c (with Vann McGee), "The degree of the set of sentences of predicate provability logic that are true under every interpretation," Journal of Symbolic Logic 52: 165-171. 1988, "Alphabetical order," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 29: 214-215. 1988a, Review of Craig Smorynski, Self-Reference and Modal Logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic 53: 306-309. 1989, "Iteration again," Philosophical Topics 17: 5-21. LLL. 1989a, "A new proof of the Gödel incompleteness theorem," Notices of the American Mathematical Society 36: 388-390. LLL. An afterword appeared under the title "A letter from George Boolos," ibid., p. 676. LLL. 1990, "On 'seeing' the truth of the Gödel sentence," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13: 655-656. LLL. 1990a, Review of Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy, Turing's World and Tarski's World, Journal of Symbolic Logic 55: 370-371. 1990b, Review of V. A. Uspensky, Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem, Journal of Symbolic Logic 55: 889-891. 1990c, "The standard of equality of numbers" in Boolos, G., ed., Meaning and Method: Essays in Honor of Hilary Putnam. Cambridge Univ. Press: 261-278. LLL; FPM: 234-254. 1991, "Zooming down the slippery slope," Nous 25: 695-706. LLL. 1991a (with Giovanni Sambin), "Provability: The emergence of a mathematical modality," Studia Logica 50: 1-23. 1993, "The analytical completeness of Dzhaparidze's polymodal logics," Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 61: 95-111. 1993a, "Whence the contradiction?" Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 67: 213-233. LLL. 1994, "1879?" in P. Clark and B. Hale, eds. Reading Putnam. Oxford: Blackwell: 31-48. LLL. 1994a, "The advantages of honest toil over theft," in A. George, ed., Mathematics and Mind. Oxford University Press: 27-44. LLL. 1994b, "Gödel's second incompleteness theorem explained in words of one syllable," Mind 103: 1-3. LLL. 1995, "Frege's theorem and the Peano postulates," Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 1: 317-326. LLL. 1995a, "Introductory note to *1951" in Solomon Feferman et al., eds., Kurt Gödel, Collected Works, vol. 3. Oxford University Press: 290-304. LLL. *1951 is Gödel's 1951 Gibbs lecture, "Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their implications." 1995b, "Quotational ambiguity" in Leonardi, P., and Santambrogio, M., eds. On Quine. Cambridge University Press: 283-296. LLL 1996, "The Hardest Logic Puzzle Ever," Harvard Review of Philosophy 6: 62-65. LLL. Italian translation by Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini, "L'indovinello piu difficile del mondo," La Repubblica (16 April 1992): 36-37. 1996a, "On the proof of Frege's theorem" in A. Morton and S. P. Stich, eds., Paul Benacerraf and his Critics. Cambridge MA: Blackwell. LLL. 1997, "Constructing Cantorian counterexamples," Journal of Philosophical Logic 26: 237-239. LLL. 1997a, "Is Hume's principle analytic?" In Richard G. Heck, Jr., ed., Language, Thought, and Logic: Essays in Honour of Michael Dummett. Oxford Univ. Press: 245-61. LLL. 1997b (with Richard Heck), "Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik, §§82-83" in Matthias Schirn, ed., Philosophy of Mathematics Today. Oxford Univ. Press. LLL. 1998, "Gottlob Frege and the Foundations of Arithmetic." First published in LLL. French translation in Mathieu Marion and Alain Voizard eds., 1998. Frege. Logique et philosophie. Montréal and Paris: L'Harmattan: 17-32. 2000, "Must we believe in set theory?" in Gila Sher and Richard Tieszen, eds., Between Logic and Intuition: Essays in Honour of Charles Parsons. Cambridge University Press. LLL.   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy Axiomatic set theory S of Boolos (1989) General set theory, Boolos's axiomatic set theory just adequate for Peano and Robinson arithmetic. List of American philosophers   == NotesEdit == ^ Van Gelder, Lawrence (30 May 1996). "George Boolos, 55, Philosopher". NY Times.  ^ MIT faculty resolution on Boolos' death   == ReferencesEdit == Peter Simons (1982) "On understanding Lesniewski," History and Philosophy of Logic. Solomon Feferman (1960) "Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting," Fundamentae Mathematica vol. 49, pp. 35–92.   == External linksEdit == George Boolos Memorial Web Site George Boolos. The hardest logic puzzle ever. The Harvard Review of Philosophy, 6:62–65, 1996.

Gerald Enoch Sacks (born 1933, Brooklyn) is a logician who holds a joint appointment at Harvard University as a Professor of Mathematical Logic and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a Professor Emeritus. His most important contributions have been in recursion theory. Named after him is Sacks forcing, a forcing notion based on perfect sets and the Sacks Density Theorem, which asserts that the partial order of the recursively enumerable Turing degrees is dense. Sacks earned his Ph.D. in 1961 from Cornell University under the direction of J. Barkley Rosser, with a dissertation entitled On Suborderings of Degrees of Recursive Insolvability. Among his notable students are Lenore Blum, Harvey Friedman, Sy Friedman, Leo Harrington, Richard Shore, and Theodore Slaman.   == Selected publications == Degrees of unsolvability, Princeton University Press 1963, 1966 Saturated Model Theory, Benjamin 1972; 2nd edition, World Scientific 2010 Higher Recursion theory, Springer 1990 Selected Logic Papers, World Scientific 1999 Mathematical Logic in the 20th Century, World Scientific 2003   == References ==

Gerhard Karl Erich Gentzen (November 24, 1909 – August 4, 1945) was a German mathematician and logician. He made major contributions to the foundations of mathematics, proof theory, especially on natural deduction and sequent calculus. He died in 1945 after the Second World War, because he was deprived of food after being arrested in Prague.   == Life and careerEdit == Gentzen was a student of Paul Bernays at the University of Göttingen. Bernays was fired as "non-Aryan" in April 1933 and therefore Hermann Weyl formally acted as his supervisor. Gentzen joined the Sturmabteilung in November 1933 although he was by no means compelled to do so. Nevertheless he kept in contact with Bernays until the beginning of the Second World War. In 1935, he corresponded with Abraham Fraenkel in Jerusalem and was implicated by the Nazi teachers' union as one who "keeps contacts to the Chosen People." In 1935 and 1936, Hermann Weyl, head of the Göttingen mathematics department in 1933 until his resignation under Nazi pressure, made strong efforts to bring him to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. Between November 1935 and 1939 he was an assistant of David Hilbert in Göttingen. Gentzen joined the Nazi Party in 1937. In April 1939 Gentzen swore the oath of loyalty to Adolf Hitler as part of his academic appointment. From 1943 he was a teacher at the University of Prague. Under a contract from the SS Gentzen evidently worked for the V-2 project. Gentzen was arrested during the citizens uprising against the occupying German forces on May 5, 1945. He, along with the rest of the staff of the German University in Prague was subsequently handed over to Russian forces. Because of his past association with the SA, NSDAP and NSD Dozentenbund, Gentzen was detained in a prison camp, where he died of malnutrition on August 4, 1945.   == WorkEdit == Gentzen's main work was on the foundations of mathematics, in proof theory, specifically natural deduction and the sequent calculus. His cut-elimination theorem is the cornerstone of proof-theoretic semantics, and some philosophical remarks in his "Investigations into Logical Deduction", together with Ludwig Wittgenstein's later work, constitute the starting point for inferential role semantics. One of Gentzen's papers had a second publication in the ideological Deutsche Mathematik that was founded by Ludwig Bieberbach who promoted "Aryan" mathematics. Gentzen proved the consistency of the Peano axioms in a paper published in 1936. In his Habilitationsschrift, finished in 1939, he determined the proof-theoretical strength of Peano arithmetic. This was done by a direct proof of the unprovability of the principle of transfinite induction, used in his 1936 proof of consistency, within Peano arithmetic. The principle can, however, be expressed in arithmetic, so that a direct proof of Gödel's incompleteness theorem followed. Gödel used a coding procedure to construct an unprovable formula of arithmetic. Gentzen's proof was published in 1943 and marked the beginning of ordinal proof theory.   == PublicationsEdit == "Über die Existenz unabhängiger Axiomensysteme zu unendlichen Satzsystemen". Mathematische Annalen 107 (2): 329–350. 1932. doi:10.1007/bf01448897.  "Untersuchungen über das logische Schließen. I". Mathematische Zeitschrift 39 (2): 176–210. 1934. doi:10.1007/bf01201353.  "Untersuchungen über das logische Schließen. II". Mathematische Zeitschrift 39 (3): 405–431. 1935. doi:10.1007/bf01201363.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1936). "Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der Stufenlogik". Mathematische Zeitschrift 41: 357–366. doi:10.1007/BF01180425.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1936). "Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie". Mathematische Annalen 112: 493–565. doi:10.1007/BF01565428.  "Der Unendlichkeitsbegriff in der Mathematik. Vortrag, gehalten in Münster am 27. Juni 1936 am Institut von Heinrich Scholz". Semester-Berichte Münster: 65–80. 1936–1937.  (Lecture hold in Münster at the institute of Heinrich Scholz on 27 June 1936) "Unendlichkeitsbegriff und Widerspruchsfreiheit der Mathematik". Actualités scientifiques et industrielles 535: 201–205. 1937.  "Die gegenwärtige Lage in der mathematischen Grundlagenforschung". Deutsche Mathematik 3: 255–268. 1938.  "Neue Fassung des Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises für die reine Zahlentheorie". Forschungen zur Logik und zur Grundlegung der exakten Wissenschaften 4: 19–44. 1938.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1943). "Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsfällen der transfiniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie". Mathematische Annalen 119: 140–161. doi:10.1007/BF01564760.    === PosthumousEdit === "Zusammenfassung von mehreren vollständigen Induktionen zu einer einzigen". Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 2 (1): 81–93. 1954.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1974). "Der erste Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweis für die klassische Zahlentheorie". Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 16 (3–4): 97–118. doi:10.1007/BF02015370.  – Published by Paul Bernays. Gentzen, Gerhard (1974). "Über das Verhältnis zwischen intuitionistischer und klassischer Arithmetik". Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 16 (3–4): 119–132. doi:10.1007/BF02015371.  – Published by Paul Bernays.   == See alsoEdit ==  Bertrand Russell   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Gentzen, Gerhard (1969), M. E., Szabo, ed., Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, Studies in logic and the foundations of mathematics (Hardcover ed.), North-Holland, ISBN 0-7204-2254-X  - (English translation). Menzler-Trott, Eckart (2001-08-01), Gentzens Problem: Mathematische Logik im nationalsozialistischen Deutschland, Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser Verlag, ISBN 3-7643-6574-9  Menzler-Trott, Eckart (November 21, 2007), Logic's Lost Genius: The Life of Gerhard Gentzen, History of Mathematics, vol. 33, Translated by Griffor, Edward and Smorynski, Craig, American Mathematical Society, ISBN 978-0-8218-3550-0  - an English translation.   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Gerhard Gentzen", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Gerhard Gentzen at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Gilbert de la Porrée (after 1085 – 4 September 1154), also known as Gilbert of Poitiers, Gilbertus Porretanus or Pictaviensis, was a scholastic logician and theologian.   == Life == He was born in Poitiers, and completed his first studies there. He was then educated at Chartres under Bernard of Chartres, where he learned the differences between Aristotle and Plato and later at Laon under Anselm of Laon and Ralph of Laon, where he studied biblical scriptures. After his education, he returned to Poitiers, where its believed he taught. He then returned to Chartres to teach logic and theology and took over Chancellor after Bernard from 1126-1140. It is in Paris where we also know he gave lectures. From a passage from the text, Dialogue with Ratius and Everard, by the Cistercian Everardus, we learn that Gilbert was more popular in Paris then in Chartres. Everardus writes that he was fourth to attend Gilberts lectures in Chartres and three hundredth to attend in Paris. In Paris, John of Salisbury attended Gilbert's lectures in 1141 and was greatly influenced by them. John of Salisbury would later become chancellor of Chartres and also wrote over Gilbert saying: He taught grammar and theology, would whip a student who made a grammatical error, if he believed a student was wasting time in class he would suggest they take up bread making, and last when he lectured he used philosophers, orators and as well as poets to help interpret. Sometime in the 1140s, Gilbert published his Commentary on Boethius's, Opuscala Sacra. Although intended as an explanation of what Boethius meant, it interpreted the Holy Trinity in such a way that it went against the teachings of the church. In 1142, Gilbert became Bishop of Poitiers and within the same year two archdeacons, Arnaud and Calon, denounced Gilbert for his ideas on the trinity. It was also in 1142 when Gilbert's teaching position was taken over in Chartres. By 1147, in Paris, Peter Lombard attacked Gilbert for his trinitarian beliefs. In 1148, Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, known as the great detector of heresies, brought Gilbert to trial. Saint Bernard had previous reasons to believe Gilbert was a heretic because when Abelard was tried and condemned, the school of Chartres}--where Gilbert was chancellor at that moment—backed Abelard. Pope Eugene III presided over the trial. During the trial, Gilbert and Bernard were asked to recite and speak of specific biblical scriptures. Bernard, being nowhere near as well versed as Gilbert, was not able to condemn him. It was decided however that in order to make the church happy, Gilbert had to change parts of his book that were not in accordance with the official position on faith. Gilbert died in 1154.   == Works == Authentic Works Commentaria in Boethii opuscula sacra, edited by Nikolaus M. Häring, Toronto: Pontifical Institute of mediaeval studies, 1966. The Psalms Commentary of Gilbert of Poitiers, edited by T. Gross-Diaz. Leiden: Brill, 1996. Spurious Work Hermes Trismegistus, De sex rerum principiis, edited by P. Lucentini and M. Delp, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis (CCCM 142), Turnhot: Brepols, 2006. Gilbert is almost the only logician of the 12th century who is quoted by the greater scholastics of the succeeding age. The Liber sex principiorum, attributed to him, but of an anonymous author, was regarded with a reverence almost equal to that paid to Aristotle, and furnished matter for numerous commentators, amongst them Albertus Magnus. Owing to the fame of this work, he is mentioned by Dante as the Magister sex principiorum. The treatise itself is a discussion of the Aristotelian categories, specially of the six subordinate modes. The author distinguishes in the ten categories two classes, one essential, the other derivative. Essential or inhering (formae inhaerentes) in the objects themselves are only substance, quantity, quality and relation in the stricter sense of that term. The remaining six, when, where, action, passion, position and habit, are relative and subordinate (formae assistantes). This suggestion has some interest, but is of no great value, either in logic or in the theory of knowledge. More important in the history of scholasticism are the theological consequences to which Gilbert's realism led him. In the commentary on the treatise De Trinitate of Boethius he proceeds from the metaphysical notion that pure or abstract being is prior in nature to that which is. This pure being is God, and must be distinguished from the triune God as known to us. God is incomprehensible, and the categories cannot be applied to determine his existence. In God there is no distinction or difference, whereas in all substances or things there is duality, arising from the element of matter. Between pure being and substances stand the ideas or forms, which subsist, though they are not substances. These forms, when materialized, are called formae substantiales or formae nativae; they are the essences of things, and in themselves have no relation to the accidents of things. Things are temporal, the ideas perpetual, God eternal. The pure form of existence, that by which God is God, must be distinguished from the three persons who are God by participation in this form. The form or essence is one, the persons or substances three. This distinction clearly goes against the church's tenet of divine simplicity. It was this distinction between Deitas or Divinitas and Deus that led to the condemnation of Gilbert's doctrine.   == References == Hermes Trismegistus, De sex rerum principiis, edited by P. Lucentini and M. Delp, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis (CCCM 142), Turnhot: Brepols, 2006. De sex rerum principiis and commentary on the De Trinitate in Migne, Patrologia Latina, lxiv. 1255 and clxxxviii. 1257.   == Notes ==   == Bibliography == F.C. Copleston, A History of Medieval Philosophy (New York: Harper and Row, 1972). L. M. de Rijk, Semantics and metaphysics in Gilbert of Poitiers. A chapter of twelfth century Platonism Vivarium, 26, 1988, pp. 73-113 and 27, 1989, pp. 1-35 (Contains the English transltion of some passages of the Commentaries on Boethius). T. Gross-Diaz, The Psalms Commentary of Gilbert of Poitiers, Leiden: Brill, 1995. Edouard Jeauneau, Rethinking The School of Chartres, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009. J. Jolivet et A. de Libera (eds.), Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains, Naples, Bibliopolis, 1987. Lewry, Osmond. The Liber sex principiourm, a supposedly Porretanean work. A study in ascription. In: Jean Jolivet, and Alain de Libera (eds. ), Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains.Aux origines de la "Logica Modernorum"., Naples: Bibliopolis, 1987, pp. 251-278. John Marenbon "Gilbert of Poitiers," Gracia, Jorge J.E. and Timothy B. Noone (eds.), A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages, Malden MA: Blackwell, 2003. John Marenbon, Early Medieval Philosophy, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Compendium logicae Porretanum Christopher J. Martin The Compendium Logicae Porretanum: A Survey of Philosophical Logic from the School of Gilbert of Poitiers Leslie Nielsen, On the Doctrine of Logic and Language of Gilbert Porreta and His Followers

Giorgi Japaridze (also spelled Giorgie Dzhaparidze) is a Georgian-American researcher in logic and theoretical computer science. He currently holds the title of Full Professor at the Computing Sciences Department of Villanova University. Japaridze is best known for his invention of computability logic, cirquent calculus, and Japaridze's polymodal logic.   == Research == During 1985–1988 Japaridze elaborated the system GLP, known as Japaridze's polymodal logic. This is a system of modal logic with the “necessity” operators [0],[1],[2],…, understood as a natural series of incrementally weak provability predicates for Peano arithmetic. In "The polymodal logic of provability" Japaridze proved the arithmetical completeness of this system, as well as its inherent incompleteness with respect to Kripke frames. GLP has been extensively studied by various authors during the subsequent three decades, especially after Lev Beklemishev, in 2004, pointed out its usefulness in understanding the proof theory of arithmetic (provability algebras and proof-theoretic ordinals). Japaridze has also studied the first-order (predicate) versions of provability logic. He came up with an axiomatization of the single-variable fragment of that logic, and proved its arithmetical completeness and decidability. In the same paper he showed that, on the condition of the 1-completeness of the underlying arithmetical theory, predicate provability logic with non-iterated modalities is recursively enumerable. In he did the same for the predicate provability logic with non-modalized quantifiers. In 1992–1993, Japaridze came up with the concepts of cointerpretability, tolerance and cotolerance, naturally arising in interpretability logic. He proved that cointerpretability is equivalent to 1-conservativity and tolerance is equivalent to 1-consistency. The former was an answer to the long-standing open problem regarding the metamathematical meaning of 1-conservativity. Within the same line of research, Japaridze constructed the modal logics of tolerance> (1993) and the arithmetical hierarchy (1994), and proved their arithmetical completeness. In 2002 Japaridze introduced “the Logic of Tasks”, which later became a part of his Abstract Resource Semantics on one hand, and a fragment of Computability Logic (see below) on the other hand. Japaridze is best known for founding Computability Logic in 2003 and making subsequent contributions to its evolution. This is a long-term research program and a semantical platform for “redeveloping logic as a formal theory of (interactive) computability, as opposed to the formal theory of truth that it has more traditionally been”. In 2006 Japaridze conceived cirquent calculus as a proof-theoretic approach that manipulates graph-style constructs, termed cirquents, instead of the more traditional and less general tree-like constructs such as formulas or sequents. This novel proof-theoretic approach was later successfully used to “tame” various fragments of computability logic, which had otherwise stubbornly resisted all axiomatization attempts within the traditional proof theory such as sequent calculus or Hilbert-style systems. It was also used to (define and) axiomatize the purely propositional fragment of Independent-Friendly Logic. The birth of cirquent calculus was accompanied with offering the associated “abstract resource semantics”. Cirquent calculus with that semantics can be seen as a logic of resources which, unlike Linear Logic, makes it possible to account for resource-sharing. As such, it has been presented by Japaridze as a viable alternative to linear logic, who repeatedly has criticized the latter for being neither sufficiently expressive nor complete as a resource logic. This challenge, however, has remained largely unnoticed by the linear logic community, which never responded to it. Japaridze has cast a similar (and also never answered) challenge to intuitionistic logic, criticizing it for lacking a convincing semantical justification the associated constructivistic claims, and for being incomplete as a result of “throwing out the baby with the bath water”. Heiting’s intuitionistic logic, in its full generality, has been shown to be sound but incomplete with respect to the semantics of computability logic. The positive (negation-free) propositional fragment of intuitionistic logic, however, has been proven to be complete with respect to the computability-logic semantics. In "On the system CL12 of computability logic", on the platform of computability logic, Japaridze generalized the traditional concepts of time and space complexities to interactive computations, and introduced a third sort of a complexity measure for such computations, termed “amplitude complexity”. Among Japaridze’s contributions is the elaboration of a series of systems of (Peano) arithmetic based on computability logic, named “clarithmetics”. These include complexity-oriented systems (in the style of bounded arithmetic) for various combinations of time, space and amplitude complexity classes.   == Biography and academic career == Giorgi Japaridze was born in 1961 in Tbilisi, Georgia (then in the Soviet Union). He graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1983, received a PhD degree (in philosophy) from Moscow State University in 1987, and then a second PhD degree (in computer science) from the University of Pennsylvania in 1998. During 1987-1992 Japaridze worked as a Senior Researcher at the Institute of Philosophy of the Georgian Academy of Sciences. During 1992-1993 he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Amsterdam (Mathematics and Computer Science department). During 1993-1994 he held the position of a Visiting Associate Professor at the University of Notre Dame (Philosophy Department). He has joined the faculty of Villanova University (Computing Sciences Department). Japaridze has also worked as a Visiting Professor at Xiamen University (2007) and Shandong University (2010-2013) in China.   == Awards == In 1982, for his work “Determinism and Freedom of Will”, Japaridze received a Medal from the Georgian Academy of Sciences for the best student research paper, granted to one student in the nation each year. In 2015, he received an Outstanding Faculty Research Award from Villanova University, granted to one faculty member each year. Japaridze has been a recipient of various grants and scholarships, including research grants from the US National Science Foundation, Villanova University and Shandong University, Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Dutch government, Smullyan Fellowship from Indiana University (never utilized), and Dean’s Fellowship from the University of Pennsylvania.   == Related bibliography == F.Pakhomov, “On the complexity of the closed fragment of Japaridze's provability logic”. Archive for Mathematical Logic 53 (2014), pages 949-967. D.Fernandez-Duque and J.Joosten, “Well-orders in the transfinite Japaridze algebra”. Logic Journal of the IGPL 22 (2014), pages 933-963. W.Xu, “A propositional system induced by Japaridze's approach to IF logic”. Logic Journal of the IGPL 22 (2014), pages 982-991. I. Shapirovsky, “PSPACE-decidability of Japaridze's polymodal logic". Advances in Modal Logic 7 (2008), pages 289-304. L.D. Beklemishev, J.J. Joosten and M. Vervoort, “A finitary treatment of the closed fragment of Japaridze's provability logic”. Journal of Logic and Computation 15(4) (2005), pages 447-463. G. Boolos, “The analytical completeness of Japaridze's polymodal logics”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 61 (1993), pages 95–111.   == Selected publications == G.Japaridze, “Introduction to clarithmetic III”.Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 165 (2014), pages 241-252. G.Japaridze, “The taming of recurrences in computability logic through cirquent calculus, Part II” Archive for Mathematical Logic 52 (2013), pages 213-259. G.Japaridze, “The taming of recurrences in computability logic through cirquent calculus, Part I”.Archive for Mathematical Logic 52 (2013), pages 173-212. G.Japaridze, “A new face of the branching recurrence of computability logic”. Applied Mathematics Letters 25 (2012), pages 1585-1589. G.Japaridze, “A logical basis for constructive systems”. Journal of Logic and Computation 22 (2012), pages 605-642. G.Japaridze, “Separating the basic logics of the basic recurrences”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 163 (2012), pages 377-389. G.Japaridze, “Introduction to clarithmetic I”.Information and Computation 209 (2011), pages 1312-1354. G.Japaridze, “From formulas to cirquents in computability logic”. Logical Methods is Computer Science 7 (2011), Issue 2 , Paper 1, pages 1-55. G.Japaridze, [2] G.Japaridze, “[Toggling operators in computability logic]”. Theoretical Computer Science 412 (2011), pages 971-1004. G.Japaridze, “Towards applied theories based on computability logic”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 75 (2010), pages 565-601. G.Japaridze, “Many concepts and two logics of algorithmic reduction”. Studia Logica 91 (2009), pages 1-24. G.Japaridze, “In the beginning was game semantics”. Games: Unifying Logic, Language and Philosophy. O. Majer, A.-V. Pietarinen and T. Tulenheimo, eds. Springer 2009, pages 249-350. G.Japaridze, “Sequential operators in computability logic”. Information and Computation 206 (2008), pages 1443-1475. G.Japaridze, “Cirquent calculus deepened.” Journal of Logic and Computation 18 (2008), pages 983-1028. G.Japaridze, “The intuitionistic fragment of computability logic at the propositional level”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 147 (2007), pages 187-227. G.Japaridze, “The logic of interactive Turing reduction”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 72 (2007), pages 243-276. G.Japaridze, “Intuitionistic computability logic”. Acta Cybernetica 18 (2007), pages 77-113. G.Japaridze, “From truth to computability II”. Theoretical Computer Science 379 (2007), pages 20-52. G.Japaridze, “From truth to computability I”. Theoretical Computer Science 357 (2006), pages 100-135. G.Japaridze, “Introduction to cirquent calculus and abstract resource semantics”. Journal of Logic and Computation 16 (2006), pages 489-532. G.Japaridze, “Computability logic: a formal theory of interaction”. Interactive Computation: The New Paradigm. D.Goldin, S.Smolka and P.Wegner, eds. Springer Verlag, Berlin 2006, pages 183-223. G.Japaridze, “Propositional computability logic II”. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic 7 (2006), pages 331-362. G.Japaridze, “Propositional computability logic I ”. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic 7 (2006), pages 302-330. G. Japaridze, “Introduction to computability logic”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 123 (2003), pages 1–99. G.Japaridze, “The logic of tasks”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 117 (2002), pages 261-293. G.Japaridze, “The propositional logic of elementary tasks”. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 41 (2000), No. 2, pages 171-183. G.Japaridze and D.DeJongh, “The logic of provability”. In: Handbook of Proof Theory, S.Buss, ed., North-Holland, 1998, pages 475-545. G.Japaridze, “A constructive game semantics for the language of linear logic”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 85 (1997), pages 87-156. G.Japaridze, “A simple proof of arithmetical completeness for Pi-1 conservativity logic”. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 35 (1994), pages 346-354. G.Japaridze, “The logic of arithmetical hierarchy”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 66 (1994), pages 89-112. G.Japaridze, “A generalized notion of weak interpretability and the corresponding modal logic”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 61 (1993), pages 113-160. G.Japaridze, “The logic of linear tolerance”. Studia Logica 51 (1992), pages 249-277. G.Japaridze, “Predicate provability logic with non-modalized quantifiers”. Studia Logica 50 (1991), pages 149-160. G.Japaridze, “Decidable and enumerable predicate logics of provability”. Studia Logica 49 (1990), pages 7-21. S.Artemov and G.Japaridze, “Finite Kripke models and predicate logics of provability”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 55 (1990), pages 1090-1098. G.Japaridze, “The polymodal logic of provability”. Intensional Logics and Logical Structure of Theories. Metsniereba, Tbilisi, 1988, pages 16-48 (Russian). S.Artemov and G.Japaridze, “[On effective predicate logics of provability]”. Dokady Mathematics 297 (1987), pages 521-523 (Russian). English translation in: Soviet Math. Doklady 36, pp. 478–480.   == See also == Japaridze's Polymodal Logic   == External links == Giorgi Japaridze's Homepage Villanova professor honored for research (Philadelphia Inquirer article) Villanova University Selects Computing Sciences Professor as Recipient of 2015 Outstanding Faculty Research Award (press release) Computability Logic Homepage Game Semantics or Linear Logic? Lecture Course on Computability Logic On abstract resource semantics and computabilty logic (video lecture by N.Vereshchagin)   == References ==

Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri (Italian pronunciation: [dʒoˈvanni dʒiˈrɔlamo sakˈkɛri]; 5 September 1667 – 25 October 1733) was an Italian Jesuit priest, scholastic philosopher, and mathematician. Saccheri was born in Sanremo. He entered the Jesuit order in 1685, and was ordained as a priest in 1694. He taught philosophy at Turin from 1694 to 1697, and philosophy, theology, and mathematics at Pavia from 1697 until his death. He was a protégé of the mathematician Tommaso Ceva and published several works including Quaesita geometrica (1693), Logica demonstrativa (1697), and Neo-statica (1708). He is primarily known today for his last publication, in 1733 shortly before his death. Now considered the second work in non-Euclidean geometry, Euclides ab omni naevo vindicatus (Euclid Freed of Every Flaw) languished in obscurity until it was rediscovered by Eugenio Beltrami in the mid-19th century. Many of Saccheri's ideas have a precedent in the 11th Century Persian polymath Omar Khayyám's Discussion of Difficulties in Euclid (Risâla fî sharh mâ ashkala min musâdarât Kitâb 'Uglîdis), a fact ignored in most Western sources until recently. It is unclear whether Saccheri had access to this work in translation, or developed his ideas independently. The Saccheri quadrilateral is now sometimes referred to as the Khayyam-Saccheri quadrilateral. The intent of Saccheri's work was ostensibly to establish the validity of Euclid by means of a reductio ad absurdum proof of any alternative to Euclid's parallel postulate. To do this he assumed that the parallel postulate was false, and attempted to derive a contradiction. Since Euclid's postulate is equivalent to the statement that the sum of the internal angles of a triangle is 180°, he considered both the hypothesis that the angles add up to more or less than 180°. The first led to the conclusion that straight lines are finite, contradicting Euclid's second postulate. So Saccheri correctly rejected it. However, today this principle is accepted as the basis of elliptic geometry, where both the second and fifth postulates are rejected. The second possibility turned out to be harder to refute. In fact he was unable to derive a logical contradiction and instead derived many non-intuitive results; for example that triangles have a maximum finite area and that there is an absolute unit of length. He finally concluded that: "the hypothesis of the acute angle is absolutely false; because it is repugnant to the nature of straight lines". Today, his results are theorems of hyperbolic geometry. There is some minor argument on whether Saccheri really meant this, as he published his work in the final year of his life, came extremely close to discovering non-Euclidean geometry and was a logician. Some believe Saccheri only concluded in such way in an intent to avoid criticism that might come from seemingly illogical aspects of hyperbolic geometry.   == See also == Saccheri–Legendre theorem Hyperbolic geometry Parallel postulate List of Jesuit scientists List of Roman Catholic cleric–scientists   == References == Martin Gardner, Non-Euclidean Geometry, Chapter 14 of The Colossal Book of Mathematics, W. W.Norton & Company, 2001, ISBN 0-393-02023-1 M. J. Greenberg, Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometries: Development and History, 1st ed. 1974, 2nd ed. 1980, 3rd ed. 1993, 4th edition, W. H. Freeman, 2008. Girolamo Saccheri, Euclides Vindicatus (1733), edited and translated by G. B. Halsted, 1st ed. (1920); 2nd ed. (1986), review by John Corcoran: Mathematical Reviews 88j:01013, 1988.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Giuseppe Peano (Italian: [dʒuˈzɛppe peˈaːno]; 27 August 1858 – 20 April 1932) was an Italian mathematician. The author of over 200 books and papers, he was a founder of mathematical logic and set theory, to which he contributed much notation. The standard axiomatization of the natural numbers is named the Peano axioms in his honor. As part of this effort, he made key contributions to the modern rigorous and systematic treatment of the method of mathematical induction. He spent most of his career teaching mathematics at the University of Turin.   == Biography ==  Peano was born and raised on a farm at Spinetta, a hamlet now belonging to Cuneo, Piedmont, Italy. He attended the Liceo classico Cavour in Turin, and enrolled at the University of Turin in 1876, graduating in 1880 with high honors, after which the University employed him to assist first Enrico D'Ovidio, and then Angelo Genocchi, the Chair of calculus. Due to Genocchi's poor health, Peano took over the teaching of calculus course within 2 years. His first major work, a textbook on calculus, was published in 1884 and was credited to Genocchi. A few years later, Peano published his first book dealing with mathematical logic. Here the modern symbols for the union and intersection of sets appeared for the first time.  In 1887, Peano married Carola Crosio, the daughter of the Turin-based painter Luigi Crosio, known for painting the Refugium Peccatorum Madonna. In 1886, he began teaching concurrently at the Royal Military Academy, and was promoted to Professor First Class in 1889. The next year, the University of Turin also granted him his full professorship. Peano's famous space-filling curve appeared in 1890 as a counterexample. He used it to show that a continuous curve cannot always be enclosed in an arbitrarily small region. This was an early example of what came to be known as a fractal. In 1890 Peano founded the journal Rivista di Matematica, which published its first issue in January 1891. In 1891 Peano started the Formulario Project. It was to be an "Encyclopedia of Mathematics", containing all known formulae and theorems of mathematical science using a standard notation invented by Peano. In 1897, the first International Congress of Mathematicians was held in Zürich. Peano was a key participant, presenting a paper on mathematical logic. He also started to become increasingly occupied with Formulario to the detriment of his other work. In 1898 he presented a note to the Academy about binary numeration and its ability to be used to represent the sounds of languages. He also became so frustrated with publishing delays (due to his demand that formulae be printed on one line) that he purchased a printing press. Paris was the venue for the Second International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900. The conference was preceded by the First International Conference of Philosophy where Peano was a member of the patronage committee. He presented a paper which posed the question of correctly formed definitions in mathematics, i.e. "how do you define a definition?". This became one of Peano's main philosophical interests for the rest of his life. At the conference Peano met Bertrand Russell and gave him a copy of Formulario. Russell was so struck by Peano's innovative logical symbols that he left the conference and returned home to study Peano's text. Peano's students Mario Pieri and Alessandro Padoa had papers presented at the philosophy congress also. For the mathematical congress, Peano did not speak, but Padoa's memorable presentation has been frequently recalled. A resolution calling for the formation of an "international auxiliary language" to facilitate the spread of mathematical (and commercial) ideas, was proposed; Peano fully supported it. By 1901, Peano was at the peak of his mathematical career. He had made advances in the areas of analysis, foundations and logic, made many contributions to the teaching of calculus and also contributed to the fields of differential equations and vector analysis. Peano played a key role in the axiomatization of mathematics and was a leading pioneer in the development of mathematical logic. Peano had by this stage become heavily involved with the Formulario project and his teaching began to suffer. In fact, he became so determined to teach his new mathematical symbols that the calculus in his course was neglected. As a result, he was dismissed from the Royal Military Academy but retained his post at Turin University. In 1903 Peano announced his work on an international auxiliary language called Latino sine flexione ("Latin without inflexion," later called Interlingua, but which should not be confused with the later Interlingua of the IALA). This was an important project for him (along with finding contributors for 'Formulario'). The idea was to use Latin vocabulary, since this was widely known, but simplify the grammar as much as possible and remove all irregular and anomalous forms to make it easier to learn. In one speech, he started speaking in Latin and, as he described each simplification, introduced it into his speech so that by the end he was talking in his new language. The year 1908 was important for Peano. The fifth and final edition of the Formulario project, titled Formulario Mathematico, was published. It contained 4200 formulae and theorems, all completely stated and most of them proved. The book received little attention since much of the content was dated by this time. However, it remains a significant contribution to mathematical literature. The comments and examples were written in Latino sine flexione. Also in 1908, Peano took over the chair of higher analysis at Turin (this appointment was to last for only two years). He was elected the director of Academia pro Interlingua. Having previously created Idiom Neutral, the Academy effectively chose to abandon it in favor of Peano's Latino sine flexione. After his mother died in 1910, Peano divided his time between teaching, working on texts aimed for secondary schooling including a dictionary of mathematics, and developing and promoting his and other auxiliary languages, becoming a revered member of the international auxiliary language movement. He used his membership of the Accademia dei Lincei to present papers written by friends and colleagues who were not members (the Accademia recorded and published all presented papers given in sessions). During the years 1913-1918, Peano published several papers that dealt with the remainder term for various numerical quadrature formulas, and introduced the Peano kernel. In 1925 Peano switched Chairs unofficially from Infinitesimal Calculus to Complementary Mathematics, a field which better suited his current style of mathematics. This move became official in 1931. Giuseppe Peano continued teaching at Turin University until the day before he died, when he suffered a fatal heart attack.   == Milestones and honors received == 1881: Published first paper. 1884: Calcolo Differenziale e Principii di Calcolo Integrale. 1887: Applicazioni Geometriche del Calcolo Infinitesimale. 1889: Appointed Professor First Class at the Royal Military Academy. 1889: Arithmetices principia: nova methodo exposita 1890: Appointed Extraordinary Professor of infinitesimal calculus at the University of Turin. 1891: Made a member of the Academy of Science, Torino. 1893: Lezioni di Analisi Infinitesimale, 2 vols. 1895: Promoted to Ordinary Professor. 1901: Made Knight of the Order of Saints Maurizio and Lazzaro. 1903: Announces Latino sine flexione. 1905: Made Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy. Elected a corresponding member of the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome, the highest Italian honour for scientists. 1908: Fifth and final edition of the Formulario mathematico. 1917: Made an Officer of the Crown of Italy. 1921: Promoted to Commendatore of the Crown of Italy.   == See also ==  Foundations of geometry Peano axioms   == Bibliography == Peano's writings in English translation 1889. "The principles of arithmetic, presented by a new method" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 83–97. 1973. Selected works of Giuseppe Peano. Kennedy, Hubert C., ed. and transl. With a biographical sketch and bibliography. London: Allen & Unwin. Secondary literature Gillies, Douglas A., 1982. Frege, Dedekind, and Peano on the foundations of arithmetic. Assen, Netherlands: Van Gorcum. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Kennedy, Hubert C., 1980. Peano: Life and Works of Giuseppe Peano at the Wayback Machine. Reidel. Biography with complete bibliography (p. 195–209).   == References ==   == External links == Works by Giuseppe Peano at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Giuseppe Peano at Internet Archive O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Giuseppe Peano", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Giuseppe Peano at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Kennedy, Hubert (2002). "Twelve articles on Giuseppe Peano" (PDF). San Francisco: Peremptory Publications. Retrieved 8 April 2012.  Collection of articles on life and mathematics of Peano (1960s to 1980s). Kennedy, Hubert (2002). "Peano. Life and Works of Giuseppe Peano". San Francisco: Peremptory Publications. CiteSeerX: 10.1.1.201.8126.  Instituto Pro Latino Sine Flexione

This is a redirect from a title that is a shortened form of a person's full name, a book title or other more complete article title. Use this rcat (not {{R from initialism}}) to tag redirects that are the initials of a person's name. For more information follow the bold category link.

Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege (/ˈfreɪɡə/; German: [ˈɡɔtloːp ˈfreːɡə]; 8 November 1848 – 26 July 1925) was a German philosopher, logician, and mathematician. He is considered to be one of the founders of modern logic and made major contributions to the foundations of mathematics. He is generally considered to be the father of analytic philosophy, for his writings on the philosophy of language and mathematics. While he was mainly ignored by the intellectual world when he published his writings, Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) introduced his work to later generations of logicians and philosophers.   == LifeEdit ==   === Childhood (1848–69)Edit === Frege was born in 1848 in Wismar, in the state of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (which is today part of the German federal state Mecklenburg-Vorpommern). His father Carl (Karl) Alexander Frege (3 August 1809 – 30 November 1866) was the co-founder and headmaster of a girls' high school until his death. After Carl's death, the school was led by Frege's mother Auguste Wilhelmine Sophie Frege (née Bialloblotzky, of Polish descent, 12 January 1815 – 14 October 1898). In childhood, Frege encountered philosophies that would guide his future scientific career. For example, his father wrote a textbook on the German language for children aged 9–13, entitled Hülfsbuch zum Unterrichte in der deutschen Sprache für Kinder von 9 bis 13 Jahren (2nd ed., Wismar 1850; 3rd ed., Wismar and Ludwigslust: Hinstorff, 1862), the first section of which dealt with the structure and logic of language. Frege studied at a gymnasium in Wismar and graduated in 1869. His teacher Gustav Adolf Leo Sachse (5 November 1843 – 1 September 1909), who was a poet, played the most important role in determining Frege's future scientific career, encouraging him to continue his studies at the University of Jena.   === Studies at University: Jena and Göttingen (1869–74)Edit === Frege matriculated at the University of Jena in the spring of 1869 as a citizen of the North German Confederation. In the four semesters of his studies he attended approximately twenty courses of lectures, most of them on mathematics and physics. His most important teacher was Ernst Karl Abbe (1840–1905; physicist, mathematician, and inventor). Abbe gave lectures on theory of gravity, galvanism and electrodynamics, complex analysis theory of functions of a complex variable, applications of physics, selected divisions of mechanics, and mechanics of solids. Abbe was more than a teacher to Frege: he was a trusted friend, and, as director of the optical manufacturer Carl Zeiss AG, he was in a position to advance Frege's career. After Frege's graduation, they came into closer correspondence. His other notable university teachers were Christian Philipp Karl Snell (1806–86; subjects: use of infinitesimal analysis in geometry, analytical geometry of planes, analytical mechanics, optics, physical foundations of mechanics); Hermann Karl Julius Traugott Schaeffer (1824–1900; analytical geometry, applied physics, algebraic analysis, on the telegraph and other electronic machines); and the philosopher Kuno Fischer (1824–1907; Kantian and critical philosophy). Starting in 1871, Frege continued his studies in Göttingen, the leading university in mathematics in German-speaking territories, where he attended the lectures of Rudolf Friedrich Alfred Clebsch (1833–72; analytical geometry), Ernst Christian Julius Schering (1824–97; function theory), Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1804–91; physical studies, applied physics), Eduard Riecke (1845–1915; theory of electricity), and Hermann Lotze (1817–81; philosophy of religion). Many of the philosophical doctrines of the mature Frege have parallels in Lotze; it has been the subject of scholarly debate whether or not there was a direct influence on Frege's views arising from his attending Lotze's lectures. In 1873, Frege attained his doctorate under Ernst Christian Julius Schering, with a dissertation under the title of "Über eine geometrische Darstellung der imaginären Gebilde in der Ebene" ("On a Geometrical Representation of Imaginary Forms in a Plane"), in which he aimed to solve such fundamental problems in geometry as the mathematical interpretation of projective geometry's infinitely distant (imaginary) points. Frege married Margarete Katharina Sophia Anna Lieseberg (15 February 1856 – 25 June 1904) on 14 March 1887.   == Work as a logicianEdit ==  Though his education and early work were mathematical, especially geometrical, Frege's thought soon turned to logic. His Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens [Concept-Script: A Formal Language for Pure Thought Modeled on that of Arithmetic] (in German), Halle a/S: Verlag von Louis Nebert, 1879  marked a turning point in the history of logic. The Begriffsschrift broke new ground, including a rigorous treatment of the ideas of functions and variables. Frege wanted to show that mathematics grows out of logic, but in so doing, he devised techniques that took him far beyond the Aristotelian syllogistic and Stoic propositional logic that had come down to him in the logical tradition.  In effect, Frege invented axiomatic predicate logic, in large part thanks to his invention of quantified variables, which eventually became ubiquitous in mathematics and logic, and which solved the problem of multiple generality. Previous logic had dealt with the logical constants and, or, if... then..., not, and some and all, but iterations of these operations, especially "some" and "all", were little understood: even the distinction between a sentence like "every boy loves some girl" and "some girl is loved by every boy" could be represented only very artificially, whereas Frege's formalism had no difficulty expressing the different readings of "every boy loves some girl who loves some boy who loves some girl" and similar sentences, in complete parallel with his treatment of, say, "every boy is foolish". A frequently noted example is that Aristotle's logic is unable to represent mathematical statements like Euclid's theorem, a fundamental statement of number theory that there are an infinite number of prime numbers. Frege's "conceptual notation" however can represent such inferences. The analysis of logical concepts and the machinery of formalization that is essential to Principia Mathematica (3 vols., 1910–13) (by Bertrand Russell, 1872–1970, and Alfred North Whitehead, 1861–1947), to Russell's theory of descriptions, to Kurt Gödel's (1906–78) incompleteness theorems, and to Alfred Tarski's (1901–83) theory of truth, is ultimately due to Frege. One of Frege's stated purposes was to isolate genuinely logical principles of inference, so that in the proper representation of mathematical proof, one would at no point appeal to "intuition". If there was an intuitive element, it was to be isolated and represented separately as an axiom: from there on, the proof was to be purely logical and without gaps. Having exhibited this possibility, Frege's larger purpose was to defend the view that arithmetic is a branch of logic, a view known as logicism: unlike geometry, arithmetic was to be shown to have no basis in "intuition", and no need for non-logical axioms. Already in the 1879 Begriffsschrift important preliminary theorems, for example a generalized form of law of trichotomy, were derived within what Frege understood to be pure logic. This idea was formulated in non-symbolic terms in his Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik [The Foundations of Arithmetic] (in German), 1884 . Later, in his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik [Basic Laws of Arithmetic] (in German)  (vol. 1, 1893; vol. 2, 1903) (vol. 2 of which was published at his own expense), Frege attempted to derive, by use of his symbolism, all of the laws of arithmetic from axioms he asserted as logical. Most of these axioms were carried over from his Begriffsschrift, though not without some significant changes. The one truly new principle was one he called the Basic Law V: the "value-range" of the function f(x) is the same as the "value-range" of the function g(x) if and only if ∀x[f(x) = g(x)]. The crucial case of the law may be formulated in modern notation as follows. Let {x|Fx} denote the extension of the predicate Fx, i.e., the set of all Fs, and similarly for Gx. Then Basic Law V says that the predicates Fx and Gx have the same extension iff ∀x[Fx ↔ Gx]. The set of Fs is the same as the set of Gs just in case every F is a G and every G is an F. (The case is special because what is here being called the extension of a predicate, or a set, is only one type of "value-range" of a function.) In a famous episode, Bertrand Russell wrote to Frege, just as Vol. 2 of the Grundgesetze was about to go to press in 1903, showing that Russell's paradox could be derived from Frege's Basic Law V. It is easy to define the relation of membership of a set or extension in Frege's system; Russell then drew attention to "the set of things x that are such that x is not a member of x". The system of the Grundgesetze entails that the set thus characterised both is and is not a member of itself, and is thus inconsistent. Frege wrote a hasty, last-minute Appendix to Vol. 2, deriving the contradiction and proposing to eliminate it by modifying Basic Law V. Frege opened the Appendix with the exceptionally honest comment: "Hardly anything more unfortunate can befall a scientific writer than to have one of the foundations of his edifice shaken after the work is finished. This was the position I was placed in by a letter of Mr. Bertrand Russell, just when the printing of this volume was nearing its completion." (This letter and Frege's reply are translated in Jean van Heijenoort 1967.) Frege's proposed remedy was subsequently shown to imply that there is but one object in the universe of discourse, and hence is worthless (indeed, this would make for a contradiction in Frege's system if he had axiomatized the idea, fundamental to his discussion, that the True and the False are distinct objects; see, for example, Dummett 1973), but recent work has shown that much of the program of the Grundgesetze might be salvaged in other ways: Basic Law V can be weakened in other ways. The best-known way is due to philosopher and mathematical logician George Boolos (1940–1996), who was an expert on the work of Frege. A "concept" F is "small" if the objects falling under F cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with the universe of discourse, that is, unless: ∃R[R is 1-to-1 & ∀x∃y(xRy & Fy)]. Now weaken V to V*: a "concept" F and a "concept" G have the same "extension" if and only if neither F nor G is small or ∀x(Fx ↔ Gx). V* is consistent if second-order arithmetic is, and suffices to prove the axioms of second-order arithmetic. Basic Law V can simply be replaced with Hume's Principle, which says that the number of Fs is the same as the number of Gs if and only if the Fs can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the Gs. This principle, too, is consistent if second-order arithmetic is, and suffices to prove the axioms of second-order arithmetic. This result is termed Frege's Theorem because it was noticed that in developing arithmetic, Frege's use of Basic Law V is restricted to a proof of Hume's Principle; it is from this, in turn, that arithmetical principles are derived. On Hume's Principle and Frege's Theorem, see "Frege's Logic, Theorem, and Foundations for Arithmetic". Frege's logic, now known as second-order logic, can be weakened to so-called predicative second-order logic. Predicative second-order logic plus Basic Law V is provably consistent by finitistic or constructive methods, but it can interpret only very weak fragments of arithmetic. Frege's work in logic had little international attention until 1903 when Russell wrote an appendix to The Principles of Mathematics stating his differences with Frege. The diagrammatic notation that Frege used had no antecedents (and has had no imitators since). Moreover, until Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica (3 vols.) appeared in 1910–13, the dominant approach to mathematical logic was still that of George Boole (1815–64) and his intellectual descendants, especially Ernst Schröder (1841–1902). Frege's logical ideas nevertheless spread through the writings of his student Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970) and other admirers, particularly Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951).   == PhilosopherEdit == Frege is one of the founders of analytic philosophy, mainly because of his contributions to the philosophy of language, including the Function–argument analysis of the proposition; Distinction between concept and object (Begriff und Gegenstand); Principle of compositionality; Context principle; Distinction between the sense and reference (Sinn und Bedeutung) of names and other expressions, sometimes said to involve a mediated reference theory. As a philosopher of mathematics, Frege attacked the psychologistic appeal to mental explanations of the content of judgment of the meaning of sentences. His original purpose was very far from answering general questions about meaning; instead, he devised his logic to explore the foundations of arithmetic, undertaking to answer questions such as "What is a number?" or "What objects do number-words ("one", "two", etc.) refer to?" But in pursuing these matters, he eventually found himself analysing and explaining what meaning is, and thus came to several conclusions that proved highly consequential for the subsequent course of analytic philosophy and the philosophy of language. It should be kept in mind that Frege was employed as a mathematician, not a philosopher, and he published his philosophical papers in scholarly journals that often were hard to access outside of the German-speaking world. He never published a philosophical monograph other than The Foundations of Arithmetic, much of which was mathematical in content, and the first collections of his writings appeared only after World War II. A volume of English translations of Frege's philosophical essays first appeared in 1952, edited by students of Wittgenstein, Peter Geach (born 1916) and Max Black (1909–88), with the bibliographic assistance of Wittgenstein (see Geach, ed. 1975, Introduction). Despite the generous praise of Russell and Wittgenstein, Frege was little known as a philosopher during his lifetime. His ideas spread chiefly through those he influenced, such as Russell, Wittgenstein, and Carnap, and through work on logic and semantics by Polish logicians.   == Sense and referenceEdit ==  The distinction between Sinn ("sense") and Bedeutung (usually translated "reference", but also as "meaning" or "denotation") was an innovation of Frege in his 1892 paper "Über Sinn und Bedeutung" ("On Sense and Reference"). According to Frege, sense and reference are two different aspects of the significance of an expression. Frege applied Bedeutung in the first instance to proper names, where it means the bearer of the name, the object in question, but then also to other expressions, including complete sentences, which bedeuten the two "truth values", the true and the false; by contrast, the sense or Sinn associated with a complete sentence is the thought it expresses. The sense of an expression is said to be the "mode of presentation" of the item referred to. The distinction can be illustrated thus: In their ordinary uses, the name "Charles Philip Arthur George Mountbatten-Windsor", which for logical purposes is an unanalyzable whole, and the functional expression "the Prince of Wales", which contains the significant parts "the prince of ξ" and "Wales", have the same reference, namely, the person best known as Prince Charles. But the sense of the word "Wales" is a part of the sense of the latter expression, but no part of the sense of the "full name" of Prince Charles. These distinctions were disputed by Bertrand Russell, especially in his paper "On Denoting"; the controversy has continued into the present, fueled especially by Saul Kripke's famous lectures "Naming and Necessity".   == 1924 diaryEdit == Frege's published philosophical writings were of a very technical nature and divorced from practical issues, so much so that Frege scholar Dummett expresses his "shock to discover, while reading Frege's diary, that his hero was an anti-Semite." After World War I his political opinion became more radical. In the last year of his life, at the age of 76, his diary contains extreme right-wing political opinions, opposing the parliamentary system, democrats, liberals, Catholics, the French and Jews, who he thought ought to be deprived of political rights and, preferably, expelled from Germany". Frege confided "that he had once thought of himself as a liberal and was an admirer of Bismarck", but then sympathized with General Ludendorff and Adolf Hitler. Some interpretations have been written about that time. The diary contains a critique of universal suffrage and socialism. Frege had friendly relations with Jews in real life: among his students was Gershom Scholem who much valued his teacher; and he encouraged Ludwig Wittgenstein to leave for England. The 1924 diary was published posthumously in 1944. Frege apparently never spoke in public about his political viewpoints.   == PersonalityEdit == Frege was described by his students as a highly introverted person, seldom entering into dialogue, mostly facing the blackboard while lecturing though being witty and sometimes bitterly sarcastic.   == Important datesEdit == Born 8 November 1848 in Wismar, Mecklenburg-Schwerin. 1869 — attends the University of Jena. 1871 — attends the University of Göttingen. 1873 — PhD, doctor in mathematics (geometry), attained at Göttingen. 1874 — Habilitation at Jena; private teacher. 1879 — Ausserordentlicher Professor at Jena. 1896 — Ordentlicher Honorarprofessor at Jena. 1917 or 1918 — retires. Died 26 July 1925 in Bad Kleinen (now part of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern).   == Important worksEdit ==   === Logic, foundation of arithmeticEdit === Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens (1879). Halle a. S. English: Concept Notation, the Formal Language of the Pure Thought like that of Arithmetics. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung über den Begriff der Zahl (1884). Breslau. English: The Foundations of Arithmetic: the logical-mathematical Investigation of the Concept of Number. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, Band I (1893); Band II (1903). Jena: Verlag Hermann Pohle. English: Basic Laws of Arithmetic, translated and edited with an introduction by Philip A. Ebert and Marcus Rossberg. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. ISBN 978-0-199-28174-9   === Philosophical studiesEdit === Function and Concept (1891) Original: Funktion und Begriff : Vortrag, gehalten in der Sitzung; vom 9. Januar 1891 der Jenaischen Gesellschaft für Medizin und Naturwissenschaft, Jena, 1891; In English: Function and Concept. "On Sense and Reference" (1892) Original: "Über Sinn und Bedeutung", in Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik C (1892): 25–50; In English: "On Sense and Reference", alternatively translated (in later edition) as "On Sense and Meaning". "Concept and Object" (1892) Original: "Über Begriff und Gegenstand", in Vierteljahresschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie XVI (1892): 192–205; In English: "Concept and Object". "What is a Function?" (1904) Original: "Was ist eine Funktion?", in Festschrift Ludwig Boltzmann gewidmet zum sechzigsten Geburtstage, 20. February 1904, S. Meyer (ed.), Leipzig, 1904, pp. 656–666 (Internet Archive: [2], [3], [4]); In English: "What is a Function?". Logical Investigations (1918–1923). Frege intended that the following three papers be published together in a book titled Logische Untersuchungen (Logical Investigations). Though the German book never appeared, the papers were published together in Logische Untersuchungen, ed. G. Patzig, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1966, and English translations appeared together in Logical Investigations, ed. Peter Geach, Blackwell, 1975. 1918–19. "Der Gedanke: Eine logische Untersuchung" ("The Thought: A Logical Inquiry"), in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus I: 58–77. 1918–19. "Die Verneinung" ("Negation") in Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus I: 143–157. 1923. "Gedankengefüge" ("Compound Thought"), in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus III: 36–51.   === Articles on geometryEdit === 1903: "Über die Grundlagen der Geometrie". II. Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung XII (1903), 368–375; In English: "On the Foundations of Geometry".  1967: Kleine Schriften. (I. Angelelli, ed.) Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. Darmstadt, 1967 és G. Olms, Hildescheim, 1967. "Small Writings," a collection of most of his writings (e.g., the previous), posthumously published.   == TriviaEdit == The Frege programming language is named after him.   == ReferencesEdit ==   === PrimaryEdit === Online bibliography of Frege's works and their English translations (compiled by E.N. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). 1879. Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens. Halle a. S.: Louis Nebert. Translation: Concept Script, a formal language of pure thought modelled upon that of arithmetic, by S. Bauer-Mengelberg in Jean Van Heijenoort, ed., 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press. 1884. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung über den Begriff der Zahl. Breslau: W. Koebner. Translation: J. L. Austin, 1974. The Foundations of Arithmetic: A logico-mathematical enquiry into the concept of number, 2nd ed. Blackwell. 1891. "Funktion und Begriff." Translation: "Function and Concept" in Geach and Black (1980). 1892a. "Über Sinn und Bedeutung" in Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 100: 25–50. Translation: "On Sense and Reference" in Geach and Black (1980). 1892b. "Über Begriff und Gegenstand" in Vierteljahresschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie 16: 192–205. Translation: "Concept and Object" in Geach and Black (1980). 1893. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, Band I. Jena: Verlag Hermann Pohle. Band II, 1903. Band I+II online Partial translation of volume 1: Furth, M, 1964. The Basic Laws of Arithmetic. Univ. of California Press. Translation of selected sections from volume 2 in Geach and Black (1980). Complete translation of both volumes: Ebert, P.A., and Rossberg, M., 2013, Basic Laws of Arithmetic. Oxford University Press. 1904. "Was ist eine Funktion?" in Meyer, S., ed., 1904. Festschrift Ludwig Boltzmann gewidmet zum sechzigsten Geburtstage, 20. Februar 1904. Leipzig: Barth: 656–666. Translation: "What is a Function?" in Geach and Black (1980). 1918–1923. Peter Geach (editor): Logical Investigations, Blackwell's, 1975. 1924. Gottfried Gabriel, Wolfgang Kienzler (editors): Gottlob Freges politisches Tagebuch. In: Deutsche Zeitschrift für Philosophie, vol. 42, 1994, pp. 1057–98. Introduction by the editors on pp. 1057–66. This article has been translated into English, in: Inquiry, vol. 39, 1996, pp. 303–342. Peter Geach and Max Black, eds., and trans., 1980. Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, 3rd ed. Blackwell (1st ed. 1952).   === SecondaryEdit === Philosophy: Badiou, Alain. "On a Contemporary Usage of Frege", trans. Justin Clemens and Sam Gillespie. UMBR(a), no. 1, 2000, pp. 99–115. Baker, Gordon, and P.M.S. Hacker, 1984. Frege: Logical Excavations. Oxford University Press. — Vigorous, if controversial, criticism of both Frege's philosophy and influential contemporary interpretations such as Dummett's. Currie, Gregory, 1982. Frege: An Introduction to His Philosophy. Harvester Press. Dummett, Michael, 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Harvard University Press. ------, 1981. The Interpretation of Frege's Philosophy. Harvard University Press. Hill, Claire Ortiz, 1991. Word and Object in Husserl, Frege and Russell: The Roots of Twentieth-Century Philosophy. Athens OH: Ohio University Press. ------, and Rosado Haddock, G. E., 2000. Husserl or Frege: Meaning, Objectivity, and Mathematics. Open Court. — On the Frege-Husserl-Cantor triangle. Kenny, Anthony, 1995. Frege — An introduction to the founder of modern analytic philosophy. Penguin Books. — Excellent non-technical introduction and overview of Frege's philosophy. Klemke, E.D., ed., 1968. Essays on Frege. University of Illinois Press. — 31 essays by philosophers, grouped under three headings: 1. Ontology; 2. Semantics; and 3. Logic and Philosophy of Mathematics. Rosado Haddock, Guillermo E., 2006. A Critical Introduction to the Philosophy of Gottlob Frege. Ashgate Publishing. Sisti, Nicola, 2005. Il Programma Logicista di Frege e il Tema delle Definizioni. Franco Angeli. — On Frege's theory of definitions. Sluga, Hans, 1980. Gottlob Frege. Routledge. Nicla Vassallo, 2014, Frege on Thinking and Its Epistemic Significance with Pieranna Garavaso, Lexington Books–Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD, Usa. Weiner, Joan, 1990. Frege in Perspective, Cornell University Press. Logic and mathematics: Anderson, D. J., and Edward Zalta, 2004, "Frege, Boolos, and Logical Objects," Journal of Philosophical Logic 33: 1–26. Blanchette, Patricia, 2012, Frege's Conception of Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012 Burgess, John, 2005. Fixing Frege. Princeton Univ. Press. — A critical survey of the ongoing rehabilitation of Frege's logicism. Boolos, George, 1998. Logic, Logic, and Logic. MIT Press. — 12 papers on Frege's theorem and the logicist approach to the foundation of arithmetic. Dummett, Michael, 1991. Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard University Press. Demopoulos, William, ed., 1995. Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard Univ. Press. — Papers exploring Frege's theorem and Frege's mathematical and intellectual background. Ferreira, F. and Wehmeier, K., 2002, "On the consistency of the Delta-1-1-CA fragment of Frege's Grundgesetze," Journal of Philosophic Logic 31: 301–11. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. — Fair to the mathematician, less so to the philosopher. Gillies, Donald A., 1982. Frege, Dedekind, and Peano on the foundations of arithmetic. Methodology and Science Foundation, 2. Van Gorcum & Co., Assen, 1982. Gillies, Donald: The Fregean revolution in logic. Revolutions in mathematics, 265–305, Oxford Sci. Publ., Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1992. Charles Parsons, 1965, "Frege's Theory of Number." Reprinted with Postscript in Demopoulos (1965): 182–210. The starting point of the ongoing sympathetic reexamination of Frege's logicism. Gillies, Donald: The Fregean revolution in logic. Revolutions in mathematics, 265–305, Oxford Sci. Publ., Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1992. Heck, Richard G., Jr: Frege's Theorem. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011 Heck, Richard G., Jr: Reading Frege's Grundgesetze. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013 Wright, Crispin, 1983. Frege's Conception of Numbers as Objects. Aberdeen University Press. — A systematic exposition and a scope-restricted defense of Frege's Grundlagen conception of numbers.   == External linksEdit ==  Works by or about Gottlob Frege at Internet Archive Frege at Genealogy Project A comprehensive guide to Fregean material available on the web by Brian Carver. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Gottlob Frege" — by Edward Zalta. "Frege's Logic, Theorem, and Foundations for Arithmetic" — by Edward Zalta.  Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Gottlob Frege — by Kevin C. Klement. Frege and Language — by Dorothea Lotter.  Metaphysics Research Lab: Gottlob Frege. Frege on Being, Existence and Truth. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Gottlob Frege", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Begriff, a LaTeX package for typesetting Frege's logic notation, earlier version grundgesetze, a LaTeX package for typesetting Frege's logic notation, mature version Frege's Basic Laws of Arithmetic, info website, incl. corrigenda and LaTeX typesetting tool — by P.A. Ebert and M. Rossberg


Graham Priest (born 1948) is Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the CUNY Graduate Center, as well as a regular visitor at the University of Melbourne where he was Boyce Gibson Professor of Philosophy and also at St. Andrews University. He was educated at the University of Cambridge and the London School of Economics. His thesis advisor was John Lane Bell.   == Work == He is known for his defence of dialetheism, his in-depth analyses of the logical paradoxes (holding the thesis that there is a uniform treatment for many well-known paradoxes, such as the semantic, set-theoretic and Liar paradoxes), and his many writings related to paraconsistent and other non-classical logics. Priest, a long-time resident of Australia, now residing in New York City, is the author of numerous books, and has published articles in nearly every major philosophical and logical journal. He was a frequent collaborator with the late Richard Sylvan, a fellow proponent of dialetheism and paraconsistent logic. Priest has also published on metaphilosophy. In addition to his work in philosophy and logic, Priest practiced Karate-do. He is 3rd Dan, International Karate-do Shobukai; 4th Dan, Shi’to Ryu, and an Australian National Kumite Referee and Kata Judge. Presently, he practices Taichi.   == Selected works ==   === Books === Priest, Graham; Routley, R. On Paraconsistency Research Report #l3, Research School of Social Sciences, Australian National University 1983. Reprinted as the introductory chapters of Paraconsistent Logic, G.Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman (eds.), Philosophia Verlag, 1989. Translated into Romanian as chapters in I. Lucica (ed.), Ex Falso Quodlibet: studii de logica paraconsistenta (in Romanian), Editura Technica, 2004. Priest, Graham. Logic: a Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-289320-3 Translated into Portuguese as Lógica para Começar, Temas & Debates, 2002. Translated into Spanish as Una Brevísima Introducción a la Lógica, Oceano, 2006. Translated into Czech, as Logika – průvodce pro každého, Dokořán, 2007. Translated into Persian by Bahram Asadian, 2007. Translated into Japanese, Iwanami Shoten, 2008. Priest, Graham; van Bendegem, Jean Paul; Batens, Diderik; Mortensen, Chris (2000). Frontiers of paraconsistent logic. Baldock, Hertfordshire, England Philadelphia, Pennysylvania: Research Studies Press. ISBN 9780863802539.  Priest, Graham. Introduction to Non-Classical Logic, Cambridge University Press, 2001. 2nd edition: Introduction to Non-Classical Logic: From If to Is, Cambridge University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-521-67026-5 German translation of Part 1 of Introduction to Non-Classical Logic: From If to Is: Einführung in die nicht-klassische Logik, Mentis 2008. Priest, Graham. Beyond the Limits of Thought, Cambridge University Press, 1995. 2nd edition, Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-924421-9 Priest, Graham. Towards Non-Being: the Semantics and Metaphysics of Intentionality, Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-19-926254-3 Priest, Graham. In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent, Martinus Nijhoff, 1987. Second edition Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-19-926330-2 Priest, Graham. Doubt Truth to be a Liar, Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-19-926328-0 Priest, Graham. Logic: A Brief Insight, Sterling 2010. ISBN 1-4027-6896-6 Priest, Graham. One: Being an Investigation into the Unity of Reality and of its Parts, including the Singular Object which is Nothingness, Oxford University Press, 2014. ISBN 978-0-19-968825-8   === Articles === — (September 1976). "Gruesome Simplicity". Philosophy of Science 43 (3): 432–7. doi:10.1086/288698. JSTOR 187236.  — (1976). "Modality as a Metaconcept". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 17 (3): 401–414. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093887632. MR 0446907. Zbl 0212.01303.  —; Read, S. (1977). "The Formalization of Ockham's Theory of Supposition" (PDF). Mind. LXXXVI (341): 109–113. doi:10.1093/mind/LXXXVI.341.109.  — (1977). "A Refoundation of Modal Logic". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 18 (3): 340–354. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093888007. MR 0505278. Zbl 0348.02025.  — (January 1979). "Logic of Paradox". Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1): 219–241. JSTOR 30227165.  Translated into French as 'La Logique du Paradoxe', Philosophie 94 (2007), 72–94. — (1979). "Indefinite Descriptions". Logique et Analyse 22: 5–21.  — (March 1979). "A Note on the Sorites paradox". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 57 (1): 74–75. doi:10.1080/00048407912341061.  — (1979). "Two Dogmas of Quineanism". Philosophical Quarterly 29 (117): 289–301. doi:10.2307/2219445.  — (November 1980). "Sense, Entailment and Modus Ponens". Journal of Philosophical Logic 9 (4): 415–435. doi:10.1007/BF00262864.  —; Read, S. (1980). "Merely Confused Supposition: A Theoretical Advance or a Mere Confusion". Franciscan Studies 40: 265–297. doi:10.1353/frc.1980.0009.  —; Read, S. (1981). "Ockham's Rejection of Ampliation" (PDF). Mind XC (358): 274–9. doi:10.1093/mind/XC.358.274.  — (December 1981). "The argument from design". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 59 (4): 422–431. doi:10.1080/00048408112340371.  — (1983). "The Logical Paradoxes and the Law of Excluded Middle". Philosophical Quarterly 33 (131): 160–5. doi:10.2307/2218742.  — (1982). "To be and not to be: Dialectical Tense Logic". Studia Logica 41 (2–3): 249–268. doi:10.1007/BF00370347.  translated into Bulgarian and reprinted in Filosofska Missal XL(8), 1984, 63–76. —; Routley, R. (1982). "Lessons from Pseudo-Scotus". Philosophical Studies 42 (2): 189–199. doi:10.1007/BF00374033.  —; Mortensen, C. (1981). "The Truth Teller Paradox". Logique et Analyse: 95–6, 381–8.  — (1983). "An Anti-Realist Account of Mathematical Truth". Synthese 57: 49–65. doi:10.1007/BF01064067.  Reprinted as ch. 8 of D. Jacquette (ed.) Philosophy of Mathematics, Blackwell, 2002. — (May 1984). "Logic of Paradox Revisited". Journal of Philosophical Logic 13 (2): 153–179. doi:10.1007/BF00453020.  — (1984). "Semantic Closure". Studia Logica 43 (1–2): 117–129. doi:10.1007/BF00935745.  —; Routley, R. (1984). "Introduction: Paraconsistent logics". Studia Logica 43 (1–2): 3–16. doi:10.1007/BF00935736.  — (1984). "Hypercontradictions". Logique et Analyse (107): 237–243.  — (1985). "Hume's Final Argument". History of Philosophy Quarterly 2: 349–352.  — (1985). "Contradictions in Motion". American Philosophical Quarterly 22: 339–346.  — (1985). "Contradiction, Belief and Rationality". Proc. Aristotelian Society. LXXXVI (6): 99–116.  — (1986). "Tense and Truth Conditions" (PDF). Analysis 46 (4): 162–6. doi:10.1093/analys/46.4.162.  — (1986). "The Logic of Nuclear Armaments". Critical Philosophy 3: 107–113.  'Unstable Solutions to the Liar Paradox' in Self Reference: Reflections and Reflexivity, S.J. Bartlett and P. Suber (eds.), Nijhoff, 1987. — (1987). "Tense, Tense and TENSE" (PDF). Analysis 47 (4): 177–9. doi:10.1093/analys/47.4.184.  'Reasoning about Truth', Technical Report TR-ARP-2/88, Automated Reasoning Project, Australian National University, 1988. 'Consistency by Default', Technical Report TR-ARP-3/88, Automated Reasoning Project, Australian National University, 1988. — (1988). "When Inconsistency is Inescapable". South African Journal of Philosophy 7: 83–89.  — (1989). "Primary Qualities are Secondary Qualities Too" (PDF). Br J Philos Sci 40 (1): 29–37. doi:10.1093/bjps/40.1.29.  —; Sylvan, R. (1989). "Contradiction, Assertion, and "Frege's Point"" (PDF). Analysis 49 (1): 23–6. doi:10.1093/analys/49.1.23.  — (June 1989). "Reasoning About Truth". Artificial Intelligence 39 (2): 231–244. doi:10.1016/0004-3702(89)90027-1.  — (1989). "Denyer's $ not Backed by Sterling Arguments" (PDF). Mind. XCVIII (390): 265–8. doi:10.1093/mind/XCVIII.390.265.  'Classical Logic Aufgehogen' in Paraconsistent Logic, G. Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman (eds.), Philosophia Verlag, 1989. 'Reductio ad Absurdum et Modus Tollendo Ponens' in Paraconsistent Logic, G. Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman (eds.), Philosophia Verlag, 1989. Reprinted in Rumanian in I. Lucica (ed.), Ex Falso Quodlibet: studii de logica paraconsistenta (in Romanian), Editura Technica, 2004. 'Relevance, Truth and Meaning' (with J. Crosthwaite) in Directions of Relevant Logic, R. Sylvan and J. Norman (eds.), Nijhoff, 1989. — (1989). "Gegen Wessel". Philosophische Logik 2: 109–120.  — (1990). "Dialectic and Dialetheic". Science & Society 53: 388–415.  — (May 1990). "Boolean negation, and all that". Journal of Philosophical Logic 19 (2): 201–215. doi:10.1007/BF00263541.  —; McKenzie, J. (1990). "Paraconsistent Dialogues". Logique et Analyse (131–2): 339–57.  — (1991). "Was Marx a Dialetheist?". Science & Society 54: 468–475.  — (1991). "Minimally inconsistent LP". Studia Logica 50 (2): 321–331. doi:10.1007/BF00370190.  — (1991). "Intensional Paradoxes". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 32 (2): 193–211. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093635745. MR 1122994. Zbl 0747.03005.  — (1991). "The Limits of Thought – and Beyond" (PDF). Mind C (399): 361–370. doi:10.1093/mind/C.399.361.  — (1991). "Sorites and Identity". Logique et Analyse (135–6): 293–6.  —; Sylvan R (May 1992). "Simplified semantics for basic relevant logics". Journal of Philosophical Logic 21 (2): 217–232. doi:10.1007/BF00248640.  — (1992). "On Time". Philosophia 50: 9–18.  — (1992). "What is a Non-Normal World?". Logique et Analyse 35: 291–302.  — (March 1993). "Another disguise of the same fundamental problems: Barwise and Etchemendy on the liar". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 71 (1): 60–69. doi:10.1080/00048409312345052.  — (1993). "Yu and Your Mind". Synthese 95 (3): 459–460. doi:10.1007/BF01063882.  — (1993). "Can Contradictions be True?, II". Proc. Aristotelian Society 67 (Suppl): 35–54.  — (March 1994). "Derrida and self-reference". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72 (1): 103–111. doi:10.1080/00048409412345911.  — (1994). "The Structure of the Paradoxes of Self-Reference" (PDF). Mind 103 (409): 25–34. doi:10.1093/mind/103.409.25.  — (1994). "Is Arithmetic Consistent?" (PDF). Mind 103 (411): 337–349. doi:10.1093/mind/103.411.337.  — (1994). "What Could the Least Inconsistent Number be?". Logique et Analyse 37: 3–12.  'Goedel's Theorem and Creativity', in Creativity, ed. T Dartnall, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994. Reprinted with a different introduction as 'Goedel's Theorem and the Mind... Again', in Philosophy of Mind: the place of philosophy in the study of mind, eds. M.Michaelis and J. O'Leary-Horthorne, Kluwer, 1994. — (1995). "Etchemendy and Logical Consequence". Canadian Journal of Philosophy 25: 283–292.  — (1995). "Gaps and Gluts: Reply to Parsons". Canadian Journal of Philosophy 25: 57–66.  — (1995). "Multiple Denotation, Ambiguity and the Strange Case of the Missing Amoeba". Logique et Analyse 38: 361–73.  'Some Priorities of Berkeley', Logic and Reality: Essays on the Legacy of Arthur Prior, ed. B.J.Copeland, Oxford University Press, 1996. — (1996). "Everett's Trilogy" (PDF). Mind 105 (420): 631–647. doi:10.1093/mind/105.420.631.  — (1996). "On Inconsistent Arithmetics: Reply to Denyer" (PDF). Mind 105 (420): 649–659. doi:10.1093/mind/105.420.649.  Crosthwaite, J.; Priest, G (March 1996). "The definition of sexual harassment". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (1): 66–82. doi:10.1080/00048409612347071.  Reprinted in G. Lee Bowie and Meredith Michaels (eds.), 13 Questions in Ethics and Social Philosophy, Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 2nd ed., 1997. 'Paraconsistent Logic', Encyclopaedia of Mathematics; Supplement, ed. M. Hazenwinkle, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997, 400–1. 'Logic, Nonstandard', pp. 307–10, Encyclopedia of Philosophy; Supplement, ed. D.Borshert, MacMillan, 1996. Paraconsistent Logic' (with K.Tanaka), Stanford Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, created 1996. — (February 1997). "On a Paradox of Hilbert and Bernays". Journal of Philosophical Logic 26 (1): 45–56. doi:10.1023/A:1017900703234.  — (1997). "The Linguistic Construction of Reality". Exordium 6: 1–7.  — (1997). "Sylvan's Box: A Short Story and Ten Morals". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 38 (4): 573–582. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1039540770. MR 1648853. Zbl 0926.03003.  — (1997). "Inconsistent Models of Arithmetic; I Finite Models". Journal of Philosophical Logic 26 (2): 223–235. doi:10.1023/A:1004251506208.  — (September 1997). "Sexual perversion". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 75 (3): 360–372. doi:10.1080/00048409712347951.  Translated into Croatian, ch. 9 of I. Primoratz (ed.), Suvremena filozofija seksualnosti, Zagreb: KruZak, 2003. — (1997). "Yablo's Paradox" (PDF). Analysis 57 (4): 236–42. doi:10.1093/analys/57.4.236.  'Language, its Possibility, and Ineffability', pp. 790–794 of P. Wiengartner, G.Schurz and G.Dorn (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Wittgenstein Symposium, The Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society, 1997. — (1998). "What's so Bad about Contradictions?". Journal of Philosophy 95 (8): 410–426. doi:10.2307/2564636.  —; Tanaka, K. (1997). "On an Error in Grove's Proof". Logique et Analyse (158): 215–7.  'Paraconsistent Logic', Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol.7, 208–11, ed. E.Craig, Routledge, 1998. — (1998). "Fuzzy Identity and Local Validity". Monist 81: 331–342. doi:10.5840/monist19988123.  'Number', Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol.7, 47–54, ed. E.Craig, Routledge, 1998. — (1998). "To be and Not to Be – That is the Answer. On Aristotle on the Law of Non-Contradiction". Philosophiegeschichte und Logische Analyse 1: 91–130.  — (1998). "The Trivial Object and the Non-Triviality of a Semantically Closed Theory with Descriptions". Journal of Applied and Non-Classical Logic 8: 171–183. doi:10.1080/11663081.1998.10510937.  — (1998). "The Import of Inclosure; some Comments on Grattan-Guinness" (PDF). Mind 107 (428): 835–840. doi:10.1093/mind/107.428.835.  'Dialetheism', Stanford Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, created 1998. [1] 'What not? A Defence of a Dialetheic Account of Negation', in D.Gabbay and H.Wansing (eds.), What is Negation?, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999. — (1999). "Negation as Cancellation, and Connexivism". Topoi 18 (2): 141–8. doi:10.1023/A:1006294205280.  — (1999). "On a Version of one of Zeno's Paradoxes" (PDF). Analysis 59 (1): 1–2. doi:10.1093/analys/59.1.1.  — (December 1999). "Perceiving contradictions". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77 (4): 439–446. doi:10.1080/00048409912349211.  — (December 1999). "Semantic Closure, Descriptions and Non-Triviality". Journal of Philosophical Logic 28 (6): 549–558. doi:10.1023/A:1004608013532.  'Validity', pp. 183–206 of A.Varzi (ed.) The Nature of Logic, CSLI Publications, 1999. (European Review of Philosophy, vol. 4). An abbreviated version under the same title appears as pp. 18–25 of The Logica Yearbook, 1997, ed. T.Childers, Institute of Philosophy, Czech Republic. — (July 2000). "Truth and Contradiction". Philosophical Quarterly 50 (200): 305–319. doi:10.1111/j.0031-8094.2000.00187.x.  — (2001). "Paraconsistent Belief Revision". Theoria 68: 214–228. doi:10.1111/j.1755-2567.2001.tb00204.x.  — (June 2000). "Could everything be true?". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (2): 189–195. doi:10.1080/00048400012349471.  — (2000). "The Logic of Backwards Inductions". Economics and Philosophy 16 (2): 267–285. doi:10.1017/S0266267100000250.  ‘Worlds Apart', Mind! 2000 (a supplement to Mind 109 (2000)), 25–31. — (2000). "Vasil'év and Imaginary Logic". History and Philosophy of Logic 21 (2): 135–146. doi:10.1080/01445340050064031.  'Motivations for Paraconsistency: the Slippery Slope from Classical Logic to Dialetheism', in D.Batens et al. (eds.), Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic, Research Studies Press, 2000. — (2000). "Inconsistent Models of Arithmetic II; the Genera Case". Journal of Symbolic Logic 65 (4): 1519–29. doi:10.2307/2695062.  — (2000). "On the Principle of Uniform Solution: a Reply to Smith" (PDF). Mind 109 (433): 123–6. doi:10.1093/mind/109.433.123.  — (December 2000). "Objects of thought". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (4): 494–502. doi:10.1080/00048400012349761.  Logic: One or Many’ in J. Woods, and B. Brown (eds.), pp. 23–28 of Logical Consequence: Rival Approaches Proceedings of the 1999 Conference of the Society of Exact Philosophy, Stanmore: Hermes, 2001. 'Heidegger and the Grammar of Being’, ch. 10 of R.Gaskin (ed.), Grammar in Early 20th Century Philosophy, Routledge, 2001. ‘Why it’s Irrational to Believe in Consistency’, pp. 284–93 of Rationality and Irrationality; Proc. 23rd International Wittgenstein Symposium, eds., B.Brogard and B.Smith, 2001. 'Paraconsistent Logic', Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Vol. 6, pp. 287 – 393, eds. D.Gabbay and F. Guenthner, 2nd edition, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. 'Inconsistency and the Empirical Sciences', in J. Meheus (ed.), Inconsistency in Science, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. ‘Logicians Setting Together Contradictories. A Perspective on Relevance, Paraconsistency, and Dialetheism’, ch. 14 of D.Jacquette (ed.), A Companion to Philosophical Logic, Blackwell, 2002. ‘Fuzzy Relevant Logic’, Paraconsistency: the Logical Way to the Inconsistent, ed. W.Carnielli et al., Marcel Dekker, 2002. — (October 2002). "The Hooded Man". Journal of Philosophical Logic 31 (5): 445–467. doi:10.1023/A:1020153327867.  — (2002). "Rational Dilemmas" (PDF). Analysis 62 (1): 11–16. doi:10.1093/analys/62.1.11.  — (2003). "Meinong and the Philosophy of Mathematics". Philosophica Mathematica 11: 3–15. doi:10.1093/philmat/11.1.3.  — (2003). "On Alternative Geometries, Arithmetics, and Logics; a Tribute to Łukasiewicz". Studia Logica 74 (3): 441–468. doi:10.1023/A:1025123418085.  — (June 2003). "Where is Philosophy at the Start of the Twenty First century?". Proc. Aristotelian Society 103 (1): 85–96. doi:10.1111/j.0066-7372.2003.00065.x.  ‘Geometries and Arithmetics’, pp. 65–78 of P.Weingartner (ed.), Alternative Logics; Do Sciences Need Them?, Springer Verlag, 2003. A Site for Sorites', pp. 9–23 of J. C. Beall (ed.), Liars and Heaps: New Essays on Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2003. 'Inconsistent Arithmetic: Issues Technical and Philosophical', pp. 273–99 of V. F. Hendricks and J. Malinowski (eds.), Trends in Logic: 50 Years of Studia Logica (Studia Logica Library, Vol. 21), Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003. 'Nagarjuna and the Limits of Thought’ (with Jay Garfield), Philosophy East West 53 (2003), 1–21. Reprinted as ch. 5 of J. Garfield, Empty Words, Oxford University Press, 2002. 'Consistency, Paraconsistency and the Logical Limitative Theorems', in Grenzen und Grenzüberschreitungen (XIX Deutscher Kongress für Philosphie), ed. W. Hogrebe and J. Bromond, Akademie Verlag, 2004. Bryson, Brown; Priest, G (August 2004). "Chunk and Permeate, a Paraconsistent Inference Strategy. Part I: The Infinitesimal Calculus". Journal of Philosophical Logic 33 (4): 379–388. doi:10.1023/B:LOGI.0000036831.48866.12.  —; Read, Stephen (September 2004). "Intentionality: Meinongianisn and the Medievals". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 82 (3): 421–442. doi:10.1080/713659877.  'Spiking the Field Artillery', in J. C. Beall and B. Armour-Garb (eds.), ch. 3 of Truth and Deflationism, Oxford University Press, 2005. —; Colyvan, Mark; Garfield, Jay (2005). "Problems with the Argument for Fine Tuning". Synthese 145 (3): 325–338. doi:10.1007/s11229-005-6195-0.  — (2005). "Words Without Knowledge". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (3): 686–694. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2005.tb00481.x.  'The Limits of Language' in K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, (second edition) Vol.7, 156–9, Elsevier, 2005. —; Armour-Garb, Brad (2005). "Analetheism: a Phyrric Victory" (PDF). Analysis 65 (2): 167–173. doi:10.1093/analys/65.2.167.  — (2005). "Analysing of the Iraqi Adventure". Ormond Papers 22: 147–150.  'The Paradoxes of Denotation', ch. 7 of Self-Reference, eds. T. Bolander, V. F. Hendrix, and S. A Pedersen, CLSI Lecture Notes, Stanford University, 2006. ‘Logic, Paraconsistent’, in D. Borchert (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (second edition), Macmillan, 2006, Vol. 7, 105–6. ‘Logic, Relevant (Relevance)’, in D. Borchert (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (second edition), Macmillan, 2006, Vol. 8, 358–9. 'Motion', in D. Borchert (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (second edition), Macmillan, 2006, Vol. 6, 409–11. Beall, JC; Brady, Ross T.; Hazen, A.P.; Priest, G; Restall, G. (December 2006). "Relevant Restricted Quantification" (PDF). Journal of Philosophical Logic 35 (6): 587–598. doi:10.1007/s10992-005-9008-5.  — (2006). "What is Philosophy?". Philosophy 81 (2): 189–207. doi:10.1017/S0031819106316026.  — (2006). "A Hundred Flowers". Topoi 25: 91–5. doi:10.1007/s11245-006-0014-1.  —; Beall, JC (2007). "Not so Deep Inconsistency: a Reply to Eklund". Australasian Journal of Logic 5: 74–84.  'Paraconsistency and Dialetheism', pp. 129–204 of Handbook of the History of Logic, Vol. 8, eds. D. Gabbay and J. Woods, North Holland, 2007. 'Reply to Slater', pp. 467–74 of J-Y Beziau, W. Carnielli and D. Gabbay (eds.), Handbook of Paraconsistency, College Publications, 2007. —; Thomason, Neil (2007). "60% Proof: Proof, Lakatos and Paraconsistency". Australasian Journal of Logic 5: 89–100.  ‘Revenge, Field, and ZF’, ch. 9 of JC Beall (ed.), Revenge of the Liar: New Essays on the Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2007. — (2007). "How the Particular Quantifier became Existentially Loaded Behind our Backs". Soochow Journal of Philosophical Studies 16: 197–213.  — (2007). "Translation of 'Logic of Paradox', 'La Logique du paraqdoxe'". Philosophie 94: 72–94.  —; Garfield, J.; Deguchi, Y. (2008). "The Way of the Dialetheist: Contradictions in Buddhism". Philosophy East and West 58 (3): 395–402. doi:10.1353/pew.0.0011.  — (2008). "Jaina Logic: a Contemporary Perspective". History and Philosophy of Logic 29 (3): 263–278. doi:10.1080/01445340701690233.  — (2008). "Precis of Towards Non-Being". Review of Metaphysics 74: 185–190.  — (2008). "Replies to Nolan and Kroon". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 74: 208–214. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2007.00125.x.  — (2008). "Many-Valued Modal Logic: a Simple Approach". Review of Symbolic Logic 1 (2): 190–203. doi:10.1017/S1755020308080179.  — (2008). "The Closing of the Mind: How the Particular Quantifier Became Existentially Loaded Behind our Backs". Review of Symbolic Logic 1: 42–55. doi:10.1017/S1755020308080015.  "Graham Priest and Diderik Batens Interview Each Other". The Reasoner 2 (8): 2–4. 2008.  — (2008). "Creating Non-Existents: Some Initial Thoughts". Studies in Logic 1: 18–24.  — (2008). "Badici on Inclosures". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86: 583–596.  — (2008). "Logical Pluralism Hollandaise". The Australasian Journal of Logic 6: 210–4.  'Envelops and Indifference', (with Greg Restall), pages 283–290 in Dialogues, Logics and Other Strange Things, essays in honour of Shahid Rahman, edited by Cédric Dégremont, Laurent Keiff and Helge Rückert, College Publications, 2008. [2] 'Conditionals: a Debate with Jackson', ch. 13 of I. Ravenscroft (ed.), Minds, Worlds and Conditionals: Themes from the Philosophy of Frank Jackson. Oxford University Press, 2009. ‘Beyond the Limits of Knowledge’, ch. 7 (pp. 93–104) of J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2009. — (2009). "The Structure of Emptiness". Philosophy East and West 59 (4): 467–480. doi:10.1353/pew.0.0069.  'Mountains are Just Mountains' (with Jay Garfield), pp. 71–82 of J. Garfield and M. D’Amato (eds.), Pointing at the Moon: Buddhism. Logic and Analytic Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2009. — (December 2009). "Obituary for Leonard Goddard". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 87 (4): 693–4. doi:10.1080/00048400903208805.  Translation of 'Objects of Thought' into Japanese, in Human Ontology 15 (2009), 1–12. (Trans. S. Yamahguchi.) — (2009). "Neighbourhood Semantics for Intentional Operators". Review of Symbolic Logic 2 (2): 360–373. doi:10.1017/S1755020309090170.  'Not to Be', ch. 23 of R. Le Poidevin, P. Simons, A. McGonical, and R. Cameron (eds.), The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics, Routledge 2009. — (2009). "Dualising Intuitionist Negation". Principia 13 (2): 165–184. doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2009v13n2p165.  'A Case of Mistaken Identity’, ch. 11, pp. 205–222 of J. Lear and A. Oliver, The Force of Argument, Routledge, 2010. — (January 2010). "Hopes Fade for Saving Truth". Philosophy 85 (1): 109–140. doi:10.1017/S0031819109990489.  ‘Two Truths: Two Models’, to appear in the Cowherds (eds.), Moonshadows, Oxford University Press. ‘The Truth(s) about the Two Truths’, (with T.Tilemans and M. Siderits) to appear in the Cowherds (eds.), Moonshadows, Oxford University Press (2010). — (2010). "Inclosures, Vagueness and Self-Reference". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 51 (1): 69–84. doi:10.1215/00294527-2010-005. MR 2666570. Zbl 05720470.    == References ==   == External links == Graham Priest personal website -- free pdfs of papers available for download Priest archive on the CUNY Philosophy Commons Video of Graham Priest & Maureen Eckert on Deviant Logic Rationally Speaking, Podcast of Graham Priest on Paradoxes and Paraconsistent Logic Arche Foundations of Logical Consequence Workshop 2009, "Is the Ternary R Depraved?" The Monthly: Graham priest on Gottlob Frege The Philosopher's Zone, 10 July 2010: "It's All about Me: A Forum on the Philosophy of the Self" The New York Times, The Stone Blog, 28 November 2010: "Paradoxical Truth" Graham Priest Photograph (full NYT version) Wikimedia Sept. 2010 Philosophy TV, 10 January 2011: Discussion of Deviant (Non-Classical) Logic, teaching logic, metafiction and logic with Maureen Eckert (UMASS Dartmouth) Two-Part Interview on Florida Student Philosophy Blog: Part 1 General Questions and Part 2 Technical Questions.

Gregory John Chaitin (/ˈtʃaɪtɨn/ CHY-tən; born 15 November 1947) is an Argentine-American mathematician and computer scientist. Beginning in the late 1960s, Chaitin made contributions to algorithmic information theory and metamathematics, in particular a computer-theoretic result equivalent to Gödel's incompleteness theorem. He is considered to be one of the founders of what is today known as Kolmogorov (or Kolmogorov-Chaitin) complexity together with Andrei Kolmogorov and Ray Solomonoff. Today, algorithmic information theory is a common subject in any computer science curriculum.   == Mathematics and computer science == He attended the Bronx High School of Science and City College of New York, where he (still in his teens) developed the theory that led to his independent discovery of Kolmogorov complexity. Chaitin has defined Chaitin's constant Ω, a real number whose digits are equidistributed and which is sometimes informally described as an expression of the probability that a random program will halt. Ω has the mathematical property that it is definable but not computable. Chaitin's early work on algorithmic information theory followed after the work of Solomonoff, Kolmogorov, and Martin-Lof. Chaitin is also the originator of using graph coloring to do register allocation in compiling, a process known as Chaitin's algorithm. He was formerly a researcher at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center in New York and remains an emeritus researcher. He has written more than 10 book titles that have been translated to about 15 languages. He is today interested in questions of metabiology and information-theoretic formalizations of the theory of evolution.   == Other scholarly contributions == Chaitin also writes about philosophy, especially metaphysics and philosophy of mathematics (particularly about epistemological matters in mathematics). In metaphysics, Chaitin claims that algorithmic information theory is the key to solving problems in the field of biology (obtaining a formal definition of 'life', its origin and evolution) and neuroscience (the problem of consciousness and the study of the mind). In recent writings, he defends a position known as digital philosophy. In the epistemology of mathematics, he claims that his findings in mathematical logic and algorithmic information theory show there are "mathematical facts that are true for no reason, they're true by accident. They are random mathematical facts". Chaitin proposes that mathematicians must abandon any hope of proving those mathematical facts and adopt a quasi-empirical methodology.   == Honors == In 1995 he was given the degree of doctor of science honoris causa by the University of Maine. In 2002 he was given the title of honorary professor by the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina, where his parents were born and where Chaitin spent part of his youth. In 2007 he was given a Leibniz Medal by Wolfram Research. In 2009 he was given the degree of doctor of philosophy honoris causa by the National University of Córdoba. He was formerly a researcher at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center and is now a professor at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.   == Criticism == Some philosophers and logicians strongly disagree with the philosophical conclusions that Chaitin has drawn from his theorems. The logician Torkel Franzén criticized Chaitin’s interpretation of Gödel's incompleteness theorem and the alleged explanation for it that Chaitin’s work represents.   == See also == Digital philosophy Halting problem Algorithmic information theory   == Bibliography == Information, Randomness & Incompleteness (World Scientific 1987) (online) Algorithmic Information Theory (Cambridge University Press 1987) online Information-theoretic Incompleteness (World Scientific 1992) (online) The Limits of Mathematics (Springer-Verlag 1998) The Unknowable (Springer-Verlag 1999) Exploring Randomness (Springer-Verlag 2001) Conversations with a Mathematician (Springer-Verlag 2002) From Philosophy to Program Size (Tallinn Cybernetics Institute 2003) Meta Math!: The Quest for Omega (Pantheon Books 2005) (reprinted in UK as Meta Maths: The Quest for Omega, Atlantic Books 2006) (arXiv preprint) Teoria algoritmica della complessità (G. Giappichelli Editore 2006) Thinking about Gödel & Turing (World Scientific 2007) Mathematics, Complexity and Philosophy (Editorial Midas 2011) Gödel's Way (CRC Press 2012) Proving Darwin: Making Biology Mathematical (Pantheon Books 2012)   == Notes ==   == References == Pagallo, Ugo (2005), Introduzione alla filosofia digitale. Da Leibniz a Chaitin [Introduction to Digital Philosophy: From Leibniz to Chaitin] (in Italian), G. Giappichelli Editore, ISBN 88-348-5635-X  Calude, Cristian S., ed. (2007), Randomness and Complexity. From Leibniz to Chaitin, World Scientific, ISBN 978-981-277-082-0    == External links == G J Chaitin Home Page List of publications of G J Chaitin Video of lecture on metabiology: "Life as evolving software" on YouTube Video of lecture on "Leibniz, complexity and incompleteness" Works by or about Gregory Chaitin in libraries (WorldCat catalog) New Scientist article (March, 2001) on Chaitin, Omegas and Super-Omegas A short version of Chaitin's proof

Grigori Mints (June 7, 1939 – May 29, 2014) was a Russian philosopher and mathematician with worked in mathematical logic. He was born in St. Petersburg, Russia, and received his Ph.D. in 1965 from the Leningrad State University under Nikolai Aleksandrovich Shanin with a thesis entitled "On Predicate and Operator Variants for Building Theories of Constructive Mathematics". In 1990 he received his D.Sc. from Leningrad State University with a thesis entitled "Proof Transformations and Synthesis of Programs". He was a Stanford University professor. Since 1991, Grigori "Grisha" Mints was a professor of philosophy and, by courtesy, of mathematics and of computer science at Stanford University. Before joining Stanford, Mints held research positions at the Steklov Mathematical Institute, the Leningrad University and the Estonian Academy of Sciences. Considered one of the most distinguished logicians in the world, Mints was passionate about the applications of logic to philosophy. His expertise was in proof theory – the analysis of the structure of mathematical reasoning. Mints was elected to the Estonian Academy of Sciences in 2008 and to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2010. Mints was a very active member of the steering committee of the WoLLIC series of workshops on logic and language, after having been a member of the community in several capacities such as invited speaker, PC member, PC chair, Organising Committee chair, guest editor of proceedings and special issue, and steering committee member.   == Selected Publications == Mints, G. (2013) Epsilon substitution for first- and second-order predicate logic. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 164(6): 733-739. Mints, G., Olkhovikov, G.V., Urquhart, A. (2013) Failure of interpolation in constant domain intuitionistic logic. "J. Symb. Log." 78(3): 937-950. Mints, G. (2013) ADC Method of Proof Search for Intuitionistic Propositional Natural Deduction. To appear in a "Festsschrift for A. Avron". Mints, G. (2012) Effective Cut-elimination for a Fragment of Modal mu-calculus. "Studia Logica" 100(1-2): 279-287. Mints, G. (2010) Cut-free formulations for a quantified logic of here and there. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 162(3): 237-242. Mints, G. (2008) Cut elimination for a simple formulation of epsilon calculus. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 152(1-3): 148-160. Mints, G. (2006) Notes on constructive negation. in R. Kahle and P. Schroeder-Heister (eds.), "Proof-Theoretic Semantics", special issue of "Synthese", 2006, 148, issue 3, pp. 701–717. Mints, G. (2006) Cut Elimination for a Simple Formulation of PAepsilon. "Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci." 143: 159-169. Mints, G. (2006) S4 is Topologically Complete for (0, 1): a Short Proof. "Logic Journal of the IGPL" 14(1): 63-71. Mints, G. (2006) Cut Elimination for S4C: A Case Study. "Studia Logica" 82(1): 121-132. Mints, G. & Zhang, T. (2005) Propositional logic of continuous transformations in Cantor space. "Arch. Math. Log." 44(6): 783-799. Kremer, Ph. & Mints, G. (2005) Dynamic topological logic. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 131(1-3): 133-158. Mints, G. & Zhang, T. (2005) A proof of topological completeness for S4 in (0, 1). "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 133(1-3): 231-245. Tatsuta, M. & Mints, G. (2005) A simple proof of second-order strong normalization with permutative conversions. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 136(1-2): 134-155 Mints, G. & Muskens, R. (eds.) (2003) "Games, Logic, and Constructive Sets". Published by Center for the Study of Language and Information - Lecture Notes (Book 161), 2003. ISBN 978-1575864501 Mints, G. (2001) "A Short Introduction to Intuitionistic Logic" (University Series in Mathematics). Published by Kluwer Academic Publisher, 2001. Mints, G. (1992) "A Short Introduction to Modal Logic". Published by Center for the Study of Language and Information - Lecture Notes (Book 30), 1992. ISBN 978-0937073759 Selected Papers in Proof Theory (North-Holland), August 1992, ISBN 978-0444896193, Studies in Proof Theory series) Mints, G. & Martin-Löf, P. (eds.) (1990) "COLOG-88: International Conference on Computer Logic", Tallinn, USSR, December 12–16, 1988, Proceedings - Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 417), 1990. ISBN 978-3540523352   == References ==   == External links == Grigori Mints official website at Stanford University Tributes to Grigori Mints



Hartry H. Field (born 1946) is Silver Professor of Philosophy at New York University and a leading contributor to philosophy of language, mind, and mathematics. He previously taught at Princeton University, the University of Southern California and The Graduate Center of the City University of New York. He earned his Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University under the direction of Hilary Putnam. His first work was a commentary on Alfred Tarski's theory of truth, which he has worked on since 1972. His current view on this matter is in favor of a deflationary theory of truth. His most influential work produced in this period is probably "Theory Change and the Indeterminacy of Reference" (Journal of Philosophy, 70, 14: 462-481), in which he introduced the concept of partial denotation. In the 1980s, Field started a project in the philosophy of mathematics discussing mathematical fictionalism, the doctrine that all mathematical statements are merely useful fictions, and shouldn't be taken to be literally true. More precisely, Field holds that the existence of sets may be denied, in opposition to Quine and Putnam. Field is also Distinguished Research Professor in the Department of Philosophy, University of Birmingham, UK. Much of his current work is in the semantic paradoxes. In 2008, he gave the John Locke Lectures, entitled "Logic, Normativity, and Rational Revisability."   == BooksEdit == Science Without Numbers, Blackwell, 1980 Realism, Mathematics and Modality, Blackwell, 1989 Truth and the Absence of Fact, Oxford University Press 2001 Saving Truth from Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2008   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == http://philosophy.fas.nyu.edu/object/hartryfield

Harvey Friedman (born 23 September 1948) is a mathematical logician at Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio. He has worked on reverse mathematics, a project intended to derive the axioms of mathematics from the theorems considered to be necessary. In recent years this has advanced to a study of Boolean relation theory, which attempts to justify large cardinal axioms by demonstrating their necessity for deriving certain propositions considered "concrete". Friedman earned his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1967, with a dissertation on Subsystems of Analysis. His advisor was Gerald Sacks. Friedman received the Alan T. Waterman Award in 1984. He delivered the Tarski Lectures in 2007. In 1967, Friedman was listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for being the world's youngest professor when he taught at Stanford University at age 18 as an assistant professor of philosophy. He has also been a professor of mathematics and a professor of music. He officially retired in July of 2012. Friedman is the brother of mathematician Sy Friedman.   == See also == Friedman's grand conjecture   == References == ^ a b Handbook of Philosophical Logic, ISBN 0-7923-7018-X, p. 38 ^ Dr. Harvey Martin Friedman ^ Ohio State University Distinguished Lecturers (2007—2008) ^ Harvey Friedman's Degrees and Employment History   == Further reading == L. A. Harrington et al., eds., Harvey Friedman's research in the foundations of mathematics, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 117, Amsterdam, North-Holland Publishing Company (1985)   == External links == Harvey Friedman's homepage at the Ohio State University Harvey Friedman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Haskell Brooks Curry (/ˈhæskəl ˈkɜri/; September 12, 1900 – September 1, 1982) was an American mathematician and logician. Curry is best known for his work in combinatory logic; while the initial concept of combinatory logic was based on a single paper by Moses Schönfinkel, much of the development was done by Curry. Curry is also known for Curry's paradox and the Curry–Howard correspondence. There are three programming languages named after him, Haskell, Brooks and Curry, as well as the concept of currying, a technique used for transforming functions in mathematics and computer science.   == Life == Curry was born on September 12, 1900, in Millis, Massachusetts, to Samuel Silas Curry and Anna Baright Curry, who ran a school for elocution. He entered Harvard University in 1916 to study medicine but switched to mathematics before graduating in 1920. After two years of graduate work in electrical engineering at MIT, he returned to Harvard to study physics, earning a MA in 1924. Curry's interest in mathematical logic started during this period when he was introduced to the Principia Mathematica, the attempt by Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell to ground mathematics in symbolic logic. Remaining at Harvard, Curry pursued a Ph.D. in mathematics. While he was directed by George Birkhoff to work on differential equations, his interests continued to shift to logic. In 1927, while an instructor at Princeton University, he discovered the work of Moses Schönfinkel in combinatory logic. Schönfinkel's work had anticipated much of Curry's own research, and as a consequence, he moved to Göttingen where he could work with Heinrich Behmann and Paul Bernays, who were familiar with Schönfinkel's work. Curry was supervised by David Hilbert and worked closely with Bernays, receiving a Ph.D. in 1930 with a dissertation on combinatory logic. In 1928, before leaving for Göttingen, Curry married Mary Virginia Wheatley. The couple lived in Germany while Curry completed his dissertation, then, in 1929, moved to State College, Pennsylvania where Curry accepted a position at Pennsylvania State College. They had two children, Anne Wright Curry (July 27, 1930) and Robert Wheatley Curry (July 6, 1934). Curry remained at Penn State for the next 37 years. He spent one year at University of Chicago in 1931–32 under a National Research Fellowship and one year in 1938–39 at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. In 1942 he took a leave of absence to do applied mathematics for the US government during World War II. Immediately after the war he worked on the ENIAC project, in 1945 and 1946. Under a Fulbright fellowship, he collaborated with Robert Feys in Louvain, Belgium. After retiring from Penn State in 1966, Curry accepted a position at the University of Amsterdam. In 1970, after finishing the second volume of his treatise on the combinatory logic, Curry retired from the University of Amsterdam and returned to State College, Pennsylvania. Haskell Curry died on September 1, 1982 in State College, Pennsylvania.   == Work == The focus of Curry's work were attempts to show that combinatory logic could provide a foundation for mathematics. Towards the end of 1933, he learned of the Kleene–Rosser paradox from correspondence with John Rosser. The paradox, developed by Rosser and Stephen Kleene had proved the inconsistency of a number of related formal systems including one proposed by Alonzo Church (a system which had the lambda calculus as a consistent subsystem) and Curry's own system. However, unlike Church, Kleene, and Rosser, Curry did not give up on the foundational approach, saying that he did not want to "run away from paradoxes." By working in the area of Combinatory Logic for his entire career, Curry essentially became the founder and biggest name in the field. Combinatory logic is the foundation for one style of functional programming language. The power and scope of combinatory logic is quite similar to that of the lambda calculus of Church, and the latter formalism has tended to predominate in recent decades. In 1947 Curry also described one of the first high-level programming languages and provided the first description of a procedure to convert a general arithmetic expression into a code for one-address computer.  He taught at Harvard, Princeton, and from 1929 to 1966, at the Pennsylvania State University. In 1942, he published Curry's paradox. In 1966 he became professor of mathematics at the Universiteit van Amsterdam. Curry also wrote and taught mathematical logic more generally; his teaching in this area culminated in his 1963 Foundations of Mathematical Logic. His preferred philosophy of mathematics was formalism (cf. his 1951 book), following his mentor Hilbert, but his writings betray substantial philosophical curiosity and a very open mind about intuitionistic logic.   == Major publications == "Grundlagen der Kombinatorischen Logik" [Foundations of combinatorial logic]. American Journal of Mathematics (in German) (The Johns Hopkins University Press) 52 (3): 509–536. 1930. doi:10.2307/2370619. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  A theory of formal deducibility. University of Notre Dame Press. 1950. A theory of formal deducibility (2nd ed.). University of Notre Dame Press. 1957.   Outlines of a formalist philosophy of mathematics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 1951. ISBN 0444533680. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  Leçons de logique algébrique (in French). Paris: Gauthier-Villars. 1952.  Curry, Haskell; Feys, Robert (1958). Combinatory Logic I. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.  Foundations of Mathematical Logic. Mcgraw Hill. 1963.  Foundations of mathematical logic (Unabridged and corrected Dover ed.). New York: Dover Publications. 1977. ISBN 0-486-63462-0. Retrieved 23 July 2012.   Combinatory Logic II. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company. 1972. ISBN 0720422086.    == See also == Currying Curry's paradox Functional programming Lambda calculus Curry–Howard correspondence Haskell (programming language)   == References == ^ 1924. "Über die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik", Mathematische Annalen 92, pp. 305–316. Translated by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg as "On the building blocks of mathematical logic" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 355–66. ^ a b Seldin, Jonathan. "The Logic of Curry and Church".  ^ Barendregt, H.P. The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics. Elsevier. p. 4.  ^ Knuth, Donald E.; Pardo, Luis Trabb (1976). "Early development of programming languages". Stanford University, Computer Science Department, p. 22 ^ Nelson, D. (1952). "Review: A theory of formal deducibility, by H. B. Curry". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 58 (3): 415–417. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1952-09596-3.  ^ Marcus, R. Barcan (1952). "Review: Leçons de logique algébrique, by H. B. Curry". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 58 (2): 673–674. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1952-09657-9.    == Further reading == Seldin, J.P., and Hindley, J.R., eds., 1980. To H.B. Curry: Essays on combinatory logic, lambda calculus, and formalism. Academic Press. Includes biographical essay.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Haskell Curry", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Curry archives provides images of several hundred manuscript pages from 1920 to 1931. CLg. bibliography 587 pp Haskell Brooks Curry at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Heiric of Auxerre  (841–876) was a French Benedictine theologian and writer. He was an oblate of the monastery of St. Germanus of Auxerre from a young age. He studied with Servatus Lupus and Haymo of Auxerre. His own students included Remigius of Auxerre and Hucbald. His Miracula sancti Germani was a verse life of St. Germanus. Other works include his Collectaeum, a homiliary, and glosses on the Categoriae decem.   == Notes ==   == External links == Friedrich Wilhelm Bautz (1990). "Heiric of Auxerre". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 2. Hamm: Bautz. col. 689. ISBN 3-88309-032-8.  Chapter on the School of Auxerre from The History of Philosophy by William Turner, 1903. Heiric of Auxerre's labyrinth

Helena Rasiowa (June 20, 1917 – August 9, 1994) was a Polish mathematician. She worked in the foundations of mathematics and algebraic logic.   == Early years == Rasiowa was born in Vienna on June 20, 1917 to Polish parents. As soon as Poland regained its independence in 1918, the family settled in Warsaw. Helena's father was a railway specialist. She exhibited many different skills and interests, from music to business management and the most important of her interests, mathematics. In 1938, the time was not very opportune for entering a university. Rasiowa had to interrupt her studies, as no legal education was possible in Poland after 1939. Many people fled the country, or at least they fled the big towns, which were subject to German bombardment and terror. The Rasiowa family fled also, as most high-ranking administration officials and members of the government were being evacuated to Romania. The family spent a year in Lvov. After a Soviet invasion in September 1939, the town was taken over by the Soviet Union. The lives of many Poles became endangered, so Helena's father decided to return to Warsaw.   == Academic development == Rasiowa became strongly influenced by Polish logicians. She wrote her Master's thesis under the supervision of Jan Łukasiewicz and Bolesław Sobociński. In 1944, the Warsaw Uprising broke out and consequently Warsaw was almost completely destroyed. This was not only due to the immediate fighting, but also because of the systematic destruction which followed the uprising after it had been suppressed. Rasiowa's thesis burned with the whole house. She herself survived with her mother in a cellar covered by the ruins of the demolished building. After the war, Polish mathematics began to recover its institutions, its moods, and its people. Those who remained considered their duty to be the reconstruction of Polish universities and the scientific community. One of the important conditions for this reconstruction was to gather all those who could participate in re-creating mathematics. In the meantime, Rasiowa had accepted a teaching position in a secondary school. That is where she met Andrzej Mostowski and came back to the University. She re-wrote her Master's thesis in 1945 and in the next year she started her academic career as an assistant at the University of Warsaw, the institution she remained linked with for the rest of her life. At the University, she prepared and defended her PhD thesis, Algebraic Treatment of the Functional Calculi of Lewis and Heyting,in 1950 under the guidance of Prof. Andrzej Mostowski. This paper pointed to the main field of Rasiowa's future research: algebraic methods in logic. In 1956, she took her second academic degree, doktor nauk (equivalent to habilitation today) in the Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sciences, where between 1954 and 1957, she held a post of Associate Professor, becoming a Professor in 1957 and subsequently Full Professor in 1967. For the degree, she submitted two papers, Algebraic Models of Axiomatic Theories and Constructive Theories, which together formed a thesis named Algebraic Models of Elementary Theories and their Applications.   == Works == The Mathematics of Metamathematics (1963, together with Roman Sikorski) An Algebraic Approach to Non-Classical Logics (1974)   == External links == Helena Rasiowa at the Mathematics Genealogy Project "Helena Rasiowa", Biographies of Women Mathematicians, Agnes Scott College O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Helena Rasiowa", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Rasiowa's Biography A tribute to Helena Rasiowa – by Melvin Fitting On the contributions of Helena Rasiowa to mathematical logic – an article by J. M. Font Website dedicated to Helena Rasiowa

Hendrik Pieter (Henk) Barendregt (born 18 December 1947, Amsterdam) is a Dutch logician, known for his work in lambda calculus and type theory.   == Life and work == Barendregt studied mathematical logic at Utrecht University, obtaining his Masters in 1968 and his Ph.D. in 1971, both cum laude, under Dirk van Dalen and Georg Kreisel. After a postdoctoral position at Stanford University, he taught at Utrecht University. Since 1986, Barendregt has taught at Radboud University Nijmegen, where he now holds the Chair of Foundations of Mathematics and Computer Science. His research group works on Constructive Interactive Mathematics. He is also Adjunct Professor at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. He has been a visiting scholar at Darmstadt, ETH Zürich, Siena, and Kyoto. In 1997 Barendregt was elected member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. On 6 February 2003 Barendregt was awarded the Spinozapremie for 2002, the highest scientific award in the Netherlands. In 2002 he was knighted in the Orde van de Nederlandse Leeuw.   == Selected publications == H.P. Barendregt (1985). The Lambda Calculus — Its Syntax and Semantics. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 103. Amsterdam: North-Holland. ISBN 0-444-87508-5.  — See Errata Toyama, Y. and Klop, J.W. and Barendregt, H.P. (1989). "Termination for the Direct Sum of left-Linear Term Rewriting Systems (Preliminary Draft)". In Nachum Dershowitz. Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 3rd Int. Conf., RTA-89. LNCS 355. Springer. pp. 477–491.  Barendregt, H. (2001). "Computing and Proving (invited lecture)". In Middeldorp, A. Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 12th Int. Conf., RTA-01. LNCS 2051. Springer.  2013. Lambda Calculus with Types, part of Perspectives in Logic. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521766142   == References ==   == External links == Henk Barendregt's homepage Author profile in the database zbMATH

Rudolf Hermann Lotze (German: [ˈlɔtsə]; 21 May 1817 – 1 July 1881) was a German philosopher and logician. He also had a medical degree and was unusually well versed in biology. He argued that if the physical world is governed by mechanical laws, relations and developments in the universe could be explained as the functioning of a world mind. His medical studies were pioneering works in scientific psychology.   == Biography == Lotze was born in Bautzen (Budziszyn), Saxony, Germany, the son of a physician. He was educated at the grammar school of Zittau; he had an enduring love of the classical authors, publishing a translation of Sophocles' Antigone into Latin verse in his middle age. He attended the University of Leipzig as a student of philosophy and natural sciences, but entered officially as a student of medicine when he was seventeen. Lotze's early studies were mostly governed by two distinct interests: the first was scientific, based upon mathematical and physical studies under the guidance of E. H. Weber, Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann and Gustav Fechner. The other was his aesthetic and artistic interest, which was developed under the care of Christian Hermann Weisse. He was attracted both by science and by the idealism of Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Lotze's first essay was his dissertation De futurae biologiae principibus philosophicis, with which he gained (1838) the degree of doctor of medicine, four months after obtaining the degree of doctor of philosophy. He laid the foundation of his philosophical system in his Metaphysik (Leipzig, 1841) and his Logik (1843), short books published while still a junior lecturer at Leipzig, from whence he moved to Göttingen, succeeding Johann Friedrich Herbart in the chair of philosophy. His two early books remained unnoticed by the reading public, and Lotze first became known to a larger circle through a series of works which aimed at establishing in the study of the physical and mental phenomena of the human organism in its normal and diseased states the same general principles which had been adopted in the investigation of inorganic phenomena. These works were his Allgemeine Pathologie und Therapie als mechanische Naturwissenschaften (1842, 2nd ed., 1848), the articles "Lebenskraft" (1843) and "Seele und Seelenleben" (1846) in Rudolf Wagner's Handwörterbuch der Physiologie, his Allgemeine Physiologie des Körperlichen Lebens (1851), and his Medizinische Psychologie oder Physiologie der Seele (1852). When Lotze published these works, medical science was still under the influence of Schelling's philosophy of nature. The mechanical laws, to which external things were subject, were conceived as being valid only in the inorganic world. Mechanism was the unalterable connexion of every phenomenon a with other phenomena b, c, d, either as following or preceding it; mechanism was the inexorable form into which the events of this world are cast, and by which they are connected. The object of those writings was to establish the all-pervading rule of mechanism. But the mechanical view of nature is not identical with the materialistic. In the last of the above-mentioned works the question is discussed at great length how we have to consider mind, and the relation between mind and body; the answer is we have to consider mind as an immaterial principle, its action, however, on the body and vice versa as purely mechanical, indicated by the fixed laws of a psycho-physical mechanism. These doctrines of Lotze, though pronounced with the distinct and reiterated reservation that they did not contain a solution of the philosophical question regarding the nature of mechanism, were nevertheless by many considered to be the last word of the philosopher, a decisive rejection of the reveries of Schelling and the idealistic theories of Hegel. Published as they were during the years when the modern school of German materialism was at its height, these works of Lotze were enrolled in the opposing camp of Empirical philosophy. The misinterpretations which he had suffered induced Lotze to publish a small polemical pamphlet (Streitschriften, 1857), in which he corrected two mistakes. His opposition to Hegel's formalism had induced some to associate him with the materialistic school, others to count him among the followers of Herbart. Lotze denied that he belonged to the school of Herbart. He admitted, though, that historically the same doctrine which might be considered the forerunner of Herbart's teachings might lead to his own views, viz. the monadology of Leibniz.   == Philosophy == Lotze worked in a post-revolutionary time of transition between the idealistic and rationalist legacies of Leibniz, Kant and Hegel and the new Materialism and scientific interpretation of reality. He believed that everywhere in the wide realm of observation we find three distinct regions: the region of facts, the region of laws and the region of standards of value. These three regions are separate only in our thoughts, not in reality. Full understanding comes through conviction that the world of facts is the field in which those higher standards of moral and aesthetic value are being realized through the medium of laws. Such a union is, for him, only intelligible through the idea of a personal Deity, who in the creation and preservation of a world has voluntarily chosen certain forms and laws, through the natural operation of which the ends of His work are gained. His lectures ranged over a wide field: he delivered annually lectures on psychology and on logic (the latter including a survey of the entirety of philosophical research, Encyclopädie der Philosophie), then at longer intervals lectures on metaphysics, philosophy of nature, philosophy of art, philosophy of religion, rarely on history of philosophy and ethics. In these lectures he expounded his peculiar views in a stricter form, and during the last decade of his life he embodied the substance of those courses in his System der Philosophie, of which only two volumes have appeared (vol. I Logik, 1st ed., 1874, 2nd ed., 1880; vol. II Metaphysik, 1879). The third and concluding volume, which was to treat in a more condensed form the principal problems of practical philosophy, of philosophy of art and religion, was not completed before his death. A problem of a purely formal character for him was to try to bring unity and harmony into the scattered thoughts of our general culture. Through regression analysis he sought a harmonious view of things. He wanted especially to investigate those conceptions which form the initial assumptions and conditions of the several sciences, and to fix the limits of their applicability. The investigations will then naturally divide themselves into three parts, the first of which deals with those to our mind inevitable forms, or laws, in which we are obliged to think about things, if we think at all (metaphysics), the second being devoted to the great region of facts, trying to apply the results of metaphysics to these, specially the two great regions of external and mental phenomena (cosmology and psychology), the third dealing with those standards of value from which we pronounce our aesthetic or ethical approval or disapproval. His goal was to form some general idea how laws, facts and standards of value may be combined in one comprehensive view. The world of many things surrounds us; our notions, by which we manage correctly or incorrectly to describe it, are also ready made. What remains to be done is, not to explain how such a world manages to be what it is, nor how we came to form these notions, but to eliminate those abstract notions which are inconsistent and jarring, or to remodel and define them so that they may constitute a consistent and harmonious view. The course of things and their connexion is only thinkable by the assumption of a plurality of existences, the reality of which (as distinguished from our knowledge of them) can be conceived only as a multitude of relations. This quality of standing in relation to other things is that which gives to a thing its reality. And the nature of this reality again can neither be consistently represented as a fixed and hard substance nor as an unalterable something, but only as a fixed order of recurrence of continually changing events or impressions. The things themselves which exist and their changing phases must stand in some internal connexion; they themselves must be active or passive, capable of doing or suffering. Why not interpret at once and render intelligible the common conception originating in natural science, viz. that of a system of laws which governs the many things? But, in attempting to make this conception quite clear and thinkable, we are forced to represent the connexion of things as a universal substance, the essence of which we conceive as a system of laws which underlies everything and in its own self connects everything, but is imperceptible, and known to us merely through the impressions it produces on us, which we call things. Practical life as well as those of science are equally served if we deprive the material things outside of us of an independence, and assign to them merely a connected existence through the universal substance by the action of which alone they can appear to us. He traced material things through our scientific discovery of them, back to the culture which gave them reality through this science, and ultimately back to the values which established this culture. Lotze's historical position is of much interest. Though he disclaims being a follower of Herbart, his formal definition of philosophy and his conception of the object of metaphysics are similar to those of Herbart, who defines philosophy as an attempt to remodel the notions given by experience. In this endeavor he forms with Herbart an opposition to the philosophies of Johann Gottlieb Fichte. Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel which aimed at objective and absolute knowledge, and also to the criticism of Kant, which aimed at determining the validity of all human knowledge. What, however, with the idealists was an object of thought alone, the absolute, for Lotze cannot be defined in rigorous philosophical language; the aspirations of the human heart, the contents of our feelings and desires, the aims of art and the tenets of religious faith must be grasped in order to fill the empty idea of the absolute with meaning. These manifestations of the divine spirit again cannot be traced and understood by reducing (as Hegel did) the growth of the human mind in the individual, in society and in history to the monotonous rhythm of a speculative schematism. The essence and worth which is in them reveals itself only to the student of detail, for reality is larger and wider than philosophy. The problem, "how the one can be many", is only solved for us in the numberless examples in life and experience which surround us, for which we must retain a lifelong interest and which constitute the true field of all useful human work. This conviction of the emptiness of terms and abstract notions, and of the fullness of individual life, led Lotze to combine in his writings the two courses into which German philosophical thought had been moving since the death of its great founder, Leibniz. We may define these courses by the terms esoteric and exoteric. The former was the academic quest to systematize everything and reduce all our knowledge to an intelligible principle. This attempt missed the deeper meaning of Leibniz's philosophy. The latter was the unsystematized philosophy of general culture which we find in the work of the great writers of the classical period, Lessing, Winckelmann, Goethe, Schiller and Herder. All of these expressed in some degree their indebtedness to Leibniz. Lotze can be said to have brought philosophy out of the lecture-room into the market-place of life. By understanding and combining the strengths of each approach, he became the true successor of Leibniz. The age in which Lotze lived and wrote in Germany did not appreciate the position he took up. Frequently misunderstood, yet rarely criticized, he was nevertheless greatly admired, listened to by devoted hearers and read by an increasing circle. But this circle never attained to the unity of a philosophical school.   == Works == De futurae biologiae principiis philosophicis (1838). Reprinted in Kleine Schriften, 1885. Vol. 1, pp. 1-25 Gedichte (1840). Metaphysik (1841). Google (Oxford) Allgemeine Pathologie und Therapie als mechanische Naturwissenschaften (1842). 2nd ed., 1848. Google (Harvard) Logik (1843). Google (NYPL) 2nd ed., 1880. Ueber den Begriff der Schönheit (1845). Reprint, 1847. Google (Oxford) Allgemeine Physiologie des koerperlichen Lebens (1851). Google (Harvard) Medicinische Psychologie oder Physiologie der Seele (1852). Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Mikrokosmus: Ideen zur Naturgeschichte und Geschichte der Menschheit (1856–64). 2nd ed., 1868-72. 4th ed., 1884-88. Volume 1, 1856. Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Volume 2, 1858. Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Google (NYPL) Volume 3, 1864. Google (Oxford) Google (NYPL)  Streitschriften (1857). Google (Harvard) Geschichte der Aesthetik in Deutschland (1868). Google (Oxford) System der Philosophie. Part 1. Logik: Drei Bücher (1874). Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Google (UWisc). 2nd ed., 1880. Part 2. Metaphysik: Drei Bücher (1879). 2nd ed., 1884.  Geschichte der deutschen Philosophie seit Kant (1882). 2nd ed., 1894. Google (UWisc) Grundzüge der Psychologie (1881). Google (Harvard) 2nd ed., 1882. Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der Naturphilosophie (1882). Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der praktischen Philosophie (1882). 2nd ed., 1884. Google (UCal) Grundzüge der Religionsphilosophie (1883). 2nd ed., 1884. Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der Logik und Encyclopädie der Philosophie (1883). 2nd ed., 1885. Google (UCal) Grundzüge der Metaphysik (1883). Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der Aesthetik (1884). Kleine Schriften (1885–91). Volume 1, 1885. Google (Oxford) Google (Stanford) Google (UWisc) Volume 2, 1886. Google (Harvard) Volume 3, 1891. Google (UWisc)   === Works in English === Lotze's Outlines of Philosophy. Part 1. Outlines of Metaphysic (1884). IA (UCal) IA (UVictoria) 1886. Google (UMich) Part 2. Outlines of the Philosophy of Religion (1885). Google (UWisc) Reprint, 1886. IA (OISE) 1895. IA (St. Michael's) 1901. Google (UWisc)  Part 3. Outlines of Practical Philosophy (1885). Google (UCal) Part 4. Outlines of Psychology (1886). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) Part 5. Outlines of Aesthetics (1886). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) Part 6. Outlines of Logic (1887). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) 1892. Google (Harvard)  Lotze's System of Philosophy. Part 1. Logic: In Three Books (1884). Google (Oxford) IA (State Central) IA (UToronto). 2nd ed., 1888. Volume 1. IA (St. Basil's) IA (UIllinois) IA (Osmania) Google (Stanford) 2nd ed., 1888. Volume 2. IA (St. Basil's) IA (UIllinois).  Part 2. Metaphysic: In Three Books (1884). Google (Oxford) IA (State Central) IA (UToronto) 2nd ed., 1887. Volume 1. IA (Osmania) Google (Harvard) 2nd ed., 1887. Volume 2. IA (Osmania)  Microcosmus: An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the World (1885). Volume 1. IA (Union) 2nd ed., 1887. IA (UCal) IA (KCPL) 3rd ed., 1888. Google (Harvard) IA (St. Michael's) Volume 2. IA (Union) 2nd ed., 1887. IA (UCal) 3rd ed., 1888.Google (Harvard) IA (St. Michael's)   == Notes ==   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Lotze, Rudolf Hermann". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links ==  Works written by or about Hermann Lotze at Wikisource Hermann Lotze entry by David Sullivan in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Rudolf Hermann Lotze (1817–1881) entry by Nikolay Milkov in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Frederick Beiser Late German Idealism: Trendelenburg and Lotze, Oxford University Press, 2013: the most complete discussion of Lotze's philosophy in English Carl von Prantl (1884), "Lotze, Rudolf Hermann", Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (ADB) (in German) 19, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 288–290  Richard Falckenberg (1906), "Lotze, Rudolf Hermann", Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (ADB) (in German) 52, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 93–97

Hilary Whitehall Putnam (born July 31, 1926) is an American philosopher, mathematician, and computer scientist who has been a central figure in analytic philosophy since the 1960s, especially in philosophy of mind, philosophy of language, philosophy of mathematics, and philosophy of science. He is known for his willingness to apply an equal degree of scrutiny to his own philosophical positions as to those of others, subjecting each position to rigorous analysis until he exposes its flaws. As a result, he has acquired a reputation for frequently changing his own position. Putnam is currently Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University. In philosophy of mind, Putnam is known for his argument against the type-identity of mental and physical states based on his hypothesis of the multiple realizability of the mental, and for the concept of functionalism, an influential theory regarding the mind–body problem. In philosophy of language, along with Saul Kripke and others, he developed the causal theory of reference, and formulated an original theory of meaning, introducing the notion of semantic externalism based on a famous thought experiment called Twin Earth. In philosophy of mathematics, he and his mentor W. V. Quine developed the "Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis", an argument for the reality of mathematical entities, later espousing the view that mathematics is not purely logical, but "quasi-empirical". In the field of epistemology, he is known for his critique of the well known "brain in a vat" thought experiment. This thought experiment appears to provide a powerful argument for epistemological skepticism, but Putnam challenges its coherence. In metaphysics, he originally espoused a position called metaphysical realism, but eventually became one of its most outspoken critics, first adopting a view he called "internal realism", which he later abandoned. Despite these changes of view, throughout his career he remained committed to scientific realism, roughly the view that mature scientific theories are approximately true descriptions of ways things are. In the philosophy of perception Putnam came to endorse direct realism, according to which perceptual experiences directly present one with the external world. In the past, he further held that there are no mental representations, sense data, or other intermediaries that stand between the mind and the world. By 2012, however, he rejected this further commitment, in favor of "transactionalism", a view that accepts both that perceptual experiences are world-involving transactions, and that these transactions are functionally describable (provided that worldly items and intentional states may be referred to in the specification of the function). Such transactions can further involve qualia. In his later work, Putnam has become increasingly interested in American pragmatism, Jewish philosophy, and ethics, thus engaging with a wider array of philosophical traditions. He has also displayed an interest in metaphilosophy, seeking to "renew philosophy" from what he identifies as narrow and inflated concerns. Outside philosophy, Putnam has contributed to mathematics and computer science. Together with Martin Davis he developed the Davis–Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem and he helped demonstrate the unsolvability of Hilbert's tenth problem. He has been at times a politically controversial figure, especially for his involvement with the Progressive Labor Party in the late 1960s and early 1970s.   == Personal lifeEdit == Putnam was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1926. His father, Samuel Putnam, was a scholar of Romance languages, columnist and translator who wrote for the Daily Worker, a publication of the American Communist Party, from 1936 to 1946 (when he became disillusioned with communism). As a result of his father's commitment to communism, Putnam had a secular upbringing, although his mother, Riva, was Jewish. The family lived in France until 1934, when they returned to the United States, settling in Philadelphia. Putnam attended Central High School; there he met Noam Chomsky, who was a year behind him. The two have been friends—and often intellectual opponents—ever since. Putnam studied mathematics and philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania, receiving his BA (undergraduate degree) and becoming a member of the Philomathean Society, one of the oldest collegiate literary societies in the U.S. He went on to do graduate work in philosophy at Harvard University, and later at UCLA's Philosophy Department, where he received his Ph.D. in 1951 for a dissertation entitled "The Meaning of the Concept of Probability in Application to Finite Sequences". Putnam's teacher Hans Reichenbach (his dissertation supervisor) was a leading figure in logical positivism, the dominant school of philosophy of the day; one of Putnam's most consistent positions has been his rejection of logical positivism as self-defeating. After briefly teaching at Northwestern, Princeton, and MIT, he moved to Harvard in 1965 with his wife, Ruth Anna Jacobs, who took a teaching position in philosophy at Wellesley College. Hilary and Ruth Anna were married in 1962. Ruth Anna Jacobs, descendant of a family with a long scholarly tradition in Gotha (her ancestor was the German classical scholar Christian Friedrich Wilhelm Jacobs), was born in Berlin, Germany, in 1927 to anti-Nazi political-activist parents and, like Putnam himself, she was raised an atheist (her mother was Jewish and her father had been from a Christian background). The Putnams, rebelling against the anti-Semitism that they had experienced during their youth, decided to establish a traditional Jewish home for their children. Since they had no experience with the rituals of Judaism, they sought out invitations to other Jews' homes for Seder. They had "no idea how to do it [themselves]", in the words of Ruth Anna. They therefore began to study Jewish ritual and Hebrew, and became more Jewishly interested, identified, and active. In 1994, Hilary Putnam celebrated a belated Bar Mitzvah service. His wife had a Bat Mitzvah service four years later. Hilary was a popular teacher at Harvard. In keeping with the family tradition, he was politically active. In the 1960s and early 1970s, he was an active supporter of civil rights causes and an opponent of American military intervention in Vietnam. In 1963, he organized one of the first faculty and student committees at MIT against the war. Putnam was disturbed when he learned from reading the reports of David Halberstam that the U.S. was "defending" South Vietnamese peasants from the Vietcong by poisoning their rice crops. After moving to Harvard in 1965, he organized campus protests and began teaching courses on Marxism. Hilary became an official faculty advisor to the Students for a Democratic Society and, in 1968, became a member of the Progressive Labor Party (PLP). He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1965. After 1968, his political activities were centered on the PLP. The Harvard administration considered these activities disruptive and attempted to censure Putnam, but two other faculty members criticized the procedures. Putnam permanently severed his ties with the PLP in 1972. In 1997, at a meeting of former draft resistance activists at Arlington Street Church in Boston, Putnam described his involvement with the PLP as a mistake. He said that he had been impressed at first with PLP's commitment to alliance-building, and its willingness to attempt to organize from within the armed forces. In 1976, he was elected President of the American Philosophical Association. The following year, he was selected as Walter Beverly Pearson Professor of Mathematical Logic, in recognition of his contributions to philosophy of logic and mathematics. While breaking with his radical past, Putnam has never abandoned his belief that academics have a particular social and ethical responsibility toward society. He has continued to be forthright and progressive in his political views, as expressed in the articles "How Not to Solve Ethical Problems" (1983) and "Education for Democracy" (1993). Putnam is a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. He retired from teaching in June 2000, but, as of 2009, he still gives a seminar almost yearly at Tel Aviv University. He also held the Spinoza Chair of Philosophy at the University of Amsterdam in 2001. He is the Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University. He is also a founding patron of the small liberal arts college Ralston College. His corpus includes five volumes of collected works, seven books, and more than 200 articles. Putnam's renewed interest in Judaism has inspired him to publish several recent books and essays on the topic. With his wife, he has co-authored several books and essays on the late-19th-century American pragmatist movement. Putnam began a blog in May 2014: http://putnamphil.blogspot.com.   == Philosophy of mindEdit ==   === Multiple realizabilityEdit ===  Putnam's best-known work concerns philosophy of mind. His most noted original contributions to that field came in several key papers published in the late 1960s that set out the hypothesis of multiple realizability. In these papers, Putnam argues that, contrary to the famous claim of the type-identity theory, it is not necessarily true that "Pain is identical to C-fibre firing." Pain, according to Putnam's papers, may correspond to utterly different physical states of the nervous system in different organisms, and yet they all experience the same mental state of "being in pain". Putnam cited examples from the animal kingdom to illustrate his thesis. He asked whether it was likely that the brain structures of diverse types of animals realize pain, or other mental states, the same way. If they do not share the same brain structures, they cannot share the same mental states and properties. The answer to this puzzle had to be that mental states were realized by different physical states in different species. Putnam then took his argument a step further, asking about such things as the nervous systems of alien beings, artificially intelligent robots and other silicon-based life forms. These hypothetical entities, he contended, should not be considered incapable of experiencing pain just because they lack the same neurochemistry as humans. Putnam concluded that type-identity theorists had been making an "ambitious" and "highly implausible" conjecture which could be disproven with one example of multiple realizability. This argument is sometimes referred to as the "likelihood argument". Putnam formulated a complementary argument based on what he called "functional isomorphism". He defined the concept in these terms: "Two systems are functionally isomorphic if 'there is a correspondence between the states of one and the states of the other that preserves functional relations'." In the case of computers, two machines are functionally isomorphic if and only if the sequential relations among states in the first are exactly mirrored by the sequential relations among states in the other. Therefore, a computer made out of silicon chips and a computer made out of cogs and wheels can be functionally isomorphic but constitutionally diverse. Functional isomorphism implies multiple realizability. This argument is sometimes referred to as an "a priori argument". Jerry Fodor, Putnam, and others noted that, along with being an effective argument against type-identity theories, multiple realizability implies that any low-level explanation of higher-level mental phenomena is insufficiently abstract and general. Functionalism, which identifies mental kinds with functional kinds that are characterized exclusively in terms of causes and effects, abstracts from the level of microphysics, and therefore seemed to be a better explanation of the relation between mind and body. In fact, there are many functional kinds, such as mousetraps, software and bookshelves, which are multiply realized at the physical level.   === Machine state functionalismEdit ===  The first formulation of such a functionalist theory was put forth by Putnam himself. This formulation, which is now called "machine-state functionalism", was inspired by analogies noted by Putnam and others between the mind and theoretical "Turing machines" capable of computing any given algorithm. In non-technical terms, a Turing machine can be visualized as an infinitely long tape divided into squares (the memory) with a box-shaped scanning device that sits over and scans one square of the memory at a time. Each square is either blank (B) or has a 1 written on it. These are the inputs to the machine. The possible outputs are: Halt: Do nothing. R: move one square to the right. L: move one square to the left. B: erase whatever is on the square. 1: erase whatever is on the square and print a 1. A simple example of a Turing machine which writes out the sequence '111' after scanning three blank squares and then stopping is specified by the following machine table: This table states that if the machine is in state one and scans a blank square (B), it will print a 1 and remain in state one. If it is in state one and reads a 1, it will move one square to the right and also go into state two. If it is in state two and reads a B, it will print a 1 and stay in state two. If it's in state two and reads a 1, it will move one square to the right and go into state three. Finally, if it is in state three and reads a B, it prints a 1 and remains in state three. The point, for functionalism, is the nature of the "states" of the Turing machine. Each state can be defined in terms of its relations to the other states and to the inputs and outputs. State one, for example, is simply the state in which the machine, if it reads a B, writes a 1 and stays in that state, and in which, if it reads a 1, it moves one square to the right and goes into a different state. This is the functional definition of state one; it is its causal role in the overall system. The details of how it accomplishes what it accomplishes and of its material constitution are completely irrelevant. According to machine-state functionalism, the nature of a mental state is just like the nature of the automaton states described above. Just as "state one" simply is the state in which, given an input B, such-and-such happens, so being in pain is the state which disposes one to cry "ouch", become distracted, wonder what the cause is, and so forth.   === Rejection of functionalismEdit === In the late 1980s, Putnam abandoned his adherence to functionalism and other computational theories of mind. His change of mind was primarily due to the difficulties that computational theories have in explaining certain intuitions with respect to the externalism of mental content. This is illustrated by Putnam's own Twin Earth thought experiment (see Philosophy of language). He also developed a separate argument against functionalism in 1988, based on Fodor's generalized version of multiple realizability. Asserting that functionalism is really a watered-down identity theory in which mental kinds are identified with functional kinds, Putnam argued that mental kinds may be multiply realizable over functional kinds. The argument for functionalism is that the same mental state could be implemented by the different states of a universal Turing machine. Despite Putnam's rejection of functionalism, it has continued to flourish and has been developed into numerous versions by thinkers as diverse as David Marr, Daniel Dennett, Jerry Fodor, and David Lewis. Functionalism helped lay the foundations for modern cognitive science and is the dominant theory of mind in philosophy today. By 2012 Putnam accepted a modification of functionalism called "liberal functionalism". The view holds that "what matters for consciousness and for mental properties generally is the right sort of functional capacities and not the particular matter that subserves those capacities". The specification of these capacities (1) may refer to what goes on outside the organism’s “brain”, (2) may include intentional idioms, and (3) need not describe a capacity to compute something or other.   == Philosophy of languageEdit ==   === Semantic externalismEdit === One of Putnam's contributions to philosophy of language is his claim that "meaning just ain't in the head". He illustrated this using his "Twin Earth" thought experiment to argue that environmental factors play a substantial role in determining meaning. Twin Earth shows this, according to Putnam, since on Twin Earth everything is identical to Earth, except that its lakes, rivers and oceans are filled with XYZ whereas those of earth are filled with H2O. Consequently, when an earthling, Fredrick, uses the Earth-English word "water", it has a different meaning from the Twin Earth-English word "water" when used by his physically identical twin, Frodrick, on Twin Earth. Since Fredrick and Frodrick are physically indistinguishable when they utter their respective words, and since their words have different meanings, meaning cannot be determined solely by what is in their heads. This led Putnam to adopt a version of semantic externalism with regard to meaning and mental content. The late philosopher of mind and language Donald Davidson, despite his many differences of opinion with Putnam, wrote that semantic externalism constituted an "anti-subjectivist revolution" in philosophers' way of seeing the world. Since the time of Descartes, philosophers had been concerned with proving knowledge from the basis of subjective experience. Thanks to Putnam, Tyler Burge and others, Davidson said, philosophy could now take the objective realm for granted and start questioning the alleged "truths" of subjective experience.   === Theory of meaningEdit === Putnam, along with Saul Kripke, Keith Donnellan, and others, contributed to what is known as the causal theory of reference. In particular, Putnam maintained in The Meaning of "Meaning" that the objects referred to by natural kind terms—such as tiger, water, and tree—are the principal elements of the meaning of such terms. There is a linguistic division of labor, analogous to Adam Smith's economic division of labor, according to which such terms have their references fixed by the "experts" in the particular field of science to which the terms belong. So, for example, the reference of the term "lion" is fixed by the community of zoologists, the reference of the term "elm tree" is fixed by the community of botanists, and the reference of the term "table salt" is fixed as "NaCl" by chemists. These referents are considered rigid designators in the Kripkean sense and are disseminated outward to the linguistic community. Putnam specifies a finite sequence of elements (a vector) for the description of the meaning of every term in the language. Such a vector consists of four components: the object to which the term refers, e.g., the object individuated by the chemical formula H2O; a set of typical descriptions of the term, referred to as "the stereotype", e.g., "transparent", "colorless", and "hydrating"; the semantic indicators that place the object into a general category, e.g., "natural kind" and "liquid"; the syntactic indicators, e.g., "concrete noun" and "mass noun". Such a "meaning-vector" provides a description of the reference and use of an expression within a particular linguistic community. It provides the conditions for its correct usage and makes it possible to judge whether a single speaker attributes the appropriate meaning to that expression or whether its use has changed enough to cause a difference in its meaning. According to Putnam, it is legitimate to speak of a change in the meaning of an expression only if the reference of the term, and not its stereotype, has changed. However, since there is no possible algorithm that can determine which aspect—the stereotype or the reference—has changed in a particular case, it is necessary to consider the usage of other expressions of the language. Since there is no limit to the number of such expressions which must be considered, Putnam embraced a form of semantic holism.   == Philosophy of mathematicsEdit == Putnam made a significant contribution to philosophy of mathematics in the Quine–Putnam "indispensability argument" for mathematical realism. This argument is considered by Stephen Yablo to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities, such as numbers and sets. The form of the argument is as follows. One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories, and to those entities only (commonly referred to as "all and only"). Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore, One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities. The justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the "only" part of "all and only". The assertion that "all" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism. Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry, but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position. Putnam holds the view that mathematics, like physics and other empirical sciences, uses both strict logical proofs and "quasi-empirical" methods. For example, Fermat's last theorem states that for no integer  are there positive integer values of x, y, and z such that . Before this was proven for all  in 1995 by Andrew Wiles, it had been proven for many values of n. These proofs inspired further research in the area, and formed a quasi-empirical consensus for the theorem. Even though such knowledge is more conjectural than a strictly proven theorem, it was still used in developing other mathematical ideas.   == Mathematics and computer scienceEdit == Putnam has contributed to scientific fields not directly related to his work in philosophy. As a mathematician, Putnam contributed to the resolution of Hilbert's tenth problem in mathematics. This problem was settled by Yuri Matiyasevich in 1970, with a proof that relied heavily on previous research by Putnam, Julia Robinson and Martin Davis. In computability theory, Putnam investigated the structure of the ramified analytical hierarchy, its connection with the constructible hierarchy and its Turing degrees. He showed that there exist many levels of the constructible hierarchy which do not add any subsets of the integers and later, with his student George Boolos, that the first such "non-index" is the ordinal  of ramified analysis (this is the smallest  such that  is a model of full second-order comprehension), and also, together with a separate paper with Richard Boyd (another of Putnam's students) and Gustav Hensel, how the Davis–Mostowski–Kleene hyperarithmetical hierarchy of arithmetical degrees can be naturally extended up to . In computer science, Putnam is known for the Davis-Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT), developed with Martin Davis in 1960. The algorithm finds if there is a set of true or false values that satisfies a given Boolean expression so that the entire expression becomes true. In 1962, they further refined the algorithm with the help of George Logemann and Donald W. Loveland. It became known as the DPLL algorithm. This algorithm is efficient and still forms the basis of most complete SAT solvers.   == EpistemologyEdit ==  In the field of epistemology, Putnam is known for his "brain in a vat" thought experiment (a modernized version of Descartes' evil demon hypothesis). The argument is that one cannot coherently state that one is a disembodied "brain in a vat" placed there by some "mad scientist". This follows from the causal theory of reference. Words always refer to the kinds of things they were coined to refer to, thus the kinds of things their user, or the user's ancestors, experienced. So, if some person, Mary, were a "brain in a vat", whose every experience is received through wiring and other gadgetry created by the "mad scientist", then Mary's idea of a "brain" would not refer to a "real" brain, since she and her linguistic community have never seen such a thing. Rather, she saw something that looked like a brain, but was actually an image fed to her through the wiring. Similarly, her idea of a "vat" would not refer to a "real" vat. So, if, as a "brain in a vat", she were to say "I'm a brain in a vat", she would actually be saying "I'm a brain-image in a vat-image", which is incoherent. On the other hand, if she is not a "brain in a vat", then saying that she is still incoherent, but now because she actually means the opposite. This is a form of epistemological externalism: knowledge or justification depends on factors outside the mind and is not solely determined internally. Putnam has clarified that his real target in this argument was never skepticism, but metaphysical realism. Since realism of this kind assumes the existence of a gap between how man conceives the world and the way the world really is, skeptical scenarios such as this one (or Descartes' Evil demon) present a formidable challenge. Putnam, by arguing that such a scenario is impossible, attempts to show that this notion of a gap between man's concept of the world and the way it is, is in itself absurd. Man cannot have a "God's eye" view of reality. He is limited to his conceptual schemes. Metaphysical realism is therefore false, according to Putnam.   == Metaphilosophy and ontologyEdit == In the late 1970s and the 1980s, stimulated by results from mathematical logic and by some ideas of Quine, Putnam abandoned his long-standing defence of metaphysical realism—the view that the categories and structures of the external world are both causally and ontologically independent of the conceptualizations of the human mind. He adopted a rather different view, which he called "internal realism". Internal realism was the view that, although the world may be causally independent of the human mind, the structure of the world—its division into kinds, individuals and categories—is a function of the human mind, and hence the world is not ontologically independent. The general idea is influenced by Kant's idea of the dependence of our knowledge of the world on the categories of thought. The problem with metaphysical realism, according to Putnam, was that it fails to explain the possibility of reference and truth. According to the metaphysical realist, our concepts and categories refer because they match up in some mysterious manner with the pre-structured categories, kinds and individuals that are inherent in the external world. But how is it possible that the world "carves up" into certain structures and categories, the mind carves up the world into its own categories and structures, and the two "carvings" perfectly coincide? The answer must be that the world does not come pre-structured but that structure must be imposed on it by the human mind and its conceptual schemes. In Reason, Truth, and History, Putnam identified truth with what he termed "idealized rational acceptability." The theory, which owes something to C. S. Peirce, is that a belief is true if it would be accepted by anyone under ideal epistemic conditions. Nelson Goodman had formulated a similar notion in Fact, Fiction and Forecast in 1956. In that work, Goodman went as far as to suggest that there is "no one world, but many worlds, each created by the human mind." Putnam rejected this form of social constructivism, but retained the idea that there can be many correct descriptions of reality. No one of these descriptions can be scientifically proven to be the "one, true" description of the world. This does not imply relativism, for Putnam, because not all descriptions are equally correct and the ones that are correct are not determined subjectively. Putnam renounced internal realism in his reply to Simon Blackburn in the volume Reading Putnam. The reasons he gave up his "antirealism" are stated in the first three of his replies in "The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam", an issue of the journal Philosophical Topics, where he gives a history of his use(s) of the term "internal realism", and, at more length, in his The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body and World (1999). Although he abandoned internal realism, Putnam still resists the idea that any given thing or system of things can only be described in exactly one complete and correct way. He thus accepts "conceptual relativity" - the view that it may be a matter of choice or convention, e.g., whether mereological sums exist, or whether space-time points are individuals or mere limits. In other words, having abandoned internal realism Putnam came to accept metaphysical realism in simply the broad sense of rejecting all forms of verificationism and all talk of our ‘making’ the world. Under the influence of C. S. Peirce and William James, Putnam also became convinced that there is no fact–value dichotomy; that is, normative (e.g., ethical and aesthetic) judgments often have a factual basis, while scientific judgments have a normative element.   == Neopragmatism and WittgensteinEdit == At the end of the 1980s, Putnam became increasingly disillusioned with what he perceived as the "scientism" and the rejection of history that characterize modern analytic philosophy. He rejected internal realism because it assumed a "cognitive interface" model of the relation between the mind and the world. Putnam claimed that the very notion of truth would have to be abandoned by a consistent eliminative materialist. Under the increasing influence of James and the pragmatists, he adopted a direct realist view of this relation. For a time, under the influence of Ludwig Wittgenstein, he adopted a pluralist view of philosophy itself and came to view most philosophical problems as nothing more than conceptual or linguistic confusions created by philosophers by using ordinary language out of its original context. Many of Putnam's most recent works have addressed the concerns of ordinary people, particularly their concerns about social problems. For example, he has written about the nature of democracy, social justice and religion. He has discussed the ideas of the continental philosopher, Jürgen Habermas, and has written articles influenced by "continental" ideas.   == CriticismEdit == Putnam himself may be his own most formidable philosophical adversary. His frequent changes of mind have led him to attack his previous positions. However, many significant criticisms of his views have come from other philosophers and scientists. For example, multiple realizability has been criticized on the grounds that, if it were true, research and experimentation in the neurosciences would be impossible. According to Bechtel and Mundale, to be able to conduct such research in the neurosciences, universal consistencies must either exist or be assumed to exist in brain structures. It is the similarity (or homology) of brain structures that allows us to generalize across species. If multiple realizability were an empirical fact, results from experiments conducted on one species of animal (or one organism) would not be meaningful when generalized to explain the behavior of another species (or organism of the same species). Other criticisms of MR have been proposed by Jaegwon Kim, David Lewis, Robert Richardson and Patricia Churchland. One of the main arguments against functionalism was formulated by Putnam himself: the Twin Earth thought experiment. However, there have been other criticisms. The Chinese room argument by John Searle (1980) is a direct attack on the claim that thought can be represented as a set of functions. The thought experiment is designed to show that it is possible to mimic intelligent action, without any interpretation or understanding, through the use of a purely functional system. In short, Searle describes a situation in which a person who speaks only English is locked in a room with Chinese symbols in baskets and a rule book in English for moving the symbols around. The person is instructed, by people outside the room, to follow the rule book for sending certain symbols out of the room when given certain symbols. Further, suppose that the people outside the room are Chinese speakers and are communicating with the person inside via the Chinese symbols. According to Searle, it would be absurd to claim that the English speaker inside "knows" Chinese based on these syntactic processes alone. This thought experiment attempts to show that systems that operate merely on syntactic processes cannot realize any semantics (meaning) or intentionality (aboutness). Thus, Searle attacks the idea that thought can be equated with the following of a set of syntactic rules. Thus, functionalism is an inadequate theory of the mind. Several other arguments against functionalism have been advanced by Ned Block. Putnam has consistently adhered to the idea of semantic holism, in spite of the many changes in his other positions. The problems with this position have been described by Michael Dummett, Jerry Fodor, Ernest Lepore, and others. In the first place, they suggest that, if semantic holism is true, it is impossible to understand how a speaker of a language can learn the meaning of an expression, for any expression of the language. Given the limits of our cognitive abilities, we will never be able to master the whole of the English (or any other) language, even based on the (false) assumption that languages are static and immutable entities. Thus, if one must understand all of a natural language to understand a single word or expression, language learning is simply impossible. Semantic holism also fails to explain how two speakers can mean the same thing when using the same linguistic expression, and therefore how any communication at all is possible between them. Given a sentence P, since Fred and Mary have each mastered different parts of the English language and P is related in different ways to the sentences in each part, the result is that P means one thing for Fred and something else for Mary. Moreover, if a sentence P derives its meaning from its relations with all of the sentences of a language, as soon as the vocabulary of an individual changes by the addition or elimination of a sentence, the totality of relations changes, and therefore also the meaning of P. As this is a common phenomenon, the result is that P has two different meanings in two different moments in the life of the same person. Consequently, if I accept the truth of a sentence and then reject it later on, the meaning of that which I rejected and that which I accepted are completely different and therefore I cannot change my opinions with regard to the same sentences. The brain in a vat argument has also been subject to criticism. Crispin Wright argues that Putnam's formulation of the brain-in-a-vat scenario is too narrow to refute global skepticism. The possibility that one is a recently disembodied brain in a vat is not undermined by semantic externalism. If a person has lived her entire life outside the vat—speaking the English language and interacting normally with the outside world—prior to her "envatment" by a mad scientist, when she wakes up inside the vat, her words and thoughts (e.g., "tree" and "grass") will still refer to the objects or events in the external world that they referred to before her envatment. In another scenario, a brain in a vat may be hooked up to a supercomputer that randomly generates perceptual experiences. In this case, one's words and thoughts would not refer to anything, and would therefore be devoid of content. Semantics would no longer exist and the argument would be meaningless. In philosophy of mathematics, Stephen Yablo has argued that the Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis does not demonstrate that mathematical entities are truly indispensable. The argumentation is sophisticated, but the upshot is that one can achieve the same logical results by simply replacing all occurrences of the expression "so-and-so exists" (e.g., numbers exist) by occurrences of the expression "so-and-so is assumed (or hypothesized) to exist". For example, one can take the argument for indispensability described above and replace all references to existent entities with references to entities assumed to exist as follows. 1*. One must have ontological commitments to all and only the entities that are assumed to exist and are indispensable to the best scientific theories. 2*. Mathematical entities that are assumed to exist are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore, 3*. One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities that are assumed to exist. Finally, Putnam's internal realism has been accused by Curtis Brown of being a disguised form of subjective idealism. If this is the case, it is subject to the traditional arguments against that position. In particular, it falls into the trap of solipsism. That is, if existence depends on experience, as subjective idealism maintains, and if one's consciousness were to stop existing, then the rest of the universe would stop existing as well.   == Major works and bibliographyEdit == There is a detailed bibliography of Hilary Putnam's writings (with 16 books and 198 articles) compiled by Vincent C. Müller and published in 1993. Online in PhilPapers. A later version of this is on Harvard's Servers. The "Innateness Hypothesis" and Explanatory Models in Linguistics, Synthese, Vol. 17, No. 1, March 1967, pp. 12–22. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Edited with Paul Benacerraf. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964. 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. ISBN 0-521-29648-X Philosophy of Logic. New York: Harper and Row, 1971. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1972. ISBN 0-04-160009-6 Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2nd. ed., 1985 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29550-5 Mind, Language and Reality. Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2003 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29551-3 Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978. Reason, Truth, and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 2004 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29776-1 Realism and Reason. Philosophical Papers, vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 2002 paperback: ISBN 0-521-31394-5 Methodology, Epistemology, and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Wolfgang Stegmüller. edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Carl G. Hempel. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1983. Epistemology, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Carl G. Hempel. edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Wolfgang Stegmüller. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985. The Many Faces of Realism. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1987. ISBN 0-8126-9043-5 Representation and Reality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988. ISBN 0-262-66074-1 Realism with a Human Face. edited by James F. Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990. 9780674749450 Description. ISBN 0-674-74945-6 Renewing Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992. 9780674760943 Description. ISBN 0-674-76094-8 Pursuits of Reason: Essays in Honor of Stanley Cavell. edited with Ted Cohen and Paul Guyer. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1993. ISBN 0-89672-266-X Words and Life. edited by James F. Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994. 9780674956070 Description. ISBN 0-674-95607-9 Pragmatism: An Open Question. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995. ISBN 0-631-19343-X The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World. New York: Columbia University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-231-10287-9 Enlightenment and Pragmatism. Assen: Koninklijke Van Gorcum, 2001. 48pp. The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. Description. ISBN 0-674-01380-8 Ethics Without Ontology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. 9780674018518 Description. ISBN 0-674-01851-6 Jewish Philosophy as a Guide to Life: Rosenzweig, Buber, Levinas, Wittgenstein. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008. Philosophy in an Age of Science. edited by Mario De Caro and David Macarthur. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012. 9780674050136 Description.   == Works about PutnamEdit == Y. Ben-Menahem (ed.), Hilary Putnam, Contemporary Philosophy in Focus, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005. P. Clark-B. Hale (eds.), Reading Putnam, Blackwell, Cambridge (Massachusetts)-Oxford 1995. C. S. Hill (ed.), The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam, Fayetteville, Arkansas 1992. M. Rüdel, Erkenntnistheorie und Pragmatik: Untersuchungen zu Richard Rorty und Hilary Putnam, (Dissertation) Hamburg 1987. Maximilian de Gaynesford, Hilary Putnam, McGill-Queens University Press / Acumen, 2006.   == See alsoEdit ==  American philosophy List of American philosophers Rietdijk–Putnam argument   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit ==  Quotations related to Hilary Putnam at Wikiquote Hilary Putnam at PhilPapers Hilary Putnam at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Harvard University Philosophy Faculty page An extensive bibliography An extensive directory Hilary Putnam at the Mathematics Genealogy Project London Review of Books contributor page Hilary Putnam: On Mind, Meaning and Reality, Interview by Josh Harlan, The Harvard Review of Philosophy, spring 1992. Putnam, Hilary and Ruth Anna, "The Quarrel Between Poetry and Philosophy", read to the Santayana Society at its annual meeting in New York on December 28, 1995. "To Think with Integrity", Hilary Putnam's Farewell Lecture, The Harvard Review of Philosophy, Spring 2000. Putnam, "The Depths and Shallows of Experience", video lecture, UCSB, September 1, 2003. Comments by Hubert Schwyzer and Bruno Latour. Putnam, "The Fact/Value Dichotomy and its critics"; Roundtable on Externalism audio/video lecture, audio discussion, March 2007, University College Dublin. Hilary Putnam - Externalism: Its Motivation And Its Critics, video of a lecture, delivered at Harvard University on October 4, 2007 A short film about the Putnam-Rorty debate and its influence on the pragmatist revival on YouTube The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with Hilary Putnam 2010-04-21 (with transcript)

Hugh MacColl (1831–1909) was a Scottish mathematician, logician and novelist.   == Life == MacColl was the youngest son of a poor Highland family which was at least partly Gaelic-speaking. Hugh's father died when he was still an infant, and Hugh was educated largely thanks to the efforts of his elder brother Malcolm MacColl, an Episcopalian clergyman and friend and political ally of William Ewart Gladstone. Early in his acquaintanceship with Gladstone, Malcolm MacColl persuaded the Liberal politician to provide funds for Hugh's education at Oxford. It was proposed to send him to Oxford University's St. Edmund Hall, but Gladstone made this conditional on Hugh MacColl agreeing to take orders in the Church of England. Hugh MacColl refused this condition and, as a result, never obtained a university education, which may have limited his contribution to philosophy, and certainly prevented him from ever obtaining a formal academic position. After a few years working in different areas of Great Britain, MacColl relocated to Boulogne-sur-Mer, in France on the Channel, where he developed the greater part of his work and became a French citizen. MacColl was not obscure during his time. He was a lifelong regular contributor to the Educational Times. His correspondents included the logicians William Stanley Jevons and Charles Sanders Peirce. He also corresponded, and argued in print, with the young Bertrand Russell, and reviewed Alfred North Whitehead's 1898 Universal Algebra for Mind magazine.   == Works == He is known for three main accomplishments: During 1877-79, while working out a problem involving integration, he published a four-part article establishing the first known variant of the propositional calculus, terming it the "calculus of equivalent statements", preceding Gottlob Frege's Begriffschrifft. He subsequently published 11 articles in Mind magazine, 1880..1908, and a text, in an effort to attract the attention of philosophers to his work. Clarence Irving Lewis credited MacColl's late work on the nature of implication as the source of the basic ideas of Lewis's innovative work in modal logic. MacColl's work represents one of the first treatments of logical pluralism where he explores the possibilities of modal logic, logic of fiction, connexive logic, many-valued logic and probability logic. MacColl also published two novels, Mr. Stranger's Sealed Packet (1889), concerning a journey to Mars and a utopian Martian society, and Ednor Whitlock (1891), dealing with a crisis of faith occasioned by exposure to new scientific ideas. While described by a recent critic as "best left unread", the novels reveal social and moral values to which the author gave full expression in his 1909 publication Man's Origin, Destiny, and Duty, an apology for Christianity.   == Legacy == There is presently a long-term MacColl Project, a joint venture of Greifswald University in Germany and the University of Oslo, which intends to publish a critical edition of his work. Furthermore, the group of logic and epistemology at the University of Lille (France) develop MacColl's suggestions for a dynamic free logic. The December 1999 issue of the magazine Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic published the proceedings of a 1998 conference devoted to MacColl's work.   == References ==  Rahman, S. & Redmond, J., 2008. "Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism". In: Handbook of History of Logic. Elsevier, vol. 4. Discusses MacColl's contributions to philosophy of language and logic including modal logic, logic of fictions and modal logic. Rahman, S. & Redmond, J., 2007. Hugh MacColl. An Overview of his Logical Work with Anthology. College Publications. Contains a long introduction to MacColl's logic and reprints of his main logical work. Kneebone, G., 2001 (1963). Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. Dover. Contains a brief introduction to the "calculus of equivalent statements." Rahman, S.; Rückert, H. (2001). "Dialogical Connexive Logic". Synthese 127 (1-2): 105–139. doi:10.1023/a:1010351931769.  Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Uni. Press.   == External links == Special Hugh MacColl issue of the Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic (Vol. 3 no. 1) "Symbolic logic and its applications" By Hugh MacColl, full .PDF on Google Books.

Hui Shi (Chinese: 惠施; pinyin: Huì Shī; Wade–Giles: Hui4 Shih1; 380–305 BCE), or Huizi (Chinese: 惠子; pinyin: Huìzǐ; Wade–Giles: Hui4 Tzu3; "Master Hui"), was a Chinese philosopher during the Warring States period. He was a representative of the School of Names (Sophists or Dialecticians), and is famous for ten paradoxes about the relativity of time and space, for instance, "I set off for Yue (southeastern China) today and came there yesterday."   == Works mentioning Hui Shi == The philosophical writings of Hui Shi are no longer extant, but several Chinese classic texts refer to him, including the Zhan Guo Ce, Lüshi Chunqiu, Han Feizi, Xunzi, and most frequently, the Zhuangzi. Nine Zhuangzi chapters mention Hui Shi, calling him "Huizi" 26 times and "Hui Shi" 9 times. "Under Heaven" (chapter 33), which summarizes Warring States philosophies, contains all of the latter 9 references by name.   == The Ten Theses == "Under Heaven" lists Hui Shi's ten theses (sometimes referred to as the ten paradoxes):   == Relation to Zhuangzi == Most of the other Zhuangzi passages portray Hui Shi (Huizi) as a friendly rival of Zhuangzi. Hui Shi acts as an intellectual foil who argues the alternative viewpoint, or criticizes the Daoist perspective, often with moments of humor. The best known of the Zhuang-Hui dialogues concerns the subjectivity of happiness.  According to these ancient Daoist stories, Zhuangzi and Hui Shi remained friendly rivals until death.  Chad Hansen (2003:146) interprets this lament as "the loss of a philosophical partnership, of two like-minded but disagreeing intellectual companions engaged in the joys of productive philosophical argument."   == Notes == ^ Bo Mou, The Routledge History of Chinese Philosophy, Taylor & Francis, 2008, p. 167 ^ "School of Names: 5.1 The Ten Theses", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy   == References == Hansen, Chad. "The Relatively Happy Fish." Asian Philosophy 13 (2003):145-164. Kou Pao-koh. Deux sophistes chinois:Houei Che et Kong -souen Long. Paris, 1953. Lucas Thierry. Hui Shih and Kung Sun Lung: an approach from contemporary logic, Journal of Chinese Philosophy 20: 211-255 (1993). Moritz R. Hui Shi und die Entwicklung des philosophischen Denkens im alten China. Berlin, 1973. Solomon B.S. The assumptions of Hui Shih, Monumenta Serica, 1969, vol.28. P.1-40. Watson, Burton, tr. 1968. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu. New York: Columbia University Press.   == External links == Fraser, Chris. "School of Names: 5. Hui Shi" and "Life of Hui Shi", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005.

Ian Rumfitt is a British philosopher currently serving as Professor of Philosophy at the University of Birmingham.   == Life == He was educated at Victoria College, Jersey, at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was also a Junior Research Fellow, and at Princeton University. His graduate studies at Oxford were supervised by Sir Michael Dummett. He has taught at Keele University, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, University College, Oxford, where he served as a tutorial fellow from 1998 until 2005, and Birkbeck College, University of London, where he was Professor of Philosophy from 2005 until 2013. He delivered the Nelson Lectures in Philosophy at the University of Michigan in 2004. He was founding co-director of the Centre for Logic and Language within the Institute of Philosophy, School of Advanced Study, University of London. He was awarded a Philip Leverhulme Prize in 2001. From January 2016 he will be one of the editors of Philosophers' Imprint. His primary areas of research include the philosophy of logic and the philosophy of language. He also works in metaphysics, model theory, and the philosophy of mathematics, with an interest in the works of Gottlob Frege.   == Works == Rumfitt's work in the philosophy of logic culminated in the publication of "The Boundary Stones of Thought" (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2015). This book presents a sustained defense of classical logic against such philosophers as Michael Dummett and Crispin Wright. What makes Rumfitt's defense unusual is that he joins Dummett and Wright in rejecting the Principle of Bivalence, the keystone of classical semantics. So Rumfitt presents and defends non-classical semantic theories for various problematical areas of discourse which nevertheless validate classical logic. The book also presents a solution to the Sorites Paradox and a defense of Kripke-Platek set theory against the better-known Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. Rumfitt's earlier work in logic includes a 'bilateral' formalization of classical logic which avoids problems that have been held to attend its familiar 'unilateral' formalization. In the philosophy of language, he is also known for his work on plural terms, on conditionals, on ascriptions of know how, on indirect speech reports, and for his views on the relationship between truth-conditional theories of meaning in the style of Donald Davidson and the intention-based theories championed by Paul Grice. "The Boundary Stones Of Thought: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language", (2015)* "Truth and Meaning", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volumes (2014)* "Old Adams Buried", Analytic Philosophy (2013)* "Plural terms: another variety of reference?" in J. L. Bermudez (ed.) Thought, Reference and Experience: Themes from the Philosophy of Gareth Evans, (OUP, 2005) "Savoir Faire", The Journal of Philosophy (2003)* "'Yes' and 'No'", Mind (2001)* "Truth Conditions and Communication", Mind (1995)* "Content and Context: The Paratactic Theory Revisited and Revised", Mind (1993)*   == References ==   == External links == "Ian Rumfitt", Philosophy Papers

Aḥmad ibn Taymiyyah (Arabic: تقي الدين أحمد ابن تيمية) known as Ibn Taymiyyah (22 January 1263 - 26 September 1328) was a Islamic scholar, theologian and logician. He lived during the troubled times of the Mongol invasions, much of the time in Damascus. He was a member of the school founded by Ahmad ibn Hanbal and is considered by his followers, along with Ibn Qudamah, as one of the two most significant proponents of Hanbalism. In the modern era, his adherents often refer to the two as "the two sheikhs" and Ibn Taymiyyah in particular as "Sheikh ul-Islam". Ibn Taymiyyah sought the return of Sunni Islam to what he viewed as earlier interpretations of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, and is considered to have had considerable influence in contemporary Wahhabism, Salafism, and Jihadism. He is renowned for his fatwa issued against the Mongol rulers declaring jihad by Muslims against them compulsory, on the grounds that they did not follow Sharia and as such were not Muslim, their claims to have converted to Islam notwithstanding. His teachings had a profound influence on Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, and other later Wahabi scholars.   == Name == Ibn Taymiyyah's full name is Taqī ad-Dīn Abu 'l-`Abbās Ahmad ibn `Abd al-Ḥalīm ibn `Abd as-Salām ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Khidr ibn Muhammad ibn al-Khidr ibn `Ali ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Taymiyyah al-Ḥarrānī (Arabic: تقي الدين أبو العباس أحمد بن عبد الحليم بن عبد السلام بن عبد الله بن الخضر بن محمد بن الخضر بن على بن عبد الله ابن تيمية الحراني‎). Ibn Taymiyyah's name is unusual in that it is derived from a female member of his family as opposed to a male member, which was the normal custom at the time and still is now. Taimiyatu was a woman, famous for her scholarship and piety and the name Ibn Taymiyyah was taken up by many of her male descendents.   == Overview == Ibn Taymiyyah had a simple life, most of which he dedicated to learning, writing, and teaching. He never married nor did he have a female companion, throughout his years. Al-Matroudi says that this may be why he was able to engage fully with the political affairs of his time without holding any official position such as that of a judge. An offer of an official position was made to him but he never accepted. His life was that of a religious scholar and a political activist. In his efforts he was persecuted and imprisoned on six different occasions with the total time spent inside prison coming to over six years. Other sources say that he spent over twelve years in prison. His detentions were due to certain elements of his creed and his views on some jurisprudential issues. However according to Yahya Michot, "the real reasons were more trivial". Michot gives five reasons as to why Ibn Taymiyyah was imprisoned, they being: not complying with the "doctrines and practices prevalent among powerful religious and Sufi establishments, an overly outspoken personality, the jealousy of his peers, the risk to public order due to this popular appeal and political intrigues." Baber Johansen, a professor at the Harvard divinity school says that the reasons for Ibn Taymiyyah's incarcerations were, "as a result of his conflicts with Muslim mystics, jurists, and theologians, who were able to persuade the political authorities of the necessity to limit Ibn Taymiyyah's range of action through political censorship and incarceration." Ibn Taymiyyah's own relationship, as a religious scholar, with the ruling apparatus, who did deviate in application of shari'a law, was not always amicable. It ranged from silence to open rebellion. On occasions when he shared the same views and aims as the ruling authorities, his contributions were welcomed but when Ibn Taymiyyah went against the status quo, he was seen as "uncooperative" and on occasions spent much time in prison. Ibn Taymiyyah's attitude towards his own rulers, was based on the actions of the companions (sahaba) when they made an oath of allegiance to the Islamic Prophet Muhammad as follows; "to obey within obedience to God, even if the one giving the order is unjust; to abstain from disputing the authority of those who exert it; and to speak out the truth, or take up its cause without fear in respect of God, of blame from anyone."   == Early years ==   === Background === Ibn Taymiyyah was born in 1263 in Harran into a well-known Arabian family of theologians. His father had the Hanbali chair in Harran and later at the Great mosque of Damascus (Umayyad Mosque). His tribal root origin from Bani Namir, a tribe from the Arabian Peninsula. Harran was a city part of the Sultanate of Rum in the region of Kurdistan, now Harran is a small city on the border of Syria and Turkey, currently in Şanlıurfa province of modern-day Turkey, a place to which Moses was reportedly sent to provide guidance. Before its destruction by the Mongols, Harran was also well known since the early days of Islam for its Hanbali school and tradition, to which Ibn Taymiyyah's family belonged. His grandfather, Abu al-Barkat Majd ad-Din ibn Taymiyyah al-Hanbali (d. 1255) and his uncle, Fakhr al-Din (d. 1225) were reputable scholars of the Hanbali school of law. Likewise, the scholarly achievements of ibn Taymiyyah's father, Shihab al-deen 'Abd al-Halim ibn Taymiyyah (d. 1284) were also well known.   === Immigration to Damascus === In 1269, Ibn Taymiyyah at the age of seven together with his father, and three brothers left the city of Harran which was completely destroyed by the ensuing Mongol invasion. Ibn Taymiyyah's family moved and settled in Damascus, Syria, which at the time was ruled by the Mamluks of Egypt.   === Education === In Damascus his father served as the director of the Sukkariyya madrasa, a place where Ibn Taymiyyah also received his early education. Ibn Taymiyyah acquainted himself with the religious and secular sciences of his time. His religious studies began in his early teens, when he committed the entire Qur'an to memory and later on came to learn the Islamic disciplines of the Qur'an. From his father he learnt the religious science of Fiqh (jurisprudence) and Usul al-Fiqh (principles of jurisprudence). Ibn Taymiyyah learnt the works of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, al-Khallal, Ibn Qudamah and also the works of his grandfather, Abu al-Barakat Majd ad-Din. His study of jurisprudence was not limited to the Hanbali tradition but he also learnt the other schools of jurisprudence. The number of scholars under which he studied Hadith is said to number more than two hundred, four of whom were women. Those who are known by name amount to forty hadith teachers, as recorded by Ibn Taymiyyah in his book called Arba`un Hadithan. Serajul Haque says, based on this, Ibn Taymiyyah started to hear hadith from the age of five. One of his teachers was the first Hanbali Chief Justice of Syria, Shams ud-Din Al-Maqdisi who held the newly created position instituted by Baibars as part of a reform of the judiciary. Al-Maqdisi later on, came to gave Ibn Taymiyyah permission to issue Fatawa (legal verdicts) when he became a mufti at the age of 17. Ibn Taymiyyah's secular studies led him to devote attention to Arabic language and Arabic literature by studying Arabic grammar and lexicography under Ali ibn `Abd al-Qawi al-Tuft. He went on to master the famous book of Arabic grammar, Al-Kitab, by the Persian grammarian Sibawayhi. He also studied mathematics, algebra, calligraphy, theology (kalam), philosophy, history and heresiography. The knowledge he gained from history and philosophy, he used to refute the prevalent philosopical discourses of his time, one of which was Aristotelian philosophy. Ibn Taymiyyah learnt about Sufism and stated that he had reflected on the works of; Sahl al-Tustari, Junayd of Baghdad, Abu Talib al-Makki, Abdul-Qadir Gilani, Abu Hafs Umar al-Suhrawardi and Ibn Arabi. At the age of 20 in the year 1282, Ibn Taymiyyah completed his education.   == Life as a scholar ==  After his father died in 1284, he took up the then vacant post as the head of the Sukkariyya madrasa and began giving lessons on Hadith. A year later he started giving lessons, as chair of the Hanbali Zawiya on Fridays at the Umayyad Mosque, on Fridays, on the subject of tafsir (exegesis of Qur'an). In November 1292, Ibn Taymiyyah performed the Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) and when he returned 4 months later, he wrote his first book aged twenty nine called Manasik al-Hajj (Rites of the Pilgrimage), in which he criticized and condemned the bid‘ah's (innovations) which he saw take place there. Ibn Taymiyyah represented the Hanbali school of thought during this time. The Hanbali school was seen as the most traditional school out of the four legal systems (Hanafi, Maliki and Shafii) because it was "suspicious of the Hellenist disciplines of philosophy and speculative theology." He remained faithful throughout his life to this school, whose doctrines he had mastered, but he nevertheless called for ijtihad (independent reasoning by one who is qualified) and discouraged taqlid.   === Relationship with authorities === Ibn Taymiyyah's emergence into the public and political sphere began in 1293 at the age of 30, when he was asked by the authorities to give an Islamic legal verdict (Fatwa) on Assaf al-Nasrani, a Christian cleric accused of insulting the Islamic prophet Muhammad. He accepted the invitation and delivered his fatwa, calling for the man to receive the death penalty. Despite the fact that public opinion was very much on Ibn Taymiyyah's side, the Governor of Syria attempted to resolve the situation by asking Assaf to accept Islam in return for his life, to which he agreed. This resolution was not acceptable to Ibn Taymiyyah who then, together with his followers, protested outside the Governor's palace demanding Assaf be put to death, on the grounds that any person -- Muslim or non-Muslim -- who insults Muhammad must be killed. This unwillingness to compromise coupled with his attempt to protest against the Governor's actions, resulted in him being punished with a prison sentence, the first of many such imprisonments to come. The French orientalist Henri Laoust says that during this incarceration Ibn Taymiyyah "wrote his first great work, al-Ṣārim al-maslūl ʿalā s̲h̲ātim al-Rasūl (The Drawn Sword against those who insult the Messenger)." Ibn Taymiyyah, together with the help of his disciples, continued with his efforts against what, "he perceived to be un-Islamic practices" and to implement what he saw as his religious duty of commanding good and forbidding wrong. Yahya Michot says that some of these incidences included: "shaving children's heads", leading "an anti-debauchery campaign in brothels and taverns", hitting an atheist before his public execution, destroying what was thought to be a sacred rock in a mosque, attacking astrologers and obliging "deviant Sufi Shaykhs to make public acts of contrition and to adhere to the Sunnah." Ibn Taymiyyah and his disciples used to condemn wine sellers and they would attack wine shops in Damascus by breaking wine bottles and pouring them onto the floor. A few years later in 1296, he took over the position of one of his teachers (Zayn al-Din Ibn al-Munadjdjaal), taking the post of professor of Hanbali jurisprudence at the Hanbaliyya madrasa, the oldest such institution of this tradition in Damascus. This is seen by some to be the peak of his scholarly career. The year he began his post at the Hanbaliyya madrasa, was a time of political turmoil. The Mamluk sultan Al-Adil Kitbugha was deposed by his vice-sultan Al-Malik al-Mansur Lajin who then ruled from 1297 to 1299. Lajin had a desire to commission an expedition against the Christians of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia who formed an alliance with the Mongol Empire and taking part of the military campaign which lead to the destruction of Baghdad the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate and Harran the birth place of Ibn Taymiyyah, for that purpose he urged Ibn Taymiyyah to call the Muslims to Jihad. In 1298 Ibn Taymiyyah wrote an explanation of the ayat al-mutashabihat (the unclear verses of the Qur'an) called Al-`Aqidat al-Hamawiyat al-Kubra (The creed of the great people of Hama). The book is about divine attributes and it served as an answer to a question from the city of Hama, Syria. At that particular time Ash'arites held prominent positions within the Islamic scholarly community in both Syria and Egypt, and they held a certain position on the divine attributes of God. Ibn Taymiyyah in his book strongly disagreed with their views and this heavy opposition to the common Ash'ari position, caused considerable controversy. Ibn Taymiyyah collaborated once more with the Mamluks in 1300, when he joined the expedition against the Alawites , in the Kasrawan region of the Lebanese mountains. Ibn Taymiyyah thought of the Alawites as "more heritical yet than Jews and Christians," (بالنصيرية هم وسائر أصناف القرامطة الباطنية أكفر من اليهود والنصارى ; بل وأكفر من كثير من المشركين), and according to Carole Hillenbrand, the confrontation with the Shia's resulted because they "were accused of collaboration with Christians and Mongols." Ibn Taymiyya had further active involvements in campaigns against the Mongols and their Shia allies.   === Second expedition against the Alawites === Ibn Taymiyyah took part in a second military offensive in 1305 against the Alawites and the Isma`ilis in the Kasrawan region of the Lebanese mountains where they were defeated. The Alawis eventually left the region to settle in southern Lebanon.   == Involvement in Mongol invasion ==   === First invasions === The first invasion took place between December 1299 and April 1300 due to the military campaign by the Mamluks against the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia who were allied with the Mongols. The Ilkhanate army managed to reach Damascus by the end of December 1299. Ibn Taymiyyah went with a delegation of Islamic scholars to talk to Ghazan Khan, who was the Khan of the Mongol Ilkhanate of Iran, to plead clemency and to stop his attack on the Muslims. It is reported that none of the scholars said anything to the Khan except Ibn Taymiyyah who said:  "You claim that you are Muslim and you have with you Mu'adhdhins, Muftis, Imams and Shaykhs but you invaded us and reached our country for what? While your father and your grandfather, Hulagu were non-believers, they did not attack and they kept their promise. But you promised and broke your promise."  By early January 1300 the Mongol allies, the Armenians and Georgians, had caused widespread damage to Damascus and they had taken Syrian prisoners. The Mongols effectively occupied Damascus for the first four months of 1303. Most of the military had fled the city, including most of the civilians. Ibn Taymiyyah however, stayed and was one of the leaders of the resistance inside Damascus and he went to speak directily to the Mongol Ilkhan Mahmud Ghazan and his vizier Rashid al-Din Tabib. He sought the release of Muslim and dhimmi prisoners which the Mongols had taken in Syria, and after discussion, secured their release.   === Second Mongol invasion === The second invasion lasted between October 1300 and January 1301. Ibn Taymiyyah at this time began giving sermons on Jihad at the Umayyad mosque. Ibn Taymiyyah also spoke to and encouraged the Governor of Damscus, al-Afram to achieve a victory against the Mongols. He became involved with al-Afram once more, when he was sent to get reinforcements from Cairo.   === Third invasion and fatwa === The year 1303 saw the third Mongol invasion of Syria by Ghazan Khan. What has been called Ibn Taymiyyah's "most famous" fatwā was issued against the Mongols in the Mamluk's war. Ibn Taymiyyah declared that jihad against the Mongol attack on the Malmuk sultanate was not only permissible, but obligatory. The reason being that the Mongols could not, in his opinion, be true Muslims despite the fact that they had converted to Sunni Islam because they ruled using what he considered 'man-made laws' (their traditional Yassa code) rather than Islamic law or Sharia. Because of this, he reasoned they were living in a state of jahiliyyah, or pre-Islamic pagan ignorance. The fatwa broke new Islamic legal ground because "no jurist had ever before issued a general authorization for the use of lethal force against Muslims in battle," and was to influence modern Islamists in the use of violence against self-proclaimed Muslims. Ibn Taymiyyah called on the Muslims to Jihad once again and he also personally joined the eventual battle of Marj al-Saffar against the Mongol army. The battle began on 20 April of that year. On the same day, Ibn Taymiyyah declared a fatwa which exempted Mamluk soldiers from the fast during the month of Ramadan so that they could maintain their strength. Within two days the Mongols were severely defeated and the battle was won.   == Facing charges against his literalism == Ibn Taymiyah was imprisoned several times for conflicting with the ijma of jurists and theologians of his day. From the city of Wasit, Iraq, a judge requested that Ibn Taymiyyah write a book on creed which led to him writing his book, for which he faced troubles, called Al-Aqidah Al-Waasitiyyah, a work on his view of the creed (`aqidah) of the salaf which included reference to the divine attributes of God. Ibn Taymiyyah adopted the view that God should be described as he was literally described in the Qur'an and in the hadith, and that all Muslims were required to believe this because it was the view held by the early Muslim community (salaf). This created problems for the Islamic scholars of the time as it meant they all had to adhere to it. Within the space of two years (1305-1306) four separate religious council hearings were held to assess the correctness of his creed.   === 1305 hearing === The first hearing was held with the Shafii scholars who accused Ibn Taymiyyah of anthropomorphism. At the time Ibn Taymiyyah was 42 years old. He was protected by the then Governor of Damascus, Aqqush al-Afram, during the proceedings. The scholars suggested that he accept that his creed was simply that of the Hanbalites and offered this as a way out of the charge. The issue being, if Ibn Taymiyyah ascribed his creed to the Hanbali school of law then it would be just one view out of the four schools which one could follow rather than a creed everybody must adhere to. Ibn Taymiyyah was uncompromising and maintained that it was obligatory for all scholars to adhere to his creed.   === 1306 hearings and imprisonment === Two separate councils were held a year later on 22 and 28 of January 1306. The first council was in the house of the Governor of Damascus Aqqush al-Afram, who had protected him the year before when facing the Shafii scholars. A second hearing was held six days later where the Indian scholar Safi al-Din al-Hindi found him innocent of all charges and accepted that his creed was in line with the "Qur'an and the Sunna". Regardless, in April of 1306 the chief Islamic judges of the Mamluk state declared Ibn Taymiyyah guilty and he was incarcerated. He was released four months later in September.   === Further objections after release === After his release in Damascus, the doubts regarding his creed seemed to have resolved but his was not the case. A Shafii scholar, Ibn al-Sarsari, was insistent on starting another hearing against Ibn Taymiyyah which was held once again at the house of the Governor of Damascus, Al-Afram. His book Al-Aqidah Al-Waasitiyyah was still not found at fault. At the conclusion of this hearing, Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn al-Sarsari were sent to Cairo to settle the problem.   == Life in Egypt ==   === Debate on literalism and imprisonment === On arrival of Ibn Taymiyyah and the Shafi'ite scholar in Cairo in 1306, an open meeting was held. The Sultan of Egypt at the time was Al-Nasir Muhammad and his deputy attended the open meeting. Ibn Taymiyyah was found innocent. Despite the open meeting, objections regarding his creed continued and he was summoned to the Citadel in Cairo for a Munazara (legal debate), which took place on 8 April 1306. During the Munazara his views on divine attributes, specifically whether a direction could be attributed to God, were debated by the Indian Scholar Safi al-Din al-Hindi, in the presence of Islamic judges. Ibn Taymiyyah failed to convince the judges of his position and so on the recommendation of Al-Hindi was incarcerated for the charge of anthropomorphism. Thereafter, he together with his two brothers were imprisoned in the Citadel of the mountain (Qal‘at al-Jabal), in Cairo until 25 September 1307. He was freed due the help he received from two Amir's (ruler or military ruler); Salar and Muhanna ibn Isa, but he was not allowed to go back to Syria. He was then, again summoned for a legal debate but this time he convinced the judges of his views and he was allowed to go free.   === Trial for intercession and imprisonment ===  Ibn Taymiyyah continued to face troubles for his views which were found to be at odds with those of his contemporaries. His strong opposition to what he believed to be un-Islamic innovation (bid‘ah), caused upset among the prominent Sufis of Egypt including Ibn `Ata'Allah and Karim al-Din al-Amuli, and the locals who started to protest against Ibn Taymiyyah. The nature of the point under contention was Ibn Taymiyyah's stance on tawassul (intercession). In his view a person could not ask anyone other than God for help except on the day of judgement when intercession in his view would be possible. At the time, the people did not restrict intercession to just the day of judgement but rather they said it was allowed in other cases. Due to this Ibn Taymiyyah, now 45, was ordered to appear before the Shafii judge Badr al-Din in March 1308 and was questioned on his stance regarding intercession. Thereafter, he was incarcerated in the prison of the judges in Cairo for some months. After his release, he was allowed to return to Syria, should he so wish. Ibn Taymiyyah however stayed in Egypt for a further 5 years.   === House arrest in Alexandria === The year after his release in 1309 saw a change of power to a new Sultan in Egypt, Baibars al-Jashnakir whose reign was marked by economical and political unrest. His hold on power was short lived and lasted only a year. During this time, in August of 1309, Ibn Taymiyyah was taken into custody and placed under house arrest for seven months in the new sultan's palace in Alexandria. He was freed when Al-Nasir Muhammad retook the position of sultan on 4 March 1310. Having returned to Cairo a week later, he was received by the sultan Al-Nasir. The sultan would sometimes consult Ibn Taymiyyah on religious affairs and policies during the rest of his three-year stay in Cairo. During this time he continued to teach and wrote his famous book Al-Kitab al-Siyasa al-shar'iyya (Treatise on the Government of the Religious Law), a book noted for its account of the role of religion in politics.   == Return to Damascus and later years == He spent his last fifteen years in Damascus. Ibn Taymiyyah at the age of 50 returned to Damascus on 28 February 1313 by way of Jerusalem. Damascus was now under the governorship of Tankiz. In Damascus Ibn Taymiyyah continued his teaching role as professor of Hanbali fiqh. This is when he taught his most famous student, Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya, who went on to become a noted scholar in Islamic history. Ibn Qayyim was to share in Ibn Taymiyyah's renewed persecution. Three years after his arrival in the city, Ibn Taymiyyah became involved in efforts to deal with the increasing Shia influence amongst the Muslims. An agreement had been made in 1316 between the amir of Mecca and the Ilkhanate ruler Öljaitü, brother of Ghazan Khan, to allow a favourable policy towards Shi'ism in Mecca, a city that houses the holiest site in Islam, the Kaaba. Around the same time the Shia theologian Al-Hilli, who had played a crucial role in the Mongol rulers decision to make Shi'ism the state religion of Persia, wrote the book, Minhaj al-Karamah (The way of charisma), which dealt with the Shia doctrine of the Imamate and also served as a refutation of the Sunni doctrine of the caliphate. To counter this Ibn Taymiyyah wrote his famous book, Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah, as a refutation of Al-Hilli's work.   === Fatwa on divorce and imprisonment === In 1318 Ibn Taymiyyah wrote a treatise that would curtail the ease with which a Muslim man could divorce his wife. Ibn Taymiyyah's fatwa on divorce was not accepted by the majority of scholars of the time and this continued into the Ottoman era. However, almost every modern Muslim nation-state has come to adopt Ibn Taymiyyah's position on this issue of divorce. At the time he issued the fatwa, Ibn Taymiyyah revived an edict by the sultan not to issue fatwa's on this issue but he continued to do so, saying, "I cannot conceal my knowledge". As in previous instances, he stated that his fatwa was based on the Qur'an and hadith. His view on the issue was at odds with the Hanbali doctrine. This proved controversial among the people in Damascus as well as the Islamic scholars and the authorities who were against him on the issue. According to the scholars of the time, an oath of divorce counted as a full divorce and they were also of the view that three oaths of divorce taken under one occasion counted as three separate divorces. The significance of this was, that a man who divorces the same partner three times is no longer allowed to remarry that person until and if that person marries and divorces another man. Only then could the man, who took the oath, remarry his previous wife. Ibn Taymiyyah accepted this but rejected the validity of three oaths taken under one sitting, to count as three separate divorces as long as the intention was not to divorce. Moreover, Ibn Taymiyyah was of the view that a single oath of divorce uttered but not intended, also does not count as an actual divorce. He stated that since this is an oath much like an oath taken in the name of God, a person must expiate for an unintentional oath in a similar manner. Due to his views and also by not abiding to the sultan's letter two years before forbidding him from issuing a fatwa on the issue, three council hearing were held, in as many years (1318, 1319 and 1320), to deal with this matter. The hearing were overseen by the Viceroy of Syria, Tankiz. This resulted in Ibn Taymiyyah being imprisoned on 26 August 1320 in the Citadel of Damascus. He was released about five months and 8 days later, on 9 February 1321, by order of the Sultan Al-Nasir. Ibn Taymiyyah was reinstated as teacher of Hanbali law and he resumed teaching.   === Risāla on visiting tombs and final imprisonment === Ibn Taymiyyah had written a risāla (a treatise) in 1310 called Ziyārat al-ḳubūr or according to another source, Shadd al-rihal. It dealt with the validity and permissibility of making a journey to visit the tombs of prophets and saints (Wali). It is reported that in the book "he condemned the cult of saints". He declared that, the one who visits the Prophet's grave commits innovation (bidah). Criticism of the book arose after nearly 16 years of Ibn Taymiyyah writing it. and he was arrested and imprisoned at the age of 63, on 18 July 1326, in the Citadel of Damascus with an order from the sultan also prohibiting him from issuing any further fatwa's. The reason for his arrest was his declaration that the one who travels to visit the Prophet's grave commits innovation (bidah). His student Ibn Qayyim was also imprisoned with him in the Citadel.   === Life in prison ===  Ibn Taymiyyah referred to prison as "a divine blessing". During his incarceration he wrote that, "when a scholar forsakes what he knows of the Book of God and of the sunnah of his messenger and follows the ruling of a ruler which contravenes a ruling of God and his messenger, he is a renegade, an unbeliever who deserves to be punished in this world and in the hereafter." Whilst in prison he faced opposition from the Maliki and Shafii Chief Justices of Damascus, Taḳī al-Dīn al-Ik̲h̲nāʾī He remained in prison for over two years and ignored the sultan's prohibition, by continuing to deliver fatwa's. During his incarceration Ibn Taymiyyah wrote three works which are extanct; Kitāb Maʿārif al-wuṣūl, Rafʿ al-malām, and Kitāb al-Radd ʿala ’l-Ik̲h̲nāʾī (The response to al-Ik̲h̲nāʾī). The last book was an attack on Taḳī al-Dīn al-Ik̲h̲nāʾī, and explained his views, on saints (wali).   == Death == Ibn Taymiyyah fell ill in early September 1328 and died at the age of 65, on 26 September of that year, whilst in prison at the Citadel in Damascus. Once this news reached the public, there was a strong show of support for him from the people. After the authorities had given permission, it is reported that thousands of people came to show their respects. They gathered in the Citadel and lined the streets up to the Umayyad mosque which was and is still close by. A Janaza (funeral prayer) was held in the citadel by the sheikh, Muhammad Tammam, and a second was held in the mosque. A third and final funeral prayer was held by Ibn Taymiyyah's brother, the sheikh, Zain al-Din. He was buried in Damascus, in Maqbara Sufiyya (the cemetery of the Sufis), of whom he was a severe critic. His brother Sharafuddin had been buried in that cemetery before him. Oliver Leaman says that being deprived of the means of writing, led to Ibn Taymiyyah's death. It is reported that two hundred thousand men and fifteen to sixteen thousand women attended his funeral prayer. Ibn Kathir says that in the history of Islam, only the funeral of Ahmad ibn Hanbal received a larger attendance. This is also mentioned by Ibn `Abd al-Hadi. Caterina Bori says that, "In the Islamic tradition, wider popular attendance at funerals was a mark of public reverence, a demonstration of the deceased's rectitude, and a sign of divine approbation." Ibn Taymiyya is said to have "spent a lifetime objecting to tomb veneration, only to cast a more powerful posthumous spell than any of his Sufi contemporaries." On his death, his personal effects were in such demand "that bidders for his lice-killing camphor necklace pushed its price up to 150 dirhams, and his skullcap fetched a full 500." A few mourners sought and succeeded in "drinking the water used for bathing his corpse." His tomb received "pilgrims and sightseers" for 600 years. Almost 600 years after his death, the large Sufi cemetery where he was buried in was razed for redevelopment by French colonial authorities. His grave alone was left untouched after the Arab demolition teams "insisted" that his grave "was too holy to touch." His resting place is now "in the parking lot of a maternity ward", though as of 2009 its headstone was broken, according to author Sadakat Kadri.   == Students == Among those Ibn Taymiyyah taught, some went on to become accomplished Islamic Scholars. His students came from different backgrounds and belonged to various different schools (madhabs). His most famous students were Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya and Ibn Kathir. Ibn Qayyim wrote the famous poem "O Christ-Worshipper" which examined the dogma of the Trinity propounded by many Christian sects. Ibn Kathir became an influential scholar who wrote one of the most famous tafsīr's of the Qur'an called, Tafsir Ibn Kathir. His other students include: Al-Dhahabi Al-Mizzi Ibn Abd al-Hadi Ibn Muflih Imad al-din al-wasiti Najm al-Din al-Tufi   == Legacy == Al-Matroudi says that Ibn Taymiyyah, "was perhaps the most eminent and influential Ḥanbalī jurist of the Middle Ages and one of the most prolific among them. He was also a renowned scholar of Islam whose influence was felt not only during his lifetime but extended through the centuries until the present day." Ibn Taymiyyah's admirers often deemed him as Sheikh ul-Islam, an honorific title with which he is sometimes still termed today. The medieval Shafiite scholar Ibn Hajar al-`Asqalani said that calling Ibn Taymiyyah "Sheikh ul-Islam, will continue tomorrow just as it was yesterday". In reference to this Al-Matroudi says, "Ibn Hajar has been right so far and will most likely continue to be so in the future." The Ash'ari historian Al-Maqrizi said, regarding the rift between the Ash'ari's and Ibn Taymiyyah, "People are divided into two factions over the question of Ibn Taymiyyah; for until the present, the latter has retained admirers and disciples in Syria and Egypt." Rapoport and Ahmad say that, "Ibn Taymiyya was, by almost universal consensus, one of the most original and systematic thinkers in the history of Islam." Both his supporters and rivals grew to respect Ibn Taymiyyah because he was uncompromising in his views. Al-Dhahabi praised him as "the brilliant shaykh, imam, erudite scholar, censor, jurist, mujtahid, and commentator of the Qur'an," but acknowledged that Ibn Taymiyyah's cantankerous and disparaging manners alienated even his admirers because even his opponents noted his "genius and the rarity of his faults". Ibn Taymiyyah's works served as an inspiration for later Muslim scholars and historical figures, who have been regarded as his admirers or disciples. One such person was Ibn Rajab, who wrote a book called Al-Qawa'id al-Fiqhiyyah, on the history of Hanbalism. Others include; the Hajib of Damascus Katbugha al-Mansuri, the viceroy of Egypt Arghun al-Nasiri and the sixteenth century Jerusalemite qadi and Palestinian historian Mujir al-Din. In the contemporary world, he may be considered at the root of Wahhabism, the Senussi order and other later reformist movements. Ibn Taymiyyah has been noted to have influenced Rashid Rida, Abul A`la Maududi, Sayyid Qutb, Hassan al-Banna, Abdullah Azzam, and Osama bin Laden. The militant organization Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant used a fatwa of Ibn Taymiyyah to justify the burning alive of Jordanian pilot Muath al-Kasasbeh. Ibn Taymiyya's fatwa on Alawites as "more infidel than Christians and Jews" has been recited by Muslim Brotherhood affiliated scholar Yusuf al-Qaradawi and the Syrian rebel Islamist leader of Jaysh al-Islam Zahran Alloush.   == Influences == Ibn Taymiyyah was taught by scholars who were renowned in their time. However, there is no evidence that any of the contemporary scholars influenced him. A strong influence on Ibn Taymiyyah was the founder of the Hanbali school of Islamic jurisprudence, Ahmad ibn Hanbal. Ibn Taymiyyah was trained in this school and he had studied Ibn Hanbal's Musnad in great detail, having studied it over multiple times. Though he spent much of his life following this school, in the end he renounced taqlid (blind following). His work was most influenced by the sayings and actions of the Salaf (first 3 generation of Muslims) and this showed in his work where he would give preference to the Salaf over his contemporaries. The modern Salafi movement derives its name from this school of thought.   == Views ==   === God's Attributes === Ibn Taymiyyah said that God should be described as he has described himself in the Qur'an and the way Prophet Muhammad has described God in the Hadith. He rejected; the Ta'tili's who denied these attributes, those who compare God with the creation (Tashbih) and those who engage in esoteric interpretations (ta'wil) of the Qur'an or use symbolic exegesis. Ibn Taymiyyah said that those attributes which we know about from the two above mentioned sources, should be ascribed to God. Anything regarding God's attributes which people have no knowledge of, should be approached in a manner, according to Ibn Taymiyyah, where the mystery of the unknown is left to God (called tafwid) and the Muslim's submit themselves to the word of God and the Prophet (called taslim). Henri Laoust says that through this framework, this doctrine, "provides authority for the widest possible scope in personal internationalization of religion." In 1299 Ibn Taymiyyah wrote the book Al-Aqida al-hamawiyya al-kubra, which dealt with, among other topics, theology and creed. When he was accused of anthropomorphism, a private meeting was held between scholars in the house of Al-Din `Umar al-Kazwini who was a Shafii judge. After careful study of this book, he was cleared of those charges. Ibn Taymiyyah also wrote another book dealing with the attributes of God called, Al-Aqidah Al-Waasitiyyah. He faced considerable hostility towards these views from the Ash'ari's of whome the most notable were, Taqi al-Din al-Subki and his son Taj al-Din al-Subki who were influential Islamic jurists and also chief judge of Damascus in their respective times. Ibn Taymiyyah's highly intellectual discourse at explaining "The Wise Purpose of God, Human Agency, and the Problems of Evil & Justice" using God's attributes as a means has been illustrated by Dr. Jon Hoover in his work "Ibn Taymiyyah's Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism".   === On the Division of Tawhid === Ibn Taymiyyah supported the academic division of tawhid into three classifications; Rububiyyah (Allah is the Lord of all existence and disposer of all affairs), Uluhiyyah (singling out the oneness of Allah in worship) and Asmaa wa sifaat (the affirmation of the Names and Attributes of Allah). His works discuss the pagans at the time of revelation as accepting Allah's Rububiyyah but rejecting His Uluhiyyah, whereby they continued to worship idols.   === Sources of Shari'a === Of the four fundamental sources of the sharia accepted by thirteenth century Sunni jurists — Qur'an, sunnah, consensus of jurists (ijma), and qiyas (analogical reasoning), — Ibn Taymiyyah opposed the use of consensus of jurists, replacing it with the consensus of the "companions" (sahaba). Like all Islamic jurists Ibn Taymiyyah believed in a hierarchy sources for the Sharia. Most important was the Quran, and the sunnah or any other source could not abrogate a verse of the Qur'an. (For him, an abrogation of a verse, known in Arabic as Naskh, was only possible through another verse in the Qur'an.) Next was sunnah which other sources (besides the Quran) must not contradict.   ==== Consensus (ijma) ==== Concerning Consensus (ijma), he believed that consensus of any Muslims other than that of the companions of Muhammad could not be "realistically verifiable" and so was speculative, and thus not a legitimate source of Islamic law (except in certain circumstances). The consensus (ijma) used must be that of the companions found in their reported sayings or actions. According one supporter, Serajul Haque, his rejection of the consensus of other scholars was justified, on the basis of the instructions given to the jurist Shuraih ibn al-Hârith from the Caliph Umar, one of the companions of Muhammad; to make decisions by first referring to the Qur'an, and if that is not possible, then to the sayings of the Prophet and finally to refer to the agreement of the companions like himself. An example of Ibn Taymiyyah use of his interpretation was in defense of the (temporary) closing of all Christian churches in 1299 in the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt. The closing was in violation of a the 600-year-old covenant with Christian dhimmi known as the Pact of Umar. But as Ibn Taymiyyah pointed out, while venerable, the pact was written 60 years or so after the time of the companions and so had no legal effect.   ==== Analogy (qiyas) ==== Ibn Taymiyyah considered the use of analogy (qiyas) based on literal meaning of scripture as a valid source for deriving legal rulings. Analogy is the primary instrument of legal rationalism in Islam. He acknowledged its use as one of the four fundamental principles of Islamic jurisprudence. Ibn Taymiyyah argued against the certainty of syllogistic arguments and in favour of analogy (qiyas). He argues that concepts founded on induction are themselves not certain but only probable, and thus a syllogism based on such concepts is no more certain than an argument based on analogy. He further claimed that induction itself depends on a process of analogy. His model of analogical reasoning was based on that of juridical arguments. Work by John F. Sowa have, for example, have used Ibn Taymiyyah's model of analogy. He attached caveats however to the use of analogy because he considered the use of reason to be secondary to the use of revelation. Ibn Taymiyyah's view was that analogy should be used under the framework of revelation, as a supporting source. There were some jurists who thought rulings derived through analogy could contradict a ruling derived from the Qur'an and the authentic hadith. However, Ibn Taymiyyah disagreed because he thought a contradiction between the definitive canonical texts of Islam, and definitive reason was impossible and that this was also the understanding of the salaf. Racha el-Omari says that on an epistemological level, Ibn Taymiyyah considered the Salaf to be better than any other later scholars in understanding the agreement between revelation and reason. One example for this is the use of analogy in the Islamic legal principle of maslaha (public good) about which Ibn Taymiyya believed, if there were to be any contradiction to revelation then it is due to a misunderstanding or misapplication of the concept of utility. He said that to assess the utility of something, the criteria for benefit and harm should come from the Qur'an and sunnah, a criteria which he also applied to the establishment of a correct analogy. An example of Ibn Taymiyyah's use of analogy was in a fatwa forbidding the use of hashish one the grounds that it was analogous to wine, and users should be given 80 lashes in punishment. "Anyone who disagreed was an apostate, he added, whose corpse ought not to be washed or given a decent burial."   ==== Reason (`Aql) ==== Issues surrounding the use of reason ('Aql) and rational came about in relation to the attributes of God for which he faced much resistance. At the time the Islamic scholars thought the attributes of God as stated in the Qur'an were contradictory to reason so sought other explanations instead. Ibn Taymiyyah believed that reasons itself validated the entire Qur'an as being reliable and in light of that he argued, if some part of the scripture was to be rejected then this would render the use of reason as an unacceptable avenue through which to seek knowledge. He thought that the most perfect rational method and use of reason was contained within the Qur'an and sunnah and that the theologians of his time had used rational and reason in a flawed manner.   === Criticism of the Grammarians === Ibn Taymiyyah had mastered the grammar of Arabic and one of the books which he studied was the book of Arabic grammar called Al-Kitab, by Sibawayh. In later life he met the Qur'an commentator Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati to whom he expressed that, "Sibawayh was not the Prophet of Syntax nor was he infallible. He committed eighty mistakes in his book which are not intelligible to you." Ibn Taymiyyah is thought to have severely criticized Sibawayh but the actual substance of those criticisms is not known because the book that Ibn Taymiyyah wrote, al-Bahr, within which he wrote the criticisms has been lost. He stated that when there is an explanation of an Ayah of the Qur'an or a Hadith, from the Prophet himself, the use of philology or a grammatical explanation becomes obsolete. He also said one should refer only to the understanding of the Salaf (first three generations of Muslims) when interpreting a word within the scriptural sources. However he did not discount the contributions of the grammarians completely. Ibn Taymiyyah stated that the Arabic nouns within the scriptural sources have been divided by the fuqaha (Islamic jurists) into three categories; those that are defined by the shari'a, those defined by philology (lugha) and finally those that are defined by social custom (`urf). For him each of these categories of nouns had to be used in their own appropriate manner.   === Madh'hab === Ibn Taymiyyah censured the scholars for blindly conforming to the precedence of early jurists without any resort to the Qur'an and Sunnah. He contended that although juridical precedence has its place, blindly giving it authority without contextualization, sensitivity to societal changes, and evaluative mindset in light of the Qur'an and Sunnah can lead to ignorance and stagnancy in Islamic Law. Ibn Taymiyyah likened the extremism of Taqlid (blind conformity to juridical precedence or school of thought) to the practice of Jews and Christians who took their rabbis and ecclesiastics as gods besides God. In arguing against taqlid, he said the salaf, who in order to better understand and live according to the commands of God, had to make ijtihad using the scriptural sources. The same approach, in his view, was needed in modern times. Ibn Taymiyyah believed that the best role models for Islamic life were the first three generations of Islam (Salaf); which constitute Muhammad's companions, referred to in Arabic as Sahaba (first generation), followed by the generation of Muslims born after the death of Muhammad known as the Tabi'un (second generation) which is then followed lastly by the next generation after the Tabi'un known as Tabi' Al-Tabi'in (third generation). Ibn Taymiyyah gave precedence to the ideas of the Sahaba and early generations, over the founders of the Islamic schools of jurisprudence. For Ibn Taymiyyah it was the Qur'an, the sayings and practices of Muhammad and the ideas of the early generations of Muslims that constituted the best understanding of Islam. Any deviation from their practice was viewed as bid‘ah, or innovation, and to be forbidden. He also praised and wrote a commentary on some speeches of Abdul-Qadir Gilani. He criticized the views and actions of the Rafaiyah.   === Islamic law and polity === Ibn Taymiyya believed that Islamic policy and management was based on Quran 4:58, and that the goal of al-siyasa (politics, the political) should be to protect al-din (religion) and to manage al-dunya (worldly life and affairs). Religion and the State should be inextricably linked, in his view, as the state was indispensable in providing justice to the people, enforcing Islamic law by enjoining good and forbidding evil, unifying the people and preparing a society conducive to the worship of God. He believed that "enjoining good and forbidding wrong" was the duty of every state functionary with charge over other Muslims, from the caliph to "the schoolmaster in charge of assessing children's handwriting exercises." Ibn Taymiyyah supported giving broad powers to the state. In Al-siyasa al-Shar`iyah, he focused on duties of individuals and punishments rather than rules and procedural limits of authorities. Suspected highway robbers who would not reveal their accomplices or the location of their loot, for example should be held in detention and lashed for indefinite periods. He also allowed the lashing of imprisoned debtors, and "trials of suspicion" (da`sawi al-tuham) where defendants could be convicted without witnesses or documentary proof. Henri Laoust said that Ibn Taymiyyah never propagated the idea of a single caliphate but believed the Muslim ummah or community would form into a confederation of states. Laoust further stated that Ibn Taymiyyah called for obedience only to God, and the Islamic Prophet Muhammad, and he did not put a limit on the number of leaders a Muslim community could have. However Mona Hassan, in her recent study of the political thoughts of Ibn Taymiyyah, questions this and says laoust has wrongly claimed that Ibn Taymiyyah thought of the caliphate as a redundant idea. Hassan has shown that Ibn Taymiyyah considered the Caliphate that was under the Rashidun Caliphs; Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali, as the moral and legal ideal. The Caliphate in his view could not be ceded "in favour of secular kingship (mulk).   === Jihad === Ibn Taymiyyah was noted for emphasis he put on the importance of jihad and for the "careful and lengthy attention" he gave "to the questions of martyrdom" in jihad, such as benefits and blessings to be had for martyrs in the afterlife. He asserted that martyrdom and eternal rewards and blessings ,. He wrote that, "It is in jihad that one can live and die in ultimate happiness, both in this world and in the Hereafter. Abandoning it means losing entirely or partially both kinds of happiness." He defined jihad as:  "It comprehends all sorts of worship, whether inward or outward, including love for Allah, being sincere to Him, relying on Him, relinquishing one’s soul and property for His sake, being patient and austere, and keeping remembrance of Almighty Allah. It includes what is done by physical power, what is done by the heart, what is done by the tongue through calling to the way of Allah by means of authoritative proofs and providing opinions, and what is done through management, industry, and wealth."  He gave a broad definition of what constituted "aggression" against Muslims and what actions by non-believers made jihad against them permissible. He declared  "It is allowed to fight people for (not observing) unambiguous and generally recognized obligations and prohibitions, until they undertake to perform the explicitly prescribed prayers, to pay zakat, to fast during the month of Ramadan, to make the pilgrimage to Mecca and to avoid what is prohibited, such as marrying women in spite of legal impediments, eating impure things, acting unlawfully against the lives and properties of Muslims and the like. It is obligatory to take the initiative in fighting those people, as soon as the Prophet's summons with the reasons for which they are fought has reached them. But if they first attack the Muslims then fighting them is even more urgent, as we have mentioned when dealing with the fighting against rebellious and aggressive bandits."  In the modern context, his rulings have been used by some Islamist groups to declare jihad against various governments.   === Innovation (Bid`ah) ===  Even though Ibn Taymiyyah has been called a "theologian", he totally rejected `ilm al-kalam, known as "Islamic theology", as well as some aspects of Sufism and Peripatetic philosophy, as an innovation (Bid‘ah). Ibn Taymiyyah opposed giving any undue religious honors to mosques (even that of Jerusalem, the Al-Aqsa Mosque), to approach or rival in any way the Islamic sanctity of the two most holy mosques within Islam, Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca) and Al-Masjid al-Nabawi (in Madina). As to the practice of making journey for the sole purpose of visiting a mosque, Ibn Taymiyyah has said in his books; Majmu'at al-Rasail al-Kubra, Minhaj al-Sunna and Majmu'at Fatawa, that, "Journey must not be made except to three mosques; Masjid al-Haram, Masjid al-Nabawi and Masjid Al-Aqsa". Regarding this Serajul Haque says that, "In the opinion of Ibn Taymiyyah only these three mosques have been accepted by the Prophet as the object of journeys, on account of their excellence over all other mosques and places of prayer. Ibn Taymiyyah uses a saying (hadith) of the Islamic prophet Muhammad in Bukhari and Muslim to justify his view that it is not permitted to journey exclusively to any mosque than Mecca, Medina, or Jerusalem. The ruler Sabuktegin was praised by Ibn Taymiyyah for censuring groups that he considered heretical. Ibn Taymiyyah stated that Sabuktegin, "commanded that Ahlul Bidah be publicly cursed on the minbars, and as a result the Jahmiyyah, Rafida, Hululiyah, Mu'tazilah, and Qadariyah were all publicly cursed, along with the Asharites."   ==== Pilgrimage to tombs and intercession ==== Ibn Taymiyyah considered the veneration and making pilgrimage to the tomb of saints (ziyārat al-qubūr) as an innovation. Ibn Taymiyyah said that to make a pilgrimage or journey to the tomb of a Sufi, Wali or the Prophets, is comparable to worshipping something besides God (Shirk). To make a pilgrimage to Muhammad's grave for the sole purpose of seeking intercession or aassistance was deemed by Ibn Taymiyyah as impermissable. He said that only God should be asked for help and that it is only God that can give assistance. He uses passages from the Qur'an to support his view and uses a hadith of the Prophet where he advised his companion Ibn Abbas that when a person requires anything, he should ask God. Ibn Taymiyyah said that seeking the assistance of God through intercession is allowed, as long as the other person is still alive. The evidence he uses for this is another hadith, where the people due to the lack of rain, asked Muhammad to pray to God to provide rain, to which he agreed and rain did fall but after the Prophet had died and a similar circumstance arose, the people did not go to his grave. Ibn Taymiyyah, regarding those who ask assistance from a Sufi or a wali, says that, "those who do so are kuffar, infidels." As for those who ask assistance from the grave of the Prophet or a Sheikh, he called them mushrik, someone who is engaged in shirk. Howerver, Ibn Taymiyyah was not completely against the visitation of tombs, provided that they only go to pray for the dead person and that they seek benefit from God alone.   === Mutakallimun === The mutakallimun are scholars who engage in ilm al-Kalam (rationalst theology) and they were criticised by Ibn Taymiyyah for their use of rationalist theology and philosophy. He said that the method of kalam was used by the Mu`tazilites, Jahmites and Ash`ari's. Ibn Taymiyyah considered the use of philosophical proofs and kalam to be redundant because he saw the Qur'an and the Sunna as superior rational proofs. Ibn Taymiyyah said that these explanations were not grounded in scriptural evidence such as the philosophical explanation of the divine attributes of God or the proof of God using the cosmological argument. He said that the call to Islam was not made using such methods by the Qur'an or the Prophet and that these theories have only caused errors and corruption. The mutakallimun called their use of rationalst theology usul al-din (principles of religion) but Ibn Taymiyyah said that the use of rationalist theology has nothing to do with the true usul al-din which comes from God and to state otherwise is to say that the Prophet neglected an important aspect of Islam. Ibn Taymiyyah says that the usul al-din of the mutakallimun, deserve to be named usul din al-shaytan (principles of Satanic religion). Ibn Taymiyyah's attempts to focus attention onto Qur'anic rationality was taken up by his student Ibn Qayyim, to the exception of his other followers. This focus on traditionlist rationlism was also taken up by Musa Bigiev.   === Sufism === Ibn Taymiyyah rejected two views associated with Sufism. For one he said that some Sufis insulted God with their monism, a doctrine (seemingly similar to pantheism) that God "encompasses all things". This rejection included denouncing the views of the monist Ibn Arabi. For the second he said that the view that spiritual enlightenment is of a greater importance than obeying the sharia was a failure to properly follow the example of Muhammad. On Ibn Arabi, and Sufism in general, Henri Laoust says that Ibn Taymiyyah mentions that, "he allowed himself to be deluded, in his youth, by the Futuhat of Ibn al-Arabi, before discovering how subtly heretical they were. He never condemned Ṣūfism in itself, but only that which he considered to be, in the case of too many Ṣūfis, inadmissible deviations in doctrine, ritual or morals, such as monism, antinomianism or esotericism." Ibn Taymiyyah's own writing in his book Majmu Fatawa shows that he did not completely discount Sufism when he said, "the right attitude towards Sufism, or any other thing, is to accept what is in agreement with the Qur'an and the Sunna, and reject what does not agree". He did write positively about some Sufis such as Abdul-Qadir Gilani.   === Shi'a Islam ===  Ibn Taymiyyah's severe critique of Twelver Shi'as in his book, Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah, was written in response to the book, Minhaj al-karama fi ma'rifat al-imama, by the Shi'a theologian al-`Allama al-Hilli. He focused his criticisms to the similarity between Shi'as, and Christians and Jews.   === Christianity ===  He wrote polemics against Christians.   === Non-Muslims ===  Ibn Taymiyyah strongly opposed borrowing from Christianity or other non-Muslim religions. In his text On the Necessity of the Straight Path (kitab iqtida al-sirat al-mustaqim) he preached that the beginning of Muslim life was the point at which "a perfect dissimilarity with the non-Muslims has been achieved." To this end he opposed the celebration of the observance of the birthday of the Islamic prophet Muhammad or the construction of mosques around the tombs of Sufi saints saying: "Many of them (the Muslims) do not even know of the Christian origins of these practices."   === Economic views === He elaborated a circumstantial analysis of market mechanism, with a theoretical insight unusual in his time. Regarding the power of supply and demand, Ibn Taymiyyah said, "If desire for goods increases while its availability decreases, its price rises. On the other hand, if availability of the good increases and the desire for it decreases, the price comes down." His discourses on the welfare advantages and disadvantages of market regulation and deregulation, have an almost contemporary ring to them.   == Assessment ==   === Salafism === Ibn Taymiyyah is thought by some to be the main influence behind the emergence of Salafism. He placed an emphasis on understanding Islam as it was understood by the salaf (first three generations of Muslims).   === Modern Islamism === Various concepts within modern Islamism can be attributed to Ibn Taymiyyah. His influence is noted by Yahya Mochet who says Ibn Taymiyyah "has thus become a sort of forefather of al-Qaeda." One reason for this was his categorising the world into distinct territories: the domain of Islam (dar al-Islam), where the rule is of Islam and sharia law is enforced; the domain of unbelief (dar-al-kufr) ruled by unbelievers; and the domain of war (dar al-harb) which is territory under the rule of unbelievers who are involved in an active or potential conflict with the domain of Islam. (Ibn Taymiyyah included a fourth. When the Mongols, whom he considered unbelievers, took control of the city of Mardin the population included many Muslims. Believing Mardin was neither the domain of Islam, as Islam was not legally applied with an armed forces consisting of Muslims, nor the domain of war because the inhabitants were Muslim, Ibn Taymiyyah created a new "composite" category, known as dar al-`ahd.) A second concept is making a declaration of apostasy (takfir) against a Muslim who does not obey Islam. But at the same time Ibn Taymiyyah maintained that no one can question anothers faith and curse them as based on one's own desire, because faith is defined by God and the Prophet. He said, rather than cursing or condemning them, an approach should be taken where they are educated about the religion. A further concept attributed to Ibn Taymiyyah is, "the duty to oppose and kill Muslim rulers who do not implement the revealed law (shari'a). Ibn Taymiyyah's role in the Islamist movements of the twentieth and twenty first century have also been noted by, the previous Coordinator for Counterterrosims at the United States Department of State, Daniel Benjamin who labels the chapter on the history of modern Islamic movements in his book The Age of Sacred Terror, as "Ibn Taymiyya and His children". Yossef Rapoport, a reader in Islamic history at Queen Mary, however, says this is not a probable narrative.   === Mardin fatwa and the Mardin Conference === One of Ibn Taymiyyah's most famous fatwa's is regarding the Mongols who had conquered and destroyed the Abbasid caliphate in 1258 and had, then converted to Islam. Once they were in control of Mardin, they behaved unjustly with their subjects so the people of Mardin asked Ibn Taymiyyah for a legal verdict regarding the classification of the territory under which they live. He categorized the territory as dar al-`ahd which in some ways is similar to dar al-kufr (domain of unbelievers). Included in his verdict was declaring the Mongol ruler Ghazan and other Mongols who did not accept shari'a in full, as unbelievers. According to Nettler and Kéchichian, Ibn Taymiyyah affirmed that Jihad against the Mongols, " was not only permissible but obligatory because the latter ruled not according to Sharīʿah but through their traditional, and therefore manmade, Yassa code. This essentially meant that Mongols were living in a state of jāhilīyah (ignorance)." The authors further state that his two famous student, Ibn Qayyim and Ibn Kathir, agreed with this ruling. He called for a defensive jihad to mobilise the people to kill the Mongol rulers and any one who supported them, Muslim or non-Muslim. Ibn Taymiyyah when talking about those who support the Mongols said, "Everyone who is with them (Mongols) in the state over which they rule has to be regarded as belonging to the most evil class of men. He is either an atheist (zindīq) or a hypocrite who does not believe in the essence of the religion of Islam. This means that he (only) outwardly pretends to be Muslim or he belongs to the worst class of all people who are the people of the bida` (heretical innovations)." Yahya Mochet says that, Ibn Taymiyyah's call to war was not simply to cause a "rebellion against the political power in place" but to repel an "external enemy". In 2010 a group of Islamic Scholars at the Mardin conference argued that Ibn Taymiyyah's famous fatwa about the residents of Mardin when it was under the control of the Mongols was misprinted into an order to "fight" the people living under their territory, whereas the actual statement is, "The Muslims living therein should be treated according to their rights as Muslims, while the non-Muslims living there outside of the authority of Islamic Law should be treated according to their rights." They have based their understanding on the original manuscript in the Al-Zahiriyah Library, and the transmission by Ibn Taymiyyah's student Ibn Muflih. The particapents of the Mardin conference also rejected the categorization of the world into different domains of war and peace, stating that the division was a result of the circumstances at the time. The participants further stated that the division has become irrelevant with the existence of nation states.   == Works == Ibn Taymiyyah left a considerable body of work, ranging from 350 according to his student Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya to 500 according to his student al-Dhahabi. Oliver Leaman says that Ibn Taymiyyah produced some 700 works in the field of Islamic sciences. His scholarly output has been described as immense with a wide scope and its contents "bear the marks of brilliant insights hastility jotted down". It is the case however, that his works are not yet fully understood but efforts are being made, at least in the western languages to gain an adequate understanding of his writings. In his early life, his work was mostly based on theology and the use of reason in interpretation of scriptural evidences, with later works focusing on; refutation of Greek logic, questioning the prevalent practices of the time, and anti-Christian and anti-Shi'i polemics. Ibn Taymiyyah's total works have not all survived and his extant works of thirty five volumes, are incomplete. Extant books and essays written by ibn Taymiyyah include: A Great Compilation of Fatwa (Majmu al-Fatwa al-Kubra) This was collected centuries after his death, and contains several of the works mentioned below - Thirty six volumes. Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah (The way of the Prophet's Sunna) - Four volumes. al-Aqidah al-Waasitiyyah (The Creed to the People of Wāsiṭ) Al-Jawāb al-Ṣaḥīḥ li-man baddala dīn al-Masīh (Literally,"The Correct Response to those who have Corrupted the Deen (Religion) of the Messiah"; A Muslim theologian's response to Christianity) - Seven Volumes. Darʾ taʿāruḍ al-ʿaql wa al-naql ("Averting the Conflict between Reason and [religious] Tradition"). Also, called Al-Muwāfaqa (Harmony) - Ten volumes. al-Aqeedah Al-Hamawiyyah (The Creed to the People of Hama, Syria) al-Asma wa's-Sifaat (Allah's Names and Attributes) - Two volumes Kitbal al-Iman (Book of faith) as-Sarim al-Maslul ‘ala Shatim ar-Rasul—The Drawn Sword against those who insult the Messenger. Written in response to an incident in which Ibn Taymiyyah heard a Christian insulting Muhammad. Fatawa al-Kubra Fatawa al-Misriyyah ar-Radd 'ala al-Mantiqiyyin (The refutation of the Logicians) Naqd at-Ta'sis al-Uboodiyyah (Subjection to God) Iqtida' as-Sirat al-Mustaqim' (Following The Straight Path) al-Siyasa al-shar'iyya (The book of governance according to the shari'a) at-Tawassul wal-Waseela Sharh Futuh al-Ghayb (Commentary on Revelations of the Unseen by Abdul-Qadir Gilani) al-Hisba fi al-Islam (The Hisba in islam) - A book on economics Some of his other works have been translated to English. They include: The Friends of Allah and the Friends of Shaytan Kitab al Iman: The Book of Faith Diseases of the Hearts and their Cures The Relief from Distress Fundamentals of Enjoining Good & Forbidding Evil The Concise Legacy The Goodly Word The Madinan Way Ibn Taymiyya against the Greek logicians Muslims Under Non-Muslim Rule   === Lost works === Many of Ibn Taymiyyah's books are thought to be lost. Their existence is known through various reports written by scholars throughout history as well as some treatises written by Ibn Taymiyyah. Some of his notable lost works include: al-Bahr al-Muhit - Forty volumes tafsir of the Qur'an (written in the prison of Damascus) - Ibn Hajar al`Asqalani mentions the existence of this work in his book, al-Durar al-Kamina.   == See also ==  Islam and Antinomianism   == Bibliography == Rapoport, Yossef (9 April 2010). "Ibn Taymiyya and his Times." OUP Pakistan. ISBN 0195478347. Hoover, Jon (28 May 2007). "Ibn Taymiyya's Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism." Brill. ISBN 9004158472.   === Encyclopaedias === P. J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs (ed.). Encyclopaedia of Islam Online. Brill Academic Publishers. ISSN 1573-3912.    == References ==   == Further reading == Kepel, Gilles – Muslim extremism in Egypt: The Prophet and pharaoh. With a new preface for 2003. Translated from French by Jon Rothschild. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2003. See pp. 194–199. Little, Donald P. – "Did Ibn Taymiyya have a screw loose?", Studia Islamica, 1975, Number 41, pp. 93–111. Makdisi, G. – "Ibn Taymiyya: A Sufi of the Qadiriya Order", American Journal of Arabic Studies, 1973 Sivan, Emmanuel – Radical Islam: Medieval theology and modern politics. Enlarged edition. New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 1990. See pp. 94–107. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya: Against Extremisms. Texts translated, annotated and introduced. With a foreword by Bruce B. LAWRENCE. Beirut & Paris: Albouraq, 2012, xxxii & 334 p. — EAN 9782841615551. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya: Muslims under non-Muslim Rule. Texts translated, annotated and presented in relation to six modern readings of the Mardin fatwa. Foreword by James Piscatori. Oxford & London: Interface Publications, 2006. ISBN 0-9554545-2-2. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya’s "New Mardin Fatwa". Is genetically modified Islam (GMI) carcinogenic?, in "The Muslim World", 101/2, April 2011, pp. 130–181. Michot, Yahya – From al-Ma’mūn to Ibn Sab‘īn, via Avicenna: Ibn Taymiyya’s Historiography of Falsafa, in F. OPWIS & D. REISMAN (eds.), "Islamic Philosophy, Science, Culture, and Religion". Studies in Honor of Dimitri Gutas (Leiden – Boston: Brill, 2012), pp. 453–475. Michot, Yahya – Between Entertainment and Religion: Ibn Taymiyya’s Views on Superstition, in "The Muslim World", 99/1, January 2009, pp. 1–20. Michot, Yahya – Misled and Misleading… Yet Central in their Influence: Ibn Taymiyya’s Views on the Ikhwān al-Safā’, in "The Ikhwān al-Safā’ and their Rasā’il. An Introduction". Edited by Nader EL-BIZRI. Foreword by Farhad DAFTARY (Oxford: Oxford University Press, in association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies, " Epistles of the Brethren of Purity "), 2008, pp. 139–179. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya’s Commentary on the Creed of al-Hallâj, in A. SHIHADEH (ed.), "Sufism and Theology" (Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press, 2007), pp. 123–136. Michot, Yahya – A Mamlûk Theologian’s Commentary on Avicenna’s "Risāla Aḍḥawiyya". Being a Translation of a Part of the "Dar’ al-Ta‘āruḍ" of Ibn Taymiyya, with Introduction, Annotation, and Appendices, Part I, in "Journal of Islamic Studies", 14:2, Oxford, 2003, pp. 149–203. Michot, Yahya – A Mamlûk Theologian’s Commentary on Avicenna’s "Risāla Aḍḥawiyya". Being a Translation of a Part of the "Dar’ al-Ta‘āruḍ" of Ibn Taymiyya, with Introduction, Annotation, and Appendices, Part II, in "Journal of Islamic Studies", 14:3, Oxford, 2003, pp. 309–363. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya on Astrology. Annotated Translation of Three Fatwas, in "Journal of Islamic Studies", 11/2, Oxford, May 2000, pp. 147–208. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya’s Critique of Shī‘ī Imāmology. Translation of Three Sections of his "Minhāj al-Sunna", in "The Muslim World", 104/1-2, Hartford, Jan. - April 2014, pp. 109–149. Michot, Yahya – An Important Reader of al-Ghazālī : Ibn Taymiyya, in "The Muslim World", 103/1, Hartford, January 2013, pp. 131–160.   == External links == Why Study...Ibn Taymiyya, with Jon Hoover, University of Nottingham Ibn Taymiyyah, Salafi calls "Sheikh-ul-Islam" - Hidaya Research Britannica Concise Encyclopedia Fatwa of Mardin by Ibn Taymiyya Books by Ibn Taymiyyah Collection of internet articles/resources The Life, Struggles, Works and Impact of Shaikh ul-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah Shaykh ul-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah's letters from prison Between Shaykul-Islaam Ibn Taymiyyah and Contemporary Takfiris On The Issue of Rebellion Against Tyranny and Injustice Diagram of teachers and students of Ibn Taymiyah

Isaac Richard Jay Malitz (born 1947, Cleveland, Ohio) is a logician who introduced the subject of positive set theory in his 1976 Ph.D. Thesis at UCLA.   == References == Isaac (Richard) Jay Malitz – entry in the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Isaac Watts (/wɒts/; 17 July 1674 – 25 November 1748) was an English Christian hymnwriter, theologian and logician. A prolific and popular hymn writer, his work was part of evangelization. He was recognized as the "Father of English Hymnody", credited with some 750 hymns. Many of his hymns remain in use today and have been translated into numerous languages.   == LifeEdit == Born in Southampton, England, in 1674, Watts was brought up in the home of a committed religious Nonconformist; his father, also Isaac Watts, had been incarcerated twice for his views. At King Edward VI School, Watts had a classical education, learning Latin, Greek and Hebrew. From an early age, Watts displayed a propensity for rhyme. Once, he responded when asked why he had his eyes open during prayers:  Receiving corporal punishment for this, he cried:  Because he was a Nonconformist, Watts could not attend Oxford or Cambridge, which were each restricted to Anglicans, as were government positions at the time. He went to the Dissenting Academy at Stoke Newington in 1690. Much of the remainder of his life centred around that village, which is now part of Inner London. Following his education, Watts was called as pastor of a large independent chapel in London, where he helped train preachers, despite his poor health. Isaac Watts held religious opinions that were more non-denominational or ecumenical than was at that time common for a Nonconformist; he had a greater interest in promoting education and scholarship than preaching for any particular sect. Taking work as a private tutor, Watts lived with the Nonconformist Hartopp family at Fleetwood House, on Church Street in Stoke Newington. Through them he became acquainted with their immediate neighbours, Sir Thomas Abney and Lady Mary. Invited for a week to Hertfordshire, Watts eventually lived for a total of 36 years in the Abney household, most of the time at Abney House, their second residence. (Lady Mary had inherited the Manor of Stoke Newington in 1701 from her late brother, Thomas Gunston.) On the death of Sir Thomas Abney in 1722, the widow Lady Mary and her last unmarried daughter, Elizabeth, moved all her household to Abney Hall from Hertfordshire. She invited Watts to continue with their household. He lived at Abney Hall until his death in 1748. Watts particularly enjoyed the grounds at Abney Park, which Lady Mary planted with two elm walks leading down to an island heronry in the Hackney Brook. Watts often sought inspiration there for the many books and hymns he wrote. Watts died in Stoke Newington in 1748, and was buried in Bunhill Fields. He left an extensive legacy of hymns, treatises, educational works and essays. His work was influential amongst Nonconformist independents and religious revivalists of the 18th century, such as Philip Doddridge, who dedicated his best-known work to Watts.   == Watts and hymnodyEdit == Sacred music scholar Stephen Marini (2003) describes the ways in which Watts contributed to English hymnody. Notably, Watts led by including new poetry for "original songs of Christian experience" to be used in worship. The older tradition was based on the poetry of the Bible, notably the Psalms. This had developed from the teachings of the 16th-century Reformation leader John Calvin, who initiated the practice of creating verse translations of the Psalms in the vernacular for congregational singing. Watts' introduction of extra-Biblical poetry opened up a new era of Protestant hymnody as other poets followed in his path. Watts also introduced a new way of rendering the Psalms in verse for church services. The Psalms were originally written in Biblical Hebrew within Judaism. In early Christendom, they were affirmed in the Biblical canon as part of the Old Testament. Watts proposed that the metrical translations of the Psalms as sung by Protestant Christians should give them a specifically Christian perspective. While he granted that David [to whom authorship of many of the Psalms is traditionally ascribed] was unquestionably a chosen instrument of God, Watts claimed that his religious understanding could not have fully apprehended the truths later revealed through Jesus Christ. The Psalms should therefore be "renovated" as if David had been a Christian, or as Watts put it in the title of his 1719 metrical Psalter, they should be "imitated in the language of the New Testament." Marini discerns two particular trends in Watts' verses, which he calls "emotional subjectivity" and "doctrinal objectivity". By the former he means that "Watts' voice broke down the distance between poet and singer and invested the text with personal spirituality." As an example of this, he cites "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross". By "doctrinal objectivity," Marini means that Watts verse achieved an "axiomatic quality" that "presented Christian doctrinal content with the explicit confidence that befits affirmations of faith." As examples, Marini cites the hymns "Joy to the World" as well as "From All That Dwell Below the Skies":  Besides writing hymns, Isaac Watts was also a theologian and logician, writing books and essays on these subjects.   === LogicEdit ===  Watts wrote a text book on logic which was particularly popular; its full title was, Logic, or The Right Use of Reason in the Enquiry After Truth With a Variety of Rules to Guard Against Error in the Affairs of Religion and Human Life, as well as in the Sciences. This was first published in 1724, and it was printed in twenty editions. Watts wrote this work for beginners of logic, and arranged the book methodically. He divided the content of his elementary treatment of logic into four parts: perception, judgement, reasoning, and method, which he treated in this order. Each of these parts is divided into chapters, and some of these chapters are divided into sections. The content of the chapters and sections is subdivided by the following devices: divisions, distributions, notes, observations, directions, rules, illustrations, and remarks. Every contentum of the book comes under one or more of these headings, and this methodical arrangement serves to make the exposition clear. In Watts' Logic, there are notable departures from other works of the time, and some notable innovations. The influence of British empiricism may be seen, especially that of contemporary philosopher and empiricist John Locke. Logic includes several references to Locke and his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, in which he espoused his empiricist views. Watts was careful to distinguish between judgements and propositions, unlike some other logic authors. According to Watts, judgement is "to compare... ideas together, and to join them by affirmation, or disjoin then by negation, according as we find them to agree or disagree". He continues, "when mere ideas are joined in the mind without words, it is rather called a judgement; but when clothed with words it is called a proposition". Watts' Logic follows the scholastic tradition and divides propositions into universal affirmative, universal negative, particular affirmative, and particular negative. In the third part, Watts discusses reasoning and argumentation, with particular emphasis on the theory of syllogism. This was considered a centrally important part of classical logic. According to Watts, and in keeping with logicians of his day, Watts defined logic as an art (see liberal arts), as opposed to a science. Throughout Logic, Watts revealed his high conception of logic by stressing the practical side of logic, rather than the speculative side. According to Watts, as a practical art, logic can be really useful in any inquiry, whether it is an inquiry in the arts, or inquiry in the sciences, or inquiry of an ethical kind. Watts' emphasis on logic as a practical art distinguishes his book from others. By stressing a practical and non-formal part of logic, Watts gave rules and directions for any kind of inquiry, including the inquiries of science and the inquiries of philosophy. These rules of inquiry were given in addition to the formal content of classical logic common to text books on logic from that time. Watts' conception of logic as being divided into its practical part and its speculative part marks a departure from the conception of logic of most other authors. His conception of logic is more akin to that of the later, nineteenth-century logician, C.S. Peirce. Isaac Watts' Logic became the standard text on logic at Oxford, Cambridge, Harvard and Yale, being used at Oxford for well over 100 years. C.S. Peirce, the great nineteenth-century logician, wrote favorably of Watts' Logic. When preparing his own text book, entitled A Critick of Arguments: How to Reason (also known as the Grand Logic), Peirce wrote, 'I shall suppose the reader to be acquainted with what is contained in Dr Watts' Logick, a book... far superior to the treatises now used in colleges, being the production of a man distinguished for good sense.'  Watts followed the Logic in 1741 by a supplement, The Improvement of the Mind. This also went through numerous editions and later inspired Michael Faraday. It was also widely used as a moral textbook in schools.   == Legacy, honours and memorialsEdit ==  On his death, Isaac Watts' papers were given to Yale University in the Colony of Connecticut, which Nonconformists had established. King Edward VI School, which he attended, named one of its houses "Watts" in his honour. The Church of England and Lutheran Church remember Watts (and his priestly service) annually in the Calendar of Saints on November 25, and the Episcopal Church on the following day. The earliest surviving built memorial to Isaac Watts is at Westminster Abbey; this was completed shortly after his death. His much-visited chest tomb at Bunhill Fields, dates from 1808, replacing the original that had been paid for and erected by Lady Mary Abney and the Hartopp family. A stone bust of Watts is installed at the Nonconformist Dr Williams's Library, in central London. The earliest public statue, erected in 1845, stands at Abney Park, where Watts had lived for more than 30 years at the manor house, where he also died. The park was later devoted to uses as a cemetery and public arboretum. A later, rather similar statue was funded by public subscription and erected in a new Victorian public park named for Watts in Southampton, the city of his birth. In the mid-nineteenth century, the Congregational Dr Watts Memorial Hall was built in Southampton and named for him. After World War II, it was lost to redevelopment. The Isaac Watts Memorial United Reformed Church was built on the site and named for him. One of the earliest built memorials may also now be lost: a bust to Watts that was commissioned on his death for the London chapel with which he was associated. The chapel was demolished in the late 18th century; remaining parts of the memorial were rescued at the last minute by a wealthy landowner for installation in his chapel near Liverpool. It is unclear whether the bust survives. The stone statue in front of the Abney Park Chapel at Dr Watts' Walk, Abney Park Cemetery, was erected in 1845 by public subscription. It was designed by the leading British sculptor, Edward Hodges Baily RA FRS. A scheme for a commemorative statue on this spot had first been promoted in the late 1830s by George Collison, who in 1840 published an engraving as the frontispiece of his book about cemetery design in Europe and America; and at Abney Park Cemetery in particular. This first cenotaph proposal was never commissioned, and Baily's later design was adopted in 1845. In 1974, the City of Southampton (Watts' home city) commemorated the 300 year anniversary of his birth by commissioning the biography Isaac Watts Remembered, written by David G. Fountain, who like Watts, was also a non-conformist minister from Southampton.   == Cultural or contemporary influencesEdit == One of Watts' best-known poems was an exhortation "Against Idleness and Mischief" in Divine Songs for Children. This was parodied by Lewis Carroll in the poem "How Doth the Little Crocodile", included in his book Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. His parody is better known than the original Watts' poem. In his novel, David Copperfield (1850), Charles Dickens has school master Dr. Strong quote from Watts' "Against Idleness and Mischief". The 1884 comic opera Princess Ida includes a punning reference to Watts in Act I. At Princess Ida's women's university, no males are allowed. Her father King Gama says that "She'll scarcely suffer Dr. Watts' 'hymns'".   == WorksEdit ==   === BooksEdit === The Improvement of the Mind - first three chapters as text from Wikisource - 1815 Edition s:The Improvement of the Mind The Improvement of the Mind Vol 1 Vol 2 at The Internet Archive The Knowledge of the Heavens and the Earth Made Easy ..., first edition, 1726; 1760 edition at Google Books Logic, or The Right Use of Reason in the Enquiry After Truth With a Variety of Rules to Guard Against Error in the Affairs of Religion and Human Life, as well as in the Sciences[1] A Short View of the Whole Scripture History: With a Continuation of the Jewish Affairs From the Old Testament Till the Time of Christ; and an Account of the Chief Prophesies that Relate to Him[2] Watts is thought to be the author of the tract: An Essay on the Freedom of Will in God and Creatures (copy on The Internet Archive). Divine Songs Attempted in Easy Language for the Use of Children (1715).   === HymnsEdit === Watts' hymns include: Joy to the world (based on Psalm 98, arranged in the 19th century by American Lowell Mason to an older melody of Handel) Come ye that love the Lord (often sung with the chorus [and titled] "We’re marching to Zion") Come Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove Jesus shall reign where’er the sun (based on Psalm 72) O God, Our Help in Ages Past (based on Psalm 90) When I survey the wondrous cross Alas! and did my Saviour bleed This is the day the Lord has made 'Tis by Thy strength the mountains stand I sing the mighty power of God (originally entitled "Praise for Creation and Providence" from Divine Songs Attempted in Easy Language for the Use of Children) My shepherd will supply my need (based on Psalm 23) Bless, O my soul! the living God (based on Psalm 103) Many of Watts' hymns are included in the Christadelphian hymnal, the Evangelical Lutheran Worship Hymnal, the Baptist Hymnal, the Presbyterian Trinity Hymnal, and the Methodist Hymns and Psalms. Many of his texts are also used in the American hymnal, The Sacred Harp, using what is known as the shape note notation used for teaching non-musicians. Several of his hymns are used in the hymnals of the Church of Christ, Scientist and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.   == See alsoEdit ==  Puritan English Dissenter Independent (religion) Congregational church Africa (William Billings)   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Jones, J. A., ed. (1849). Bunhill Memorials: sacred reminiscences of three hundred ministers and other persons of note, who are buried in Bunhill Fields, of every denomination. London: James Paul. pp. 298–304.  Marini, Stephen A. (2003). Sacred Song in America: Religion, Music, and Public Culture. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.  Thorncroft, Michael (1958). "The Fertile Soil; The Church is Built; The Early Years (1714–1758); The Age of Richard Price; New Causes for Old; The Ideal of Service; The Lights Go Out; The Present Day". Trust in Freedom: The Story of Newington Green Unitarian Church 1708–1958. Privately printed for church trustees. . Watts, Isaac (1825). Logic or the Right Use of Reason in the Inquiry After Truth; with a Variety of Rules to Guard Against Error in the Affairs of Religion and Human Life, as well as in the sciences (reprint ed.). US: Kessinger. .   == External linksEdit == Works by Isaac Watts at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Isaac Watts at Internet Archive Works by Isaac Watts at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Works by Isaac Watts at Post-Reformation Digital Library A Solemn Address to the Great and Ever Blessed God (1802), originally published as A Faithful Inquiry after the Ancient and Original Doctrine of the Trinity (1745) The Isaac Watts Fan Club at the Wayback Machine (archived October 27, 2009) background info and midi files Hymns by Isaac Watts O God our help in ages past (school hymn of King Edward VI School, Southampton, Watts' alma mater) Isaac Watts Remembered (David G. Fountain, 1974) Biography commissioned by Southampton City Council (his home city) to commemorate 300 years of his birth (ISBN 978-0903556576) Monergism.com Isaac Watts Links to works of Isaac Watts Logic by Isaac Watts Improvement of the Mind by Isaac Watts The Harmony of all the Religions which God ever Prescribed to Men and all his Dispensations towards them by Isaac Watts The Ruin and Recovery of Mankind by Isaac Watts

Ivan Orlov may refer to: Ivan Orlov (philosopher) (1886–1936), Russian philosopher and industrial chemist Ivan Orlov (aviator) (1895–1917), Russian World War I flying ace Ivan Grigoryevich Orlov (1733–1791), brother of Grigory Grigoryevich Orlov

John Barkley Rosser Sr. (December 6, 1907 – September 5, 1989) was an American logician, a student of Alonzo Church, and known for his part in the Church–Rosser theorem, in lambda calculus. He also developed what is now called the Rosser sieve, in number theory. He was later director of the Army Mathematics Research Center at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Rosser wrote mathematical textbooks as well. In 1936, he proved Rosser's trick, a stronger version of Gödel's first incompleteness theorem which shows that the requirement for ω-consistency may be weakened to consistency. Rather than using the liar paradox sentence equivalent to "I am not provable," he used a sentence that stated "For every proof of me, there is a shorter proof of my negation". In prime number theory, he proved Rosser's theorem. The Kleene–Rosser paradox showed that the original lambda calculus was inconsistent. Rosser died of an aneurysm September 5, 1989, at his home in Madison, Wisconsin. Rosser's son, John Barkley Rosser, Jr., is a mathematical economist and professor at James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Virginia.   == Selected publications == A mathematical logic without variables by John Barkley Rosser, Univ. Diss. Princeton, NJ 1934, p. 127–150, 328–355 Logic for mathematicians by John B. Rosser, McGraw-Hill 1953; 2nd ed., Chelsea Publ. Co. 1978, 578 p., ISBN 0-8284-0294-9 Highlight of the History of Lambda calculus, by J. Barkley Rosser, Annals of the History of Computing, 1984, vol 6, n 4, pp. 337–349 Simplified Independence Proofs: Boolean Valued Models of Set Theory, by J. Barkley Rosser, Academic Press, 1969 See Barkley Rosser papers for a complete list of Rosser's publications.   == References ==   == External links == J. Barkley Rosser at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Interview with Rosser and Stephen Kleene about their experiences at Princeton

Kaarlo Jaakko Juhani Hintikka (12 January 1929 – 12 August 2015) was a Finnish philosopher and logician. Hintikka was born in Helsingin maalaiskunta (now Vantaa). After teaching for a number of years at Florida State University, Stanford, University of Helsinki, and the Academy of Finland, he ended his career as a Professor of Philosophy at Boston University. The prolific author or co-author of over 30 books and over 300 scholarly articles, Hintikka contributed to mathematical logic, philosophical logic, the philosophy of mathematics, epistemology, language theory, and the philosophy of science. His works have appeared in over nine languages. Hintikka is regarded as the founder of formal epistemic logic and of game semantics for logic. Early in his career, he devised a semantics of modal logic essentially analogous to Saul Kripke's frame semantics, and discovered the now widely taught semantic tableau, independently of Evert Willem Beth. Later, he worked mainly on game semantics, and on independence-friendly logic, known for its "branching quantifiers", which he believed do better justice to our intuitions about quantifiers than does conventional first-order logic. He did important exegetical work on Aristotle, Immanuel Kant, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Charles Sanders Peirce. Hintikka's work can be seen as a continuation of the analytic tendency in philosophy founded by Franz Brentano and Peirce, advanced by Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell, and continued by Rudolf Carnap, Willard Van Orman Quine, and by Hintikka's teacher Georg Henrik von Wright. For instance, in 1998 he wrote The Principles of Mathematics Revisited, which takes an exploratory stance comparable to that Russell made with his The Principles of Mathematics in 1903. Professor Hintikka was a student of G.H. von Wright, a Junior Fellow at Harvard (1956-9), and held several professorial appointments at the University of Helsinki, the Academy of Finland, Florida State University and finally Boston University from 1990 until his death. Hintikka edited the academic journal Synthese from 1962 to 2002, and was a consultant editor for more than ten journals. He was the first vice-president of the Fédération Internationale des Sociétés de Philosophie, the Vice-President of the Institut International de Philosophie (1993–1996), as well as a member of the American Philosophical Association, the International Union of History and Philosophy of Science, Association for Symbolic Logic, and a member of the governing board of the Philosophy of Science Association. In 2005, he won the Rolf Schock prize in logic and philosophy "for his pioneering contributions to the logical analysis of modal concepts, in particular the concepts of knowledge and belief". In 1985, he was president of the Florida Philosophical Association. He was a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters.   == Selected books == For a bibliography, see Auxier and Hahn (2006). Primary 1962. Knowledge and Belief – An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions ISBN 1-904987-08-7 1969. Models for Modalities: Selected Essays ISBN 978-90-277-0598-3 1975. The intentions of intentionality and other new models for modalities ISBN 978-90-277-0634-8 1976. The semantics of questions and the questions of semantics: case studies in the interrelations of logic, semantics, and syntax ISBN 978-95-1950-535-0 1989. The Logic of Epistemology and the Epistemology of Logic ISBN 0-7923-0040-8 1996. Ludwig Wittgenstein: Half-Truths and One-and-a-Half-Truths ISBN 0-7923-4091-4 1996. Lingua Universalis vs Calculus Ratiocinator ISBN 0-7923-4246-1 1996. The Principles of Mathematics Revisited ISBN 0-521-62498-3 1998. Paradigms for Language Theory and Other Essays ISBN 0-7923-4780-3 1998. Language, Truth and Logic in Mathematics ISBN 0-7923-4766-8 1999. Inquiry as Inquiry: A Logic of Scientific Discovery ISBN 0-7923-5477-X 2004. Analyses of Aristotle ISBN 1-4020-2040-6 2007. Socratic Epistemology: Explorations of Knowledge-Seeking by Questioning ISBN 978-0-521-61651-5  Secondary Auxier, R.E., and Hahn, L., eds., 2006. The Philosophy of Jaakko Hintikka (The Library of Living Philosophers). Open Court. Includes a complete bibliography of Hintikka's publications. ISBN 0-8126-9462-7 Bogdan, Radu, ed., 1987 Jaakko Hintikka, Kluwer Academic Publishers ISBN 90-277-2402-4 Daniel Kolak, 2001 On Hintikka, Wadsworth ISBN 0-534-58389-X Daniel Kolak and John Symons, eds., 2004 Quantifiers, Questions and Quantum Physics: Essays on the Philosophy of Jaakko Hintikka Springer ISBN 1-4020-3210-2   == See also ==  Rudolf Carnap Saul Kripke Charles Sanders Peirce Willard Van Orman Quine Alfred Tarski Ludwig Wittgenstein Doxastic logic   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Philosopher Jaakko Hintikka reveals love affair between his wife and JFK   == References == Jaakko Hintikka's personal website   == External links ==  Media related to Jaakko Hintikka at Wikimedia Commons Jaakko Hintikka in 375 humanists – 20 May 2015. Faculty of Arts, University of Helsinki.

Brian Jack Copeland (born 1950) is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, and author of books on computing pioneer Alan Turing. His education includes a BPhil and a DPhil from the University of Oxford in philosophy, where he undertook research on modal and non-classical logic under the supervision of Dana Scott. Jack Copeland is the Director of the Turing Archive for the History of Computing, an extensive online archive on the computing pioneer Alan Turing. He has also written and edited books on Turing. He is one of the people responsible for identifying the concept of hypercomputation and machines more capable than Turing machines. Copeland has held visiting professorships at the University of Sydney, Australia (1997, 2002), the University of Aarhus, Denmark (1999), the University of Melbourne, Australia (2002, 2003), and the University of Portsmouth, United Kingdom (1997–2005). In 2000, he was a Senior Fellow in the Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States. He is also President of the US Society for Machines and Mentality and a member of the UK Bletchley Park Trust Heritage Advisory Panel. He is the founding editor of The Rutherford Journal, established in 2005. Copeland was awarded Lecturer of the Year 2010 by the University of Canterbury's student union.   == Books == Artificial Intelligence: A Philosophical Introduction (Blackwell, 1993, 2nd edition due) ISBN 0-631-18385-X Logic and Reality Essays on the Legacy of Arthur Prior (Oxford University Press, 1996) ISBN 0-19-824060-0 The Essential Turing (Oxford University Press, 2004) ISBN 0-19-825080-0 Alan Turing’s Automatic Computing Engine: The Master Codebreaker's Struggle to Build the Modern Computer (Oxford University Press, 2005) ISBN 0-19-856593-3 Colossus: The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers (Oxford University Press, 2006) ISBN 0-19-284055-X   == References ==   == External links == Home page AlanTuring.net Alan Turing: Father of the Modern Computer List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search Jack Copeland's publications indexed by the DBLP Bibliography Server at the University of Trier

Giacomo (or Jacopo) Zabarella (5 September 1533 – 15 October 1589) was an Italian Aristotelian philosopher and logician.   == Life == Zabarella was born into a noble Paduan family. He received a humanist education and entered the University of Padua, where he received a doctorate in 1553. His teachers included Francesco Robortello in humanities, Bernardino Tomitano in logic, Marcantonio Genua in physics and metaphysics, and Pietro Catena in mathematics. In 1564 he succeeded Tomitano in a chair of logic. In 1577 he was promoted to the first extraordinary chair of natural philosophy. He died in Padua at the age of 56 in 1589. His entire teaching career was spent at his native university. His successor was Cesare Cremonini.   == Work ==  Zabarella's work reflects his teaching in the Aristotelian tradition. His first published work was Opera logica (Venice 1578), followed by Tabula logicae (1578). His commentary on Aristotle's Posterior Analytics appeared in 1582. His great work in natural philosophy was De rebus naturalibus, published posthumously in 1590. It constituted 30 treatises on Aristotelian natural philosophy, the introduction to which was written only weeks before his death. His two sons edited his incomplete commentaries on Aristotle's texts, also published posthumously (the commentary on the Physics in 1601 and the commentary on On the Soul (1605). Zabarella consulted newly recovered Greek commentators such as Alexander of Aphrodisias, Philoponus, Simplicius, and Themistius, as well as medieval commentators like Thomas Aquinas, Walter Burley, and Averroes. Unlike some earlier scholastic philosophers, he was literate in Greek, and was therefore able to use the Greek texts of Aristotle. He devoted much effort to presenting what he considered to be the true meaning of Aristotle's texts.   == Writings == Opera Logica, (first edition Venise, 1578; second Venise, 1586; third Francfort, 1586–87) contains: 1. De natura logicae; 2. De quarta figura syllogismorum; 3. De methodis; 4. De conversione demonstrationi in definitionem; 5. De propositionibus necessariis; 6. De speciebus demonstrationis; /. De regressu; 8. De tribus praecognitis; 9. De medio demonstrationis.  Opera Logica, (fourth edition Kōln, 1597) with the addition of: 10. In II libros Posteriores analyticos commentarii (Venise, 1582); 11. De doctrinae ordine apologia (Padova, 1585); 12. Tabulae logicae (Venise, 1578).  Opera Logica, anastatic reprint of the Kōln 1597 edition by Wilhelm Risse, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1966. De rebus naturalibus libri XXX (Venise, 1590). De mente agente. De rebus naturalibus liber XXIX. Edited by J. M. García Valverde, Fragmentos de Filosofía, 9(2011). De sensu gente. De rebus naturalibus liber XXIV. Edizione a cura di J.M. García Valverde, Rivista di Storia della Filosofia, 2012. De inventione aeterni motoris. De rebus naturalibus liber IV. Edición de J.M. García Valverde, Bruniana & Campanelliana, 2012. In libros Aristotelis Physicorum commentarii, (Venise, 1601). Commentarii in Meteora, In Commentarii in Aristotelis libros physicorum, item In libros De generatione et corruptione, item In Meteora, (Frankfurt, 1602). Commentarii in III libros De anima, (Venise, 1605).   == Editions and translations == Iacobus Zabarella, Tables de logique. Sur l'Introduction de Porphyre, les Catégories, le De l'interprétation et les Premiers Analytiques d'Aristote: Petite synopse introductive à la logique aristotélicienne. Paris: L'Harmattan, 2003, translated by Michel Bastit. Jacques Zabarella, La nature de la logique, Paris: Vrin 2009, translated by Dominique Bouillon. Jacopo Zabarella, On Methods and On Regressus, edited and translated by John P. McCaskey (I Tatti Renaissance Library; Harvard University Press, 2014). Volume 1, On Methods, Books I–II. Volume 2, On Methods, Books III–IV and On Regressus.   == Bibliography == Edwards, William F. (1960): The Logic of Iacopo Zabarella (1533–1589). Unpublished Ph.D.thesis, Columbia University. H. Mikkeli (1992): An Aristotelian Response to Renaissance Humanism. Jacopo Zabarella on the Nature of Arts and Sciences, Helsinki: The Finnish Historical Society. Randall, J.H. (1961): The School of Padua and the Emergence of Modern Science. Padova: Editrice Antenore.   == References ==   == External links == Giacomo Zabarella entry by Heikki Mikkeli in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Biography at The Galileo Project Ulrich G. Leinsle (1998). "Jacopo Zabarella". In Bautz, Traugott. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 14. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 292–295. ISBN 3-88309-073-5. , biography of Jacopo Zabarella Philosophy Institute of the Düsseldorf University: Philosophengalerie, article "Jacobus Zabarella (Giacomo Zabarella)" (in German) online : with picture Texts of Zabarella German translation of De ordine intelligendi, by Rudolf Schicker German translation of Zabarella's De natura, by Rudolf Schicker Opera Logica (PDF)

Jacques Herbrand (12 February 1908 – 27 July 1931) was a French mathematician. Although he died at only 23 years of age, he was already considered one of "the greatest mathematicians of the younger generation" by his professors Helmut Hasse, and Richard Courant. He worked in mathematical logic and class field theory. He introduced recursive functions. Herbrand's theorem refers to either of two completely different theorems. One is a result from his doctoral thesis in proof theory, and the other one half of the Herbrand–Ribet theorem. The Herbrand quotient is a type of Euler characteristic, used in homological algebra. He contributed to Hilbert's program in the foundations of mathematics by providing a constructive consistency proof for a weak system of arithmetic. The proof uses the above-mentioned, proof-theoretic Herbrand's Theorem.   == Biography == Herbrand finished his doctorate at École Normale Supérieure in Paris under Ernest Vessiot in 1929. He joined the army in October 1929, however, and so did not defend his thesis at the Sorbonne until the following year. He was awarded a Rockefeller fellowship that enabled him to study in Germany in 1931, first with John von Neumann in Berlin, then during June with Emil Artin in Hamburg, and finally with Emmy Noether in Göttingen. He submitted his principal study of proof theory and general recursive functions "On the consistency of arithmetic" early in 1931. While the essay was under consideration, Gödel's "On formally undecidable sentences of Principia Mathematica and related systems I" announced the impossibility of formalizing within a theory that theory's consistency proof. Herbrand studied Gödel's essay and wrote an appendix to his own study explaining why Gödel's result did not contradict his own. In July of that year he was mountain-climbing in the French Alps with two friends when he fell to his death in the granite mountains of Massif des Écrins. "On the consistency of arithmetic" was published posthumously.   == Quotation == "Jacques Herbrand would have hated Bourbaki" said French mathematician Claude Chevalley quoted in Michèle Chouchan "Nicolas Bourbaki Faits et légendes" Edition du choix, 1995.   == Bibliography == Primary literature: 1967. Jean van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. 1930. "Investigations in proof theory," 525-81. 1931. "On the consistency of arithmetic," 618-28.  1968. Jean van Heijenoort (ed.), Jacques Herbrand, Écrits logiques. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 1971. Warren David Goldfarb (transl., ed.), Logical Writings of Jacques Herbrand Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.   == See also == Herbrand universe Herbrand base Herbrand interpretation Herbrand structure Herbrand theory Herbrand–Ribet theorem Herbrand quotient   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Jacques Herbrand", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Jacques Herbrand at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

James Earl Baumgartner (March 23, 1943 – December 28, 2011) was an American mathematician who worked in set theory, mathematical logic and foundations, and topology. Baumgartner was born in Wichita, Kansas, began his undergraduate study at the California Institute of Technology in 1960, then transferred to the University of California, Berkeley, from which he received his PhD in 1970 from for a dissertation entitled Results and Independence Proofs in Combinatorial Set Theory. His advisor was Robert Vaught. He became a professor at Dartmouth College in 1969, and there spent his entire career. One of Baumgartner's results is the consistency of the statement that any two -dense sets of reals are order isomorphic (a set of reals is -dense if it has exactly  points in every open interval). With András Hajnal he proved the result (Baumgartner–Hajnal theorem) that the partition relation  holds for . He died of a heart attack in 2011.   == See also == Baumgartner's axiom   == Selected publications == Baumgartner, James E., A new class of order types, Annals of Mathematical Logic, 9:187–222, 1976 Baumgartner, James E., Ineffability properties of cardinals I, Infinite and Finite Sets, Keszthely (Hungary) 1973, volume 10 of Colloquia Mathematica Societatis János Bolyai, pages 109–130. North-Holland, 1975 Baumgartner, James E.; Harrington, Leo; Kleinberg, Eugene, Adding a closed unbounded set, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41(2):481–482, 1976 Baumgartner, James E., Ineffability properties of cardinals II, Robert E. Butts and Jaakko Hintikka, editors, Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability Theory, pages 87–106. Reidel, 1977 Baumgartner, James E.; Galvin, Fred, Generalized Erdős cardinals and 0#, Annals of Mathematical Logic 15, 289–313, 1978 Baumgartner, James E.; Erdős, Paul; Galvin, Fred; Larson, J., Colorful partitions of cardinal numbers, Can. J. Math. 31, 524–541, 1979 Baumgartner, James E.; Erdős, Paul; Higgs, D., Cross-cuts in the power set of an infinite set, Order 1, 139–145, 1984 Baumgartner, James E. (Editor), Axiomatic Set Theory (Contemporary Mathematics, Volume 31), 1990   == References == ^ "James E. Baumgartner Obituary". Rand-wilson.com. Retrieved 2012-01-06.  ^ James Earl Baumgartner at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ [1] Valley News obituary

Jan Łukasiewicz (Polish: [ˈjan wukaˈɕɛvʲitʂ]; 21 December 1878 – 13 February 1956) was a Polish logician and philosopher born in Lwów, which, before the Polish partitions, was in Poland, Galicia, then Austria-Hungary. His work centred on analytical philosophy, mathematical logic, and history of logic. He thought innovatively about traditional propositional logic, the principle of non-contradiction and the law of excluded middle. Modern work on Aristotle's logic builds on the tradition started in 1951 with the establishment by Lukasiewicz of a revolutionary paradigm. The Lukasiewicz approach was reinvigorated in the early 1970s in a series of papers by John Corcoran and Timothy Smiley--which inform modern translations of Prior Analytics by Robin Smith in 1989 and Gisela Striker in 2009. Lukasiewicz is still regarded as one of the most important historians of logic.   == Life == He grew up in Lwów and was the only child of Paweł Łukasiewicz, a captain in the Austrian army, and Leopoldina (née Holtzer), the daughter of a civil servant. His family was Roman Catholic. He finished his gymnasium studies in philology and in 1897 went on to Lwów University, which, before the Polish partitions was in Poland, where he studied philosophy and mathematics. In philosophy he was a pupil of Kazimierz Twardowski. In 1902, he received a Doctor of Philosophy degree under the patronage of emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria who gave him a special doctor ring with diamonds. He spent three years as a private teacher, and in 1905 he received a scholarship to complete his philosophical studies at the University of Berlin and the University of Louvain in Belgium. Łukasiewicz continued studying for his habilitation qualification and in 1906 submitted his thesis to the University of Lwów. In 1906 he was appointed a lecturer at the University of Lwów where he was eventually appointed Extraordinary Professor by Emperor Franz Joseph I. He taught there until the First World War. In 1915 he was invited to lecture as a full professor at the University of Warsaw which had re-opened after being closed down by the Tsarist government in the 19th century. In 1919 Łukasiewicz left the university to serve as Polish Minister of Religious Denominations and Public Education in the Paderewski government until 1920. Łukasiewicz led the development of a Polish curriculum replacing the Russian, German and Austrian curricula previously used in partitioned Poland. The Łukasiewicz curriculum emphasized the early acquisition of logical and mathematical concepts. In 1928 he married Regina Barwińska. He remained a professor at the University of Warsaw from 1920 until 1939 when the family house was destroyed by German bombs and the university was closed under German occupation. He had been a rector of the university twice. In this period Lukasiewicz and Stanisław Leśniewski founded the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic which was later made internationally famous by Alfred Tarski who had been Leśniewski's student. At the beginning of World War II he worked at the Warsaw Underground University as part of the secret system of education in Poland during World War II. He and his wife wanted to move to Switzerland but couldn't get permission from the German authorities. Instead, in the summer of 1944, they left Poland with the help of Heinrich Scholz and spent the last few months of the war in Münster, Germany hoping to somehow go on further, perhaps to Switzerland. Following the war, he emigrated to Ireland and worked at University College Dublin (UCD) until his death.   == Work == A number of axiomatizations of classical propositional logic are due to Łukasiewicz. A particularly elegant axiomatization features a mere three axioms and is still invoked down to the present day. He was a pioneer investigator of multi-valued logics; his three-valued propositional calculus, introduced in 1917, was the first explicitly axiomatized non-classical logical calculus. He wrote on the philosophy of science, and his approach to the making of scientific theories was similar to the thinking of Karl Popper. Łukasiewicz invented the Polish notation (named after his nationality) for the logical connectives around 1920. There is a quotation from his paper, Remarks on Nicod's Axiom and on "Generalizing Deduction", page 180;  "I came upon the idea of a parenthesis-free notation in 1924. I used that notation for the first time in my article   The reference cited by Łukasiewicz above is apparently a lithographed report in Polish. The referring paper by Łukasiewicz Remarks on Nicod's Axiom and on "Generalizing Deduction", originally published in Polish in 1931, was later reviewed by H. A. Pogorzelski in the Journal of Symbolic Logic in 1965. In Łukasiewicz 1951 book, Aristotle's Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic, he mentions that the principle of his notation was to write the functors before the arguments to avoid brackets and that he had employed his notation in his logical papers since 1929. He then goes on to cite, as an example, a 1930 paper he wrote with Alfred Tarski on the sentential calculus. This notation is the root of the idea of the recursive stack, a last-in, first-out computer memory store proposed by several researchers including Turing, Bauer and Hamblin, and first implemented in 1957. In 1960, Łukasiewicz notation concepts and stacks were used as the basis of the Burroughs B5000 computer designed by Robert S. Barton and his team at Burroughs Corporation in Pasadena, California. The concepts also led to the design of the English Electric multi-programmed KDF9 computer system of 1963, which had two such hardware register stacks. A similar concept underlies the reverse Polish notation (RPN, a postfix notation) of the Friden EC-130 calculator and its successors, many Hewlett Packard calculators, the Forth programming language, or the PostScript page description language.   == Recognition == In 2008 the Polish Information Processing Society established the Jan Łukasiewicz Award, to be presented to the most innovative Polish IT companies. From 1999-2004, the Department of Computer Science building at UCD was called the Łukasiewicz Building, until all campus buildings were renamed after the disciplines they housed.   == Chronology == 1878 born 1890–1902 studies with Kazimierz Twardowski in Lemberg (Lwów, L'viv) 1902 doctorate (mathematics and philosophy), University of Lemberg with the highest distinction possible 1906 habilitation thesis completed, University of Lemberg 1906 becomes a lecturer 1910 essays on the principle of non-contradiction and the excluded middle 1911 extraordinary professor at Lemberg 1915 invited to the newly reopened University of Warsaw 1916 new Kingdom of Poland declared 1917 develops three-valued propositional calculus 1919 Polish Minister of Education 1920–1939 professor at Warsaw University founds with Stanisław Leśniewski the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic (see also Alfred Tarski, Stefan Banach, Hugo Steinhaus, Zygmunt Janiszewski, Stefan Mazurkiewicz) 1928 marries Regina Barwińska 1944 flees to Germany and settles in Hembsen, where he was brought for his own safety. 1946 exile in Belgium 1946 offered a chair by the Royal Irish Academy, held at University College Dublin 1953 writes autobiography 1956 dies in Dublin   == Selected works ==   === Books === Łukasiewicz, Jan (1951). Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic. Oxford University Press.  2nd Edition, enlarged, 1957. Reprinted by Garland Publishing in 1987. ISBN 0-8240-6924-2 Łukasiewicz, Jan (1958). Elementy logiki matematycznej (in Polish). Warsaw, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe. OCLC 11322101.  Łukasiewicz, Jan (1964) [1963]. Elements of Mathematical Logic. Translated from Polish by Olgierd Wojtasiewicz. New York, Macmillan. OCLC 671498.  Łukasiewicz, Jan (1970). Ludwik Borkowski, ed. Selected Works. North-Holland Pub. Co. ISBN 0-7204-2252-3. OCLC 115237.  Łukasiewicz, Jan (1998). Jacek Jadacki, ed. Logika i metafizyka. Miscellanea (in Polish). Warsaw, WFiS UW. ISBN 83-910113-3-X.    === Papers === 1903 "On Induction as Inversion of Deduction" 1906 "Analysis and Construction of the Concept of Cause" 1910 "On Aristotle's Principle of Contradiction" 1913 "On the Reversibility of the Relation of Ground and Consequence" 1920 "On Three-valued Logic" 1921 "Two-valued Logic" 1922 "A Numerical Interpretation of the Theory of Propositions" 1928 "Concerning the Method in Philosophy" 1929 "Elements of Mathematical Logic" 1929 "On Importance and Requirements of Mathematical Logic" 1930 "Philosophical Remarks on Many-Valued Systems of Propositional Logic" 1930 "Investigations into the Sentential Calculus" ["Untersuchungen über den Aussagenkalkül"], with Alfred Tarski 1931 "Comments on Nicod's Axiom and the 'Generalizing Deduction'" 1934 "On Science" 1934 "Importance of Logical Analysis for Knowledge" 1934 "Outlines of the History of the Propositional Logic" 1936 "Logistic and Philosophy" 1937 "In Defense of the Logistic" 1938 "On Descartes's Philosophy" 1943 "The Shortest Axiom of the Implicational Calculus of Propositions" 1951 "On Variable Functors of Propositional Arguments" 1952 "On the Intuitionistic Theory of Deduction" 1953 "A System of Modal Logic" 1954 "On a Controversial Problem of Aristotle's Modal Syllogistic"   == See also == Łukasiewicz logic History of philosophy in Poland Stanisław Leśniewski List of Poles 27114 Lukasiewicz   == Notes ==   == References == "Curriculum Vitae of Jan Łukasiewicz", Rome, Italy: Metalogicon journal, (1994) VII, 2 (July–December issue). Craig, Edward (general editor), "Article: Jan Łukasiewicz", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1998, Volume 5, pp. 860–863.   == Further reading == Borkowski, L.; Słupecki, J., "The logical works of J. Łukasiewicz", Studia Logica 8 (1958), 7–56. Kotarbiński, T., "Jan Łukasiewicz's works on the history of logic", Studia Logica 8 (1958), 57–62. Kwiatkowski, T., "Jan Łukasiewicz – A historian of logic", Organon 16–17 (1980–1981), 169–188. Marshall, D., "Łukasiewicz, Leibniz and the arithmetization of the syllogism", Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 18 (2) (1977), 235–242. Seddon, Frederick (1996). Aristotle & Łukasiewicz on the Principle of Contradiction. Ames, Iowa: Modern Logic Pub. ISBN 1-884905-04-8. OCLC 37533856.  Woleński, Jan (1994). Philosophical Logic in Poland. Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 0-7923-2293-2. OCLC 27938071.  Woleński, Jan, "Jan Łukasiewicz on the Liar Paradox, Logical Consequence, Truth and Induction", Modern Logic 4 (1994), 394–400.   == External links == Jan Lukasiewicz entry by Peter Simons in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Jan Łukasiewicz", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Łukasiewicz entry at Polish Philosophy Page, ed. by F. Coniglione (University of Catania) Jan Łukasiewicz at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Jean-Yves Beziau (born January 15, 1965 in Orléans, France) is a professor and researcher of the Brazilian Research Council — CNPq — at the University of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Beziau is a dual citizen of France and Switzerland (Ropraz, VD). He is a fluent speaker of English and Portuguese as well as his native French, and has published works in all of these three languages. A former student of (and frequent collaborator with) Newton da Costa, he works in the field of logic—in particular, paraconsistent logic, the square of opposition and universal logic. He holds a Master's degree in Philosophy from Pantheon-Sorbonne University on the Allegory of the cave (advisor: Sarah Kofman), a PhD in Philosophy from the University of São Paulo on Logical truth (advisor: Newton da Costa), a MSc and a PhD in Logic and Foundations of Computer Science from Denis Diderot University (advisor: Daniel Andler). He has been working in France, Switzerland, Brazil, Poland and USA (UCLA, Stanford and UCSD ). He is the Editor-in-Chief and founder of the journal Logica Universalis, the South American Journal of Logic, the Springer book series Studies in Universal Logic, the College Publication book series Logic PhDs and book Encyclopaedia of Logic as well as the area editor of logic of the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy He is the organizer of various series of events in logic around the world: UNILOG - World Congress and School on Universal Logic (Montreux 2005, Xi'an 2007, Lisbon 2010, Rio de Janeiro 2013, Istanbul 2015), Square of Opposition (Montreux 2007, Corsica 2010, Beirut 2012, Vatican 2014), Logic in Question (Sorbonne, Paris 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015).   == Selected publications == "What is paraconsistent logic?" In D. Batens et al. (eds.), Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic, Research Studies Press, Baldock, 2000, pp. 95–111. ISBN 0-86380-253-2 Handbook of Paraconsistency (ed. with Walter Carnielli and Dov Gabbay). London: College Publication, 2007. ISBN 978-1-904987-73-4 "Semantic computation of truth based on associations already learned" (with Patrick Suppes), Journal of Applied Logic, 2 (2004), pp. 457–467. "From paraconsistent logic to universal logic", Sorites, 12 (2001), pp.5-32. Logica Universalis: Towards a General Theory of Logic (ed.). Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag, 2005, Second Edition 2007. ISBN 3-7643-7259-1 "Logic is not logic", 'Abstracta' 6 (2010), pp. 73–102. "The power of the hexagon", Logica Universalis, 6 (2012), pp. 1–43. "History of truth-values", in D.M.Gabbay and J.Woods (eds) Handbook of the History of Logic, Vol. 11 - Logic: a history of its central concepts, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2012, pp. 233–305 The Square of Opposition: a General Framework for Cognition (ed. with Gillman Payette). Bern: Peter Lang, 2012. ISBN 978-3-0343-0537-2 "The new rising of the square of opposition", in J.-Y.Béziau and D.Jacquette (eds), Around and Beyond the Square of Opposition, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2012, pp. 6–24. "Preface" of Universal Logic : an Anthology - From Paul Hertz to Dov Gabbay, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2012. La pointure du symbole (ed.). Paris: Petra, 2014. ISBN 978-2-84743-048-6 "The relativity and universality of logic", Synthese, 192 (2015), pp 1939-1954. Conceptual Clarifications - Tributes to Patrick Suppes (1922-2014) (ed. with Décio Krause and Jonas R. Becker Arenhart). London: College Publication, 2015. ISBN 978-1-84890-188-9   == External links == Jean-Yves Beziau's personal homepage The Road to Universal Logic - Festschrift for 50th Birthday of Jean-Yves Béziau Volume I The Road to Universal Logic - Festschrift for 50th Birthday of Jean-Yves Béziau Volume II Logical Autobiography 50 Logica Universalis Studies in Universal Logic Logic PhDs Encyclopaedia of Logic South American Journal of Logic World Congress and School on Universal Logic World Congress on the Square Opposition Logic in Question

Jean-Yves Girard (born 1947) is a French logician working in proof theory. He is the research director (emeritus) at the mathematical institute of Luminy. He obtained the CNRS Silver medal in 1983 and is a member of the French Academy of Sciences.   == BiographyEdit == Jean-Yves Girard is an alumnus of the École normale supérieure de Saint-Cloud. He made a name for himself in the 1970s with his proof of strong normalization in a system of second-order logic called System F. This result gave a new proof of Takeuti's conjecture, which was proven a few years earlier by William W. Tait, Moto-o Takahashi and Dag Prawitz. For this purpose, he introduced the notion of reducibility candidate ("candidat de réducibilité"). He is also credited with the invention of linear logic; the geometry of interaction; ludics; and the mustard watch.   == BibliographyEdit == Ernest Nagel; James R. Newman; Kurt Gödel; Jean-Yves Girard (1989). Le théorème de Gödel. Éditions du Seuil.  Jean-Yves Girard; P. Taylor; Yves Lafont (1989). Proofs and Types. Cambridge University Press.  Jean-Yves Girard (2007). Le Point Aveugle, Cours de Logique. Hermann.    == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Girard's home page Jean-Yves Girard at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Girard's bibliography (via DBLP) Journées Jean-Yves Girard web site of 2007 conference in honour of Girard's 60th birthday

Jean Buridan (French: [byʁidɑ̃]; Latin Johannes Buridanus; c. 1295 – 1363) was a French priest who sowed the seeds of the Copernican revolution in Europe. He developed the concept of impetus, the first step toward the modern concept of inertia, and an important development in the history of medieval science. His name is most familiar through the thought experiment known as Buridan's ass (a thought experiment which does not appear in his extant writings).   == Career == Born, most probably, in Béthune, France, Buridan studied and later taught at the University of Paris. Unusually, he spent his academic life in the faculty of arts, rather than obtaining the doctorate in Theology that typically prepared the way for a career in Philosophy. He further maintained his intellectual independence by remaining a secular cleric, rather than joining a religious Order. By 1340, his confidence had grown sufficiently for him to launch an attack on his predecessor, William of Ockham. Buridan also wrote on solutions to paradoxes such as the liar paradox. An ordinance of Louis XI., in 1473, directed against the nominalists, prohibited the reading of his works. The bishop Albert of Saxony, himself renowned as a logician, was among the most notable of his students.   == Impetus theory ==  The concept of inertia was alien to the physics of Aristotle. Aristotle, and his peripatetic followers, held that a body was only maintained in motion by the action of a continuous external force. Thus, in the Aristotelian view, a projectile moving through the air would owe its continuing motion to eddies or vibrations in the surrounding medium, a phenomenon known as antiperistasis. In the absence of a proximate force, the body would come to rest almost immediately. Jean Buridan, following in the footsteps of John Philoponus and Avicenna, proposed that motion was maintained by some property of the body, imparted when it was set in motion. Buridan named the motion-maintaining property impetus. Moreover, he rejected the view that the impetus dissipated spontaneously (this is the big difference between Buridan's theory of impetus and his predecessors), asserting that a body would be arrested by the forces of air resistance and gravity which might be opposing its impetus. Buridan further held that the impetus of a body increased with the speed with which it was set in motion, and with its quantity of matter. Clearly, Buridan's impetus is closely related to the modern concept of momentum. Buridan saw impetus as causing the motion of the object. Buridan anticipated Isaac Newton when he wrote: ...after leaving the arm of the thrower, the projectile would be moved by an impetus given to it by the thrower and would continue to be moved as long as the impetus remained stronger than the resistance, and would be of infinite duration were it not diminished and corrupted by a contrary force resisting it or by something inclining it to a contrary motion (Questions on Aristotle's Metaphysics XII.9). Buridan used the theory of impetus to give an accurate qualitative account of the motion of projectiles but he ultimately saw his theory as a correction to Aristotle, maintaining core peripatetic beliefs including a fundamental qualitative difference between motion and rest. The theory of impetus was also adapted to explain celestial phenomena in terms of circular impetus.   == Apocryphal stories and anecdotes about personal life == Apocryphal stories abound about his reputed amorous affairs and adventures which are enough to show that he enjoyed a reputation as a glamorous and mysterious figure in Paris life. In particular, a rumour held that he was sentenced to be thrown in a sack into the River Seine, but was ultimately saved through the ingenuity of a student. François Villon alludes to this in his famous poem Ballade des Dames du Temps Jadis. Buridan also seems to have had an unusual facility for attracting academic funding which suggests that he was indeed a charismatic figure.   == Selected works in English translation == Hughes, G.E. (1982). John Buridan on Self-Reference: Chapter Eight of Buridan's Sophismata. An edition and translation with an introduction, and philosophical commentary. Cambridge/London/New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-28864-9. King, Peter (1985). John Buridan's Logic: The Treatise on Supposition; The Treatise on Consequences. Translation from the Latin with a Philosophical Introduction, Dordrecht: Reidel. Zupko, John Alexander, ed. and tr. (1989). John Buridan's Philosophy of Mind: An Edition and Translation of Book III of His Questions on Aristotle's De Anima (Third Redaction), with Commentary and Critical and Interpretative Essays. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University. Klima, Gyula, tr. (2001). John Buridan: 'Summulae de Dialectica'. Yale Library of Medieval Philosophy. New Haven, Conn./London: Yale University Press. John Buridan (2014). Treatise on Consequences, translated, with an Introduction by Stephen Read. New York: Fordham University Press.   == See also == List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics Buridan's bridge   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Michael, Bernd (1985). Johannes Buridan: Studien zu seinem Leben, seinen Werken und zu Rezeption seiner Theorien im Europa des späten Mittelalters [Jean Buridan: His life, his works and the reaction to his theories in the Europe of the late Middle Ages]. 2 Vols. Doctoral dissertation. University of Berlin.  Klima, Gyula (2008). John Buridan. New York: Oxford University Press. Landi, Marcello (2007). "Un contributo allo studio della scienza nel Medio Evo. Il trattato Il cielo e il mondo di Giovanni Buridano e un confronto con alcune posizioni di Tommaso d'Aquino" [A contribution to the study of science in the Middle Ages. The sky and the world of Jean Buridan and a comparison with some positions of St. Thomas Aquinas]. Divus Thomas 110 (2): 151–185.  Thijssen, J. M. M. H., and Jack Zupko (ed.) (2001). The Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy of John Buridan Leiden: Brill. Zupko, Jack (2003). John Buridan. Portrait of a Fourteenth-Century Arts Master. Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press.   == External links == John Buridan entry by Jack Zupko in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bibliography by Fabienne Pironet (up to 2001) Buridan's Logic and Metaphysics: an annotated bibliography (updates the bibliography of Fabienne Pironet to 2014) Buridan's Logical Works. I. An Overview of the Summulae de dialectica a detailed summary of the nine treatises of the Summulae de dialectica Buridan's Logical Works. II. The Treatise on Consequences and other writings a summary of the other logical writings Buridan: Editions, Translations and Studies on the Manuscript Tradition Complete bibliography of the logical and metaphysical works

Jean George Pierre Nicod (c. 1893 – 16 February 1924) was a French philosopher and logician. In his best known work, he showed that the classical propositional calculus could be derived from one axiom and one rule, both expressed using the Sheffer stroke. He also developed Nicod's criterion. Nicod died at the age of 31 from tuberculosis. See also Carl Hempel's raven paradox.   == Legacy == The Institut Jean Nicod (Paris) — a branch of the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) -- is research laboratory at the interface between philosophy, cognitive science, and the social sciences — was named in honour of Nicod's memory. Jean Nicod's name is also commemorated by the prestigious Jean Nicod Lectures, delivered annually in Paris by a leading philosopher of mind or philosophically oriented cognitive scientist, and published as a series by the MIT Press. The lecturer is awarded the Jean Nicod Prize by the CNRS.   == Main works == 1917, "A Reduction in the Number of Primitive Propositions of Logic", Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 19: 32-41. 1921, "La géométrie des sensations de mouvement", Revue de métaphysique et de morale 28: 537-43. 1922, "Les tendances philosophiques de M. Bertrand Russell", Revue de métaphysique et de morale 29: 77-84. 1922, "Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics" in Encyclopædia Britannica: The New Volumes, vol. 3, 12th ed. 874-76. 1923. La géométrie dans le monde sensible. Thèse, Univ. de Paris. 1923. Le problème logique de l'induction. Thèse complémentaire, Univ. de Paris. 1924. "Les relations des valeurs et les relations de sens en logique formelle", Revue de métaphysique et de morale 31: 467-80. 1924, "Freedom of Association and Trade Unionism: An Introductory Survey", International Labor Review 9: 467-80. 1930. Foundations of Geometry & Induction, Containing Geometry in a Sensible World and the Logical Problem of Induction, with prefaces by Bertrand Russell and André Lalande. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co. Reprinted 2000, London: Routledge.   == References ==   == External links == Jean Nicod (1893-1924): Biographical note and works (in French) Institut Jean Nicod (CNRS)

This is a redirect from a title with another method of capitalisation. It leads to the title in accordance with the Wikipedia naming conventions for capitalisation, or it leads to a title that is associated in some way with the conventional capitalisation of this redirect title. This may help writing, searching and international language issues. For more information follow the bold category link. If this redirect is an incorrect capitalization (a typo), then it is made available to aid searches, so pages that use this link should be updated to link directly to the target. Use this rcat to tag only mainspace redirects; when other capitalisations are in other namespaces, use {{R from modification}} instead.

Jeffrey Bruce Paris (/ˈpærɪs/; born 1944) is British a mathematician and Professor of Logic in the School of Mathematics at the University of Manchester.    == Education == Paris gained his doctorate under Robin Gandy at Manchester in 1969 with a dissertation entitled Large Cardinals and the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis.   == Research == Paris known for his work on mathematical logic, in particular provability in arithmetic, uncertain reasoning and inductive logic with an emphasis on rationality and common sense principles.   == Awards and honours == Paris was elected Fellow of the British Academy in 1999.   == References ==

Jeroen Antonius Gerardus Groenendijk (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈχʁunəndɛik]) (born 20 July 1949, Amsterdam), is a Dutch logician, linguist and philosopher, working on philosophy of language, formal semantics, pragmatics. Groenendijk wrote a joint Ph.D. dissertation with Martin Stokhof on the formal semantics of questions, under the supervision of Renate Bartsch and Johan van Benthem. He was also an important figure in the development of dynamic semantics (together with Stokhof, Veltman and others). His current work is mainly focused on studying and developing the recently founded framework of Inquisitive Semantics. He is a former director of the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC) at the University of Amsterdam and a member of the group collectively publishing under the pseudonym L. T. F. Gamut.   == References ==   == External links == Groenendijk's university homepage Inquisitive Semantics project homepage

Jerzy Łoś (born March 22, 1920 in Lwów, Poland (now Lviv, Ukraine)-June 1, 1998 in Warsaw) (Polish pronunciation: [ˈjɛʐɨ ˈwɔɕ]) was a Polish mathematician, logician, economist, and philosopher. He is best known for his work on ultraproducts, in particular for "Łoś's theorem", which states that any first-order formula is true in an ultraproduct if and only if it is true in "most" factors (see ultraproduct for details). He was faculty at academies in Wrocław, Toruń, and Warsaw. In 1996 Łoś suffered from a severe brain stroke. He was thenceforward ill until his death in 1998.   == Selected publications == Łoś, Jerzy (1955) Quelques remarques, théorèmes et problèmes sur les classes définissables d'algèbres. Mathematical interpretation of formal systems, pp. 98--113. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam.   == See also == Transfer principle Łoś's theorem   == External links == Jerzy Łoś's biography

Jin Yuelin (Chinese: 金岳霖) (1895–1984) was a Chinese philosopher and logician.   == Biography == He was born in Changsha, Hunan and attended Tsinghua University from 1911 until 1914. He obtained Ph.D. in Political Science from Columbia University in 1920. In 1926, Jin founded the Department of Philosophy at Tsinghua University. Jin was an active participant in the May 4th movement as a young, intellectual revolutionary. He helped to incorporate the scientific method into philosophy. He died in Beijing.   == Philosophical context: Eastern vs. Western thought == Among the first to systematically introduce modern logic into China, Jin also founded a new philosophical system combining elements from Western and Chinese philosophical traditions (especially the concept of Tao). Not much work on Jin’s philosophy has been done in the West in English, although a decent amount has been done in Chinese. Jin does not advocate a traditional, historical approach to philosophy, but rather presents philosophy as a practicing approach to solving problems – philosophy as goal in and of itself. This is quite different from how Chinese philosophers at the time viewed the study of philosophy. At the risk of oversimplifying, Jin’s approach can be viewed as a hybrid between Western and Eastern philosophical ideologies – influenced both by his Western education in logic and science, and by his Chinese roots. He was particularly interested in Bertrand Russell’s work, which is based partly upon New Realism in British Philosophy. Russell worked with two main concepts: breaking down the complex into smaller parts, and rebuilding the logic method, both of which affected Jin’s thinking and philosophy. However Jin can be considered a Chinese philosopher because he was most informed by Chinese philosophy, and concerned himself most with Chinese concepts, such as Tao. “However,” Zinda writes, “Jin used discursive structures borrowed from both Chinese and Western thought as modes of persuasion”.   === Jin's views on Chinese philosophy === Jin’s writing is intertwined with his desire to navigate the space between Chinese and Western philosophy. In his essay “Chinese Philosophy”, Jin highlights the differences he sees between the two spheres regarding the study of philosophy. He sees the Western approach to philosophy as being more of a meticulous scientific and logical approach that he traces back to the Hellenistic thought in Ancient Greece. In contrast, he explains Chinese philosophy as having “underdevelopment of what might be called logico-epistemological consciousness”. He explains Chinese philosophy as being more poetic in that it has “bareness and disconnectedness”, where Western philosophy is more verbose. This lack of extended explanation in Chinese philosophy leads, Jin notes, to Chinese philosophy being more about interpreting old philosopher’s work, rather than presenting new original ways of thinking. In contrast, Jin does not attribute ideas to past thinkers or quote past thinkers in his own philosophy. Additionally, he did not pursue the nationalistic aims of China in his philosophy, as many of his colleagues did. Jin notes that China has a long history of the study of philosophy and political science being intertwined; the philosophy of today is a more specialized and differentiated discipline. This detachment from the discipline, while it creates objective knowledge, distances the philosopher from the philosophy. Jin advocates for living philosophy, rather than just knowing it. Thus, he works to take advantage of the emotional attachment of Chinese words. For example, Jin chooses not to translate the word “Dao” to English, but keeps its Chinese origin.   == Works == 1936: Logic (《逻辑》/《邏輯》) 1940: On Tao (《论道》/《論道》) 1965: Criticism of Russell's Philosophy (《罗素哲学批判》/《羅素哲學批判》) 1983: A Theory of Knowledge (《知识论》/《知識論》)   === Basic writings and concepts === Jin’s most accomplished philosophical writings are his three principal publications written in Chinese: Logic (1935), On Tao (1940), and A Theory of Knowledge (1983). His English publication, "Tao, Nature, and Man" draws heavily on thought from "On Dao", which he considers to be one of the most central parts of his philosophical work. Jin’s metaphysics is focused mostly on Tao, which he argues is what life is made up of. It is composed of two main elements that Jin coins as Stuff and Form. In short, Stuff refers to the inexpressible matter that fills everything, while Form refers to all of reality that is being filled. Essentially, Tao is the result of when Form is filled with Stuff. Jin uses his definition of Tao to posit a universal sympathy: everything – including humans – is one in the same, and we should appreciate life as such.   ==== Stuff ==== Stuff is inexpressible. In fact, the word “Stuff” itself is simply a word Jin uses to approximate the definition because, he posits, no word or human will ever fully grasp the concept. Scholar Hu Jun writes, “What is required in order to grasp matter [Stuff] is a sort of intellectual projection, in which recognition of the limits of one’s intellect is accompanied by a leave out of the intellectual process...”. Stuff refers to the capacity of all things to change – pure activity and potentiality. It is composed of two categories – Universals and Possibilities.   ==== Universals and possibilities ==== Jin explains the notions of Universals and Possibilities as stemming from the ideal version of concepts, which in turn stems from abstracting the concrete. The Universal refers to a concept which a group of things have in common. Jin writes, “Each universal is an aspect shared by a class of objects, for example… horseness which is shared by a class of quadrupeds”. Universals are groupings that we are familiar with. A Possibility, therefore, is a concept that is not a Universal. It is that which has not been imagined yet, but could be imagined. Thus, Jin writes, “we are able to define an universal as a realized possibility… A universal is merely a Stuffed possibility”. Jin posits that the reality we feel with regard to events and objects is the realization of possibilities of those events and objects. Hu writes, “The realization of contingent possibilities gives us the richness, variety, and completeness of Tao, whereas the eternally unrealized possibilities supply us with the implements in the realm of thinking and thought”.   ==== Form ==== Form is what Stuff must remain inside of. Hu writes, “Whether or not matter [Stuff] enters into or withdraws from possibilities, it must stay within Form”. Everything is inside of Form. Jin explains that unlike Universals, it does not have “a boundary line dividing what belongs to it from what doesn’t”. Thus Form is formless – it incorporates everything and is nothing at the same time. It is what is left when there are no possibilities – there is nothing outside of Form. Form and Stuff are inescapably intertwined. Stuff fills Form, and Form contains Stuff. Jin writes, “Un-Stuffed Form or Un-formed Stuff is a contradiction”. Jin defines their relationship as, “Stuff as a sort of raw material and Form as a kind of mould”.   ==== Tao ==== Tao is Jin’s most basic concept, but is also his highest ideal realm. Tao is the coming together of Stuff and Form to create the universe. If Tao were only Stuff then it would be fluid, and if it were only Form then it would be empty. Jin writes, “Tao is simply Stuffed Form or Formed Stuff. It is therefore neither pure Form nor pure Stuff”. Tao is all-pervasive and incorporates everything. Therefore, Jin posits that humans are part of Tao, and urges us to be “conscious of the fundamental oneness at which we are with the universe and everything there is in it”. He presents a universe where everything has the same status because everything is made up of the same fabric. Scholar Yvonne Schulz Zinda writes, “he established a kind of ontological certainty that integrates individuals the evolutionary process of dao, through which they are interrelated with each other”. While different things have different jobs – Jin gives the example of a mosquito’s job being to bite a human, and a human’s job to kill the mosquito – one thing not innately superior to the other.   == See also == Feng Youlan   == References ==  On Jin Yuelin's Metaphysics   == References ==

Joachim Jungius (22 October 1587 – 23 September 1657) was a German mathematician, logician and philosopher of sciences.   == Life == He was a native of Lübeck. He studied metaphysics at the Universities of Rostock and Giessen, where he earned in 1608 his degree. Beginning in 1609, he was a professor of mathematics at the University of Giessen, and in 1614–15, with Wolfgang Ratke (1571–1635) and Christoph Helvig (1581–1617), he took part in studies of educational reform. In 1616, he returned to Rostock in order to study medicine, later obtaining his medical doctorate from the University of Padua (1619). From 1619 to 1623, he practiced medicine in Lübeck. In 1622 at Rostock, he founded an early scientific society known as Societas Ereunetica sive Zetetica. From 1624 to 1628, Jungius worked as a professor of mathematics at Rostock, his service here being briefly interrupted in 1625, when he spent time as professor of medicine at the University of Helmstedt. From 1629 until 1657, he was professor of natural sciences at the Akademisches Gymnasium, a secondary school in Hamburg. Jungius believed that science was based on mathematics, and at Hamburg stressed the importance of critical thinking to his students. He also felt that mathematics and logic served as a remedy to metaphysical and mystical speculation.   == Works == Jungius was an important figure of 17th century atomism, and was an advocate of a "corpuscular chemistry" that assumed the conservation of mass. He also demonstrated that a catenary was not a parabola. In 1638 he published the textbook Logica Hamburgensis, which presented late medieval theories and techniques of logic. Here he demonstrated oblique cases of arguments that did not adhere to simpler forms of inference; An example being: "The square of an even number is even; 6 is even; therefore, the square of 6 is even". His double position as connected to scholastic logic, but also to innovations, earns him the classification Semi-Ramist. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz wrote, "While Jungius of Lübeck is a man little known even in Germany itself, he was clearly of such judiciousness and such capacity of mind that I know of no other mortal, including even Descartes himself, from whom we could better have expected a great restoration of the sciences, had Jungius been either known or assisted."   == Citations ==   == Bibliography ==   === Editions === Joachim Jungius, 1957. Logica Hamburgensis, facsimile reproduction of the original edition (Hamburg, 1638) edited by Rudolf W. Meyer, Hamburg: J.J. Augustin. Joachim Jungius, 1977. Logica Hamburgensis additamenta, edited by Wilhelm Risse, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Joachim Jungius, 1988. Disputationes Hamburgenses, critical edition by Clemens Müller-Glauser, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.   === Studies === Ariew, Roger and Daniel Garber, 1989. G. W. Leibniz: Philosophical Essays. Indianapolis: Hackett. Ashworth, Earline Jennifer, 1967. Joachim Jungius (1587-1657) and the Logic of Relations. Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie 49: 72-85. Clucas, Stephen, 2009. Scientia and inductio scientifica in the 'Logica Hamburgensis' of Joachim Jungius, in Tom Sorell, Jill Kraye and G. A. J. Rogers (eds.), Scientia in Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth-Century Thinkers on Demonstrative Knowledge from First Principles, Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 53–70. Klein, Peter (ed.) 1990. Praktische Logik. Traditionen und Tendenzen. 350 Jahre Joachim Jungii 'Logica Hamburgensis' , Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Trevisani, Francesco, 1978. Geometria e logica nel metodo di Joachim Jungius (1587-1657), Rivista Critica di Storia della Filosofia 33: 171-208.   == External links == H. Kangro, Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Joachim Jungius", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . The Galileo Project, Biographical Data

Joachim Lambek (5 December 1922 – 23 June 2014) was Peter Redpath Emeritus Professor of Pure Mathematics at McGill University, where he earned his Ph.D. degree in 1950 with Hans Zassenhaus as advisor.   == Scholarly work == Lambek supervised 16 doctoral students, and has 51 doctoral descendants. He has over 100 publications listed in the Mathematical Reviews, including 6 books. His earlier work was mostly in module theory, especially torsion theories, non-commutative localization, and injective modules. One of his earliest papers, (Lambek & Moser 1954) proved the Lambek-Moser theorem about integer sequences. His more recent work is in pregroups and formal languages; his earliest work in this field were probably (Lambek 1958) and (Lambek 1979). He is noted, among other things, for the Lambek calculus, an effort to capture mathematical aspects of natural language syntax in logical form and a work that has been very influential in computational linguistics. His last works were on pregroup grammar.   == Selected works ==   === Books === Fine, N. J.; Gillman, Leonard; Lambek, Joachim (1966), Rings of quotients of rings of functions, McGill University Press, MR 0200747  Lambek, Joachim (1966), Lectures on rings and modules, With an appendix by Ian G. Connell, Blaisdell Publishing, MR 0206032 ; 3rd edition. 2009.  Lambek, Joachim (1966), Completions of categories, Seminar lectures given in 1966 in Zürich. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, No. 24, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 0209330  Lambek, Joachim (1971), Torsion theories, additive semantics, and rings of quotients, With an appendix by H. H. Storrer on torsion theories and dominant dimensions. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 177, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 0284459  Lambek, J.; Scott, P.J. (1986), Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-35653-4, MR 856915  Anglin, W. S.; Lambek, Joachim (1995), The heritage of Thales, Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-94544-6, MR 1369087  Casadio, Claudia; Lambek, Joachim (2008), Computational Algebraic Approaches to Natural Language, Polimetrica, ISBN 978-88-7699-125-7  Lambek, J. (2008), From word to sentence: a computational algebraic approach to grammar, Polimetrica, ISBN 978-88-7699-117-2    === Articles === Lambek, Joachim; Moser, L. (1954), "Inverse and Complementary Sequences of Natural Numbers", The American Mathematical Monthly (The American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 61, No. 7) 61 (7): 454–458, doi:10.2307/2308078, ISSN 0002-9890, JSTOR 2308078, MR 0062777  Lambek, J. (1958), "The Mathematics of Sentence Structure", The American Mathematical Monthly (The American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 65, No. 3) 65 (3): 154–170, doi:10.2307/2310058, ISSN 0002-9890, JSTOR 1480361  Lambek, Joachim (1972), "Bicommutators of nice injectives", Journal of Algebra 21: 60–73, doi:10.1016/0021-8693(72)90034-8, ISSN 0021-8693, MR 0301052  Lambek, Joachim (1972), "Localization and completion", Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 2 (4): 343–370, doi:10.1016/0022-4049(72)90011-4, ISSN 0022-4049, MR 0320047  Lambek, Joachim (1979), "A mathematician looks at Latin conjugation", Theoretical Linguistics 6 (2): 221–234, doi:10.1515/thli.1979.6.1-3.221, ISSN 0301-4428, MR 589163    == References ==  Barr, Michael; Scott, P. J.; Seely, R. A. G., eds. (2000), The Lambek Festschrift: mathematical structures in computer science, Cambridge University Press, MR 1770227    == External links == Joachim Lambek at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Faculty profile of Joachim Lambek at McGill University An appreciation of Jim Lambek at McGill by Michael Barr (a biographical talk given on the occasion of his 75th birthday) Lambek festival (80th anniversary)


Johann Heinrich Lambert (German: [ˈlambɛʁt], Jean-Henri Lambert in French; 26 August 1728 – 25 September 1777) was a Swiss polymath who made important contributions to the subjects of mathematics, physics (particularly optics), philosophy, astronomy and map projections.   == BiographyEdit == Lambert was born in 1728 in the city of Mulhouse (now in Alsace, France), at that time an exclave of Switzerland. Leaving school he continued to study in his free time whilst undertaking a series of jobs. These included assistant to his father (a tailor), a clerk at a nearby iron works, a private tutor, secretary to the editor of Basler Zeitung and, at the age of 20, private tutor to the sons of Count Salis in Chur. Travelling Europe with his charges (1756–1758) allowed him to meet established mathematicians in the German states, The Netherlands, France and the Italian states. On his return to Chur he published his first books (on optics and cosmology) and began to seek an academic post. After a few short posts he was rewarded (1763) by an invitation to a position at the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, where he gained the sponsorship of Frederick II of Prussia, and became a friend of Euler. In this stimulating and financially stable environment, he worked prodigiously until his death in 1777.   == WorkEdit ==   === MathematicsEdit === Lambert was the first to introduce hyperbolic functions into trigonometry. Also, he made conjectures regarding non-Euclidean space. Lambert is credited with the first proof that π is irrational. He used a generalized continued fraction for the function tan x. Euler believed but could not prove that π was irrational, and it is speculated that Aryabhata also believed this, in 500 CE.  Lambert also devised theorems regarding conic sections that made the calculation of the orbits of comets simpler. Lambert devised a formula for the relationship between the angles and the area of hyperbolic triangles. These are triangles drawn on a concave surface, as on a saddle, instead of the usual flat Euclidean surface. Lambert showed that the angles added up to less than π (radians), or 180°. The amount of shortfall, called the defect, increases with the area. The larger the triangle's area, the smaller the sum of the angles and hence the larger the defect CΔ = π — (α + β + γ). That is, the area of a hyperbolic triangle (multiplied by a constant C) is equal to π (in radians), or 180°, minus the sum of the angles α, β, and γ. Here C denotes, in the present sense, the negative of the curvature of the surface (taking the negative is necessary as the curvature of a saddle surface is defined to be negative in the first place). As the triangle gets larger or smaller, the angles change in a way that forbids the existence of similar hyperbolic triangles, as only triangles that have the same angles will have the same area. Hence, instead of expressing the area of the triangle in terms of the lengths of its sides, as in Euclid's geometry, the area of Lambert's hyperbolic triangle can be expressed in terms of its angles.   === Map projectionEdit === Lambert was the first mathematician to address the general properties of map projections. In particular he was the first to discuss the properties of conformality and equal area preservation and to point out that they were mutually exclusive. (Snyder 1993 p77). In 1772, Lambert published seven new map projections under the title Anmerkungen und Zusätze zur Entwerfung der Land- und Himmelscharten, (translated as Notes and Comments on the Composition of Terrestrial and Celestial Maps by Waldo Tobler (1972)). Lambert did not give names to any of his projections but they are now known as: Lambert conformal conic Transverse Mercator Lambert azimuthal equal area Lagrange projection Lambert cylindrical equal area Transverse cylindrical equal area Lambert conical equal area The first three of these are of great importance. Further details may be found at map projections and in several texts.   === PhysicsEdit === Lambert invented the first practical hygrometer. In 1760, he published a book on photometry, the Photometria. From the assumption that light travels in straight lines, he showed that illumination was proportional to the strength of the source, inversely proportional to the square of the distance of the illuminated surface and the sine of the angle of inclination of the light's direction to that of the surface. These results were supported by experiments involving the visual comparison of illuminations and used for the calculation of illumination. In Photometria Lambert also formulated the law of light absorption—the Beer–Lambert law) and introduced the term albedo. He wrote a classic work on perspective and contributed to geometrical optics. The photometric unit lambert is named in recognition of his work in establishing the study of photometry. Lambert was also a pioneer in the development of three-dimensional colour models. Late in life, he published a description of a triangular colour pyramid, which shows a total of 107 colours on six different levels, variously combining red, yellow and blue pigments, and with an increasing amount of white to provide the vertical component. He was assisted in this project by the court painter Benjamin Calau   === PhilosophyEdit === In his main philosophical work, Neues Organon (New Organon, 1764), Lambert studied the rules for distinguishing subjective from objective appearances. This connects with his work in the science of optics. In 1765 he began corresponding with Immanuel Kant who intended to dedicate to him the Critique of Pure Reason but the work was delayed, appearing after his death.   === AstronomyEdit === Lambert also developed a theory of the generation of the universe that was similar to the nebular hypothesis that Thomas Wright and Immanuel Kant had (independently) developed. Wright published his account in An Original Theory or New Hypothesis of the Universe (1750), Kant in Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels, published anonymously in 1755. Shortly afterward, Lambert published his own version of the nebular hypothesis of the origin of the solar system in Cosmologische Briefe über die Einrichtung des Weltbaues (1761). Lambert hypothesized that the stars near the sun were part of a group which travelled together through the Milky Way, and that there were many such groupings (star systems) throughout the galaxy. The former was later confirmed by Sir William Herschel. In astrodynamics he also solved the problem of determination of time of flight along an section of orbit, known now as Lambert's problem. His work in this area is commemorated by the Asteroid 187 Lamberta named in his honour.   === LogicEdit === Johann-Heinrich Lambert is the author of a treatise on logic, which he called Neues Organon (1764), that is to say, the New Organon. The most recent edition of this work named after Aristotle's Organon was issued in 1990 by the Akademie-Verlag of Berlin. To say nothing of the fact that in it one has the first appearance of the term phenomenology, one can find therein a very pedagogical presentation of the various kinds of syllogism. In A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, John-Stuart Mill expresses his admiration for Johann Heinrich Lambert.   == See alsoEdit == Beer-Lambert law (Lambert–Beer law, Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law) lambert (unit) Lambert quadrilateral Lambert's cosine law Lambertian reflectance Lambert cylindrical equal-area projection Lambert conformal conic projection Lambert azimuthal equal-area projection Lambert series, of importance in number theory. Lambert's trinomial equation Lambert's W function Lambert's theorem on the parabola   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, W. W. Rouse Ball, 1908. Asimov's Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, Isaac Asimov, Doubleday & Co., Inc., 1972, ISBN 0-385-17771-2. "La théorie des parallèles de Johann Heinrich Lambert : Présentation, traduction et commentaires", A. Papadopoulos and G. Théret, Collection Sciences dans l'histoire, Librairie Albert Blanchard, Paris, 2014. ISBN 978-2-85367-266-5. Max E. Eisenring (Nov 1941). Johann Heinrich Lambert und die wissenschaftliche Philosophie der Gegenwart (PDF) (Ph.D. thesis) (in German). ETH Zürich.    == External linksEdit == Johann Heinrich Lambert (1728-1777): Collected Works - Sämtliche Werke Online O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Johann Heinrich Lambert", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Entry from "A Short Account of the History of Mathematics". Britannica NNDB Rouse Ball Digitized works at Université de Strasbourg Sarah Lowengard "Number, Order, Form: Color Systems and Systematization" and Johann Heinrich Lambert The Creation of Color in Eighteenth-Century Europe (New York: Columbia University Press, 2006) "Mémoire sur quelques propriétés remarquables..." (1761), demonstration of irrationality of π, online and analyzed BibNum (PDF).

John Corcoran is the name of: John Corcoran (martial arts), is an American non-fiction book author, newsstand magazine editor, screenwriter and martial arts historian John Corcoran (author), spokesman for literacy programs, and he has set up his own foundation to help people learn to read John Corcoran (attorney), former Clinton White House aide, former speechwriter in the California Governor's office, attorney, and blogger John Corcoran (logician) (born 1937), American philosopher and logician, University of Buffalo (SUNY) John Corcoran (Medal of Honor) (1842–1919), American soldier who received the Medal of Honor for valor during the American Civil War John H. Corcoran (1897–1945), Massachusetts politician who served as the Mayor of Cambridge, Massachusetts John Corcoran (baseball) (1873–1901), American infielder in Major League Baseball Jack Corcoran (1858–1935), [John H. Corcoran], American catcher in Major League Baseball

John of Dumbleton (Lat. Ioannes De Dumbleton) (ca.1310 – ca. 1349) was a member of the Dumbleton village community in Gloucestershire, a southwestern county in England. Although obscure, he is considered a significant English fourteenth-century philosopher for his contributions to logic, natural philosophy, and physics. Dumbleton’s masterwork is his Summa Logicae et Philosophiae Naturalis (Summary of Logic and Natural Philosophy), likely to have been composed just before the time of his death.   == Life == John of Dumbleton is recorded to have become a fellow at Merton College, Oxford (ca. 1338–9) and to have studied with the likes of William Heytesbury, Thomas Bradwardine, and Richard Swineshead. These four medieval scholastics held a common bond in that their study interests were in a similar field, but the method of study which brought these fellows into the same sphere of learning was of a more esoteric bent than modern university methods. They were interested in mathematics and logical analysis for the purposes of natural philosophy, theology, and an a priori type of mathematical physics (not to be confused with modern, empirical, experimental physics). Thus, the physics postulations and conjectures made by Dumbleton and his Oxford contemporaries were primarily done without any application of physical experimentation. Dumbleton, along with the other three Merton philosophers, received the moniker 'Calculators' for their adherence to mathematics and logical disputation when solving philosophical and theological problems. After being named a fellow at The Queen's College, Oxford (1340) and making a return to Merton College (1344–45) Dumbleton is recorded to have studied theology in Paris (ca. 1345–47) for a brief period before returning to finish his studies at Merton College (1347–1348). The fact that no extant copy of Dumbleton's Summa Logicae et Philosophiae Naturalis is complete (nor edited) leads one to wonder if his death (ca. 1349) abruptly terminated the possibility of its completion.   == Philosophical Contributions == Though there was a considerable reverence for Platonism in Oxford during the fourteenth century, the rebirth of Aristotelianism held sway in the higher Parisian learning circuits. Dumbleton, who studied in Paris for a brief time, was not immune to this spell. In fact, his compendium Summa Logica et Philosophiae Naturalis, has an overview of many principles found in Aristotle's Physics. The Summa is broken into ten different sections. The ninth section is uncompleted in all extant manuscripts. The tenth section, which, according to Dumbleton, was supposed to examine "universals and signification," shows no evidence of ever being worked on. Although this is the case, the other sections of Dumbleton's Summa are filled with medieval philosophical gems. A couple emphasized topics to be found in the first section are "certitude and the psychology of logic." It includes a medieval examination of epistemological issues; such as the certainty of knowledge. A strong Aristotelian appreciation is felt in the remaining sections, since the majority of the work is dedicated to commenting on the first eight chapters of Aristotle's Physics, and his treatises On Generation and Corruption & On the Soul. In those sections of the Summa will be found discussions and commentary on such topics as: alteration, change (i.e., the measure of motion), properties of natural bodies and their forms (parts II and III); questions dealing with classification (e.g., "whether light belongs to some element"; motions and changes of bodies/forms (parts IV – VI); and in the final sections an examination of the intellect and matters of the soul (parts VII – IX). It is difficult to assess why Dumbleton's Summa did not have a significant following, but it may have been because it was never completed or that it was not circulated well enough.   == Scientific Contributions == The four Merton ‘Calculators’ were not only well versed in the current issues of philosophy during the fourteenth century; they actually initiated new groundbreaking scientific postulations. John of Dumbleton was no exception. Because he concurred with many of the positions held by William Ockham (1288–1348)—especially the idea that is commonly referred to as Ockham’s razor, which states that the most simplistic explanations are ideal—he may have learned how to succinctly formulate his scientific conjectures. Of Dumbleton’s many scientific theories there is one in particular that is worth mentioning here. By making the assumption that bodies are finite, Dumbleton was able to conjecture that contraction or expansion, as in cases of condensation or rarefaction, does not eliminate any parts of a body; rather, a “denumerable number of parts” always exists. Though the idea of molecules was not theorized at this time, Dumbleton’s speculation helped to tame the view that bodies have infinitely divisible parts. Dumbleton was one of the first to express functional relationships in graphical form. He gave a proof of the mean speed theorem stating that "the latitude of a uniformly difform movement corresponds to the degree of the midpoint" and used this method to study the quantitative decrease in intensity of illumination, stating that it was not linearly proportional to the distance, but was unable to expose the Inverse-square law, which was postponed nearly 250 years until its discovery by Johannes Kepler in 1604.   == Criticism == It is difficult to determine what methodology the Oxford 'Calculators' used when they were conjecturing and postulating theorems by way of abstraction (i.e., without empirical investigation). This criticism is not expressly made toward Dumbleton's conjectures but more broadly aimed at the methodology of the whole group of Mertonian physicists. One suggestion is that they may have been trying to create a mathematical picture of the Aristotelian world-view. If this were true, it would show why empirical investigation was not their modus operandi. In other words, the Oxford Calculators' works show respect for quantitative reasoning; opposed to a posteriori evaluations. Regardless of whether they opted against empirical investigation for theological reasons or simply because the debut of the scientific method was not ready to be revealed, one ought to regard John of Dumbleton and his contemporaries as exemplary pioneers in mathematics, physics, and logical discourse.   == Writings == Summa Logica et Philosophiae Naturalis (c. 1349; There are at least twenty extant manuscripts) Compendium Sex Conclusionum Expositio Capituli Quarti Bradwardini de Proportionibus (1332; Exposition of the Fourth Chapter of Bradwardine's De Proportionibus)   == See also == Medieval European scientists   == References ==   == Bibliography == Norman Kretxmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg (eds.). The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy: From the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism (1100–1600). (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982). Jorge J.E. Gracia & Timothy B. Noone (eds.). Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2003). James Weisheipl, "The Place of John Dumbleton in the Merton School", Isis, 50, 1959, pp. 439-454.



John W. Etchemendy (born 1952 in Reno, Nevada) is Stanford University's twelfth and current Provost. He succeeded John L. Hennessy to the post on September 1, 2000. John Etchemendy received his bachelor's and master's degrees at the University of Nevada, Reno before earning his PhD in philosophy at Stanford in 1982. He has been a faculty member in Stanford's Department of Philosophy since 1983, prior to which he was a faculty member in the Philosophy Department at Princeton University. He is also a faculty member of Stanford's Symbolic Systems Program and a senior researcher at the Center for the Study of Language and Information at Stanford. Etchemendy's research interests include logic, semantics and the philosophy of language. He has challenged orthodox views on the central notions of truth, logical consequence and logical truth. His most well-known book, The Concept of Logical Consequence (1990, 1999), criticizes Alfred Tarski's widely accepted analysis of logical consequence. The Liar: An essay on truth and circularity (1987, 1992), co-authored with the late Jon Barwise, develops a formal account of the liar paradox modelled using a version of set theory incorporating the so-called Anti-Foundation Axiom. Etchemendy's recent work has focused on the role of diagrams and other nonlinguistic forms of representation in reasoning. His latest book, written with Jon Barwise and Dave Barker-Plummer, is Language, Proof and Logic (2000, 2006), a popular introductory logic textbook. He has also developed numerous pieces of instructional software, including Turing's World, Tarski's World, Fitch, and Hyperproof, software that allows computers to support the reasoning process. At Stanford, Etchemendy served as director of the Center for the Study of Language and Information from 1990 to 1993, senior associate dean in the School of Humanities and Sciences from 1993 to 1997, and chair of the Department of Philosophy from 1998 to 2000. He is a member of the American Philosophical Association, on the editorial boards of Synthese and Philosophia Mathematica, and a former editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic. His wife is the writer Nancy Etchemendy and they have one son Max Etchemendy.   == External links == Stanford Provost's office Etchemendy's Biography from Stanford

John Lane Bell (born March 25, 1945) is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Western Ontario in Canada. He has made contributions to mathematical logic and philosophy, and is the author of a number of books. His research includes such topics as set theory, model theory, lattice theory, modal logic, quantum logic, constructive mathematics, type theory, topos theory, infinitesimal analysis, spacetime theory, and the philosophy of mathematics. He is the author of more than 70 articles and of 11 books. In 2009, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. He was awarded a scholarship to Oxford University at the age of 15, and graduated with a D.Phil. in Mathematics: his dissertation supervisor was John Crossley. During 1968-89 he was Lecturer in Mathematics and Reader in Mathematical Logic at the London School of Economics. John Bell's students include Graham Priest (Ph.D. Mathematics LSE, 1972), Michael Hallett (Ph.D. Philosophy LSE, 1979), Elaine Landry (Ph.D. Philosophy UWO, 1997), David DeVidi (Ph.D. Philosophy UWO, 1994) and Richard Feist (Ph.D. Philosophy UWO, 1999).   == Bibliography ==   === Books === Intuitionistic Set Theory. College Publications, 2013. Set Theory: Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs. Oxford University Press 2011. The Axiom of Choice. College Publications, 2009. The Continuous and the Infinitesimal in Mathematics and Philosophy. Polimetrica, 2005. (With D. DeVidi and G. Solomon) Logical Options: An Introduction to Classical and Alternative Logics. Broadview Press, 2001. The Art of the Intelligible: An Elementary Survey of Mathematics in its Conceptual Development. Kluwer, 1999. A Primer of Infinitesimal Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1998. Second Edition, 2008. Toposes & Local Set Theories: An Introduction. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1988. Reprinted by Dover, 2008. Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1977. 2nd edition, 1985. 3rd edition, 2005. (With M. Machover). A Course in Mathematical Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1977. 4th printing, 2003. (With A. B. Slomson). Models and Ultraproducts: An Introduction. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969. Reprinted by Dover, 2006.   === Journal articles === The Axiom of Choice in the Foundations of Mathematics, forthcoming in volume on Foundations of Mathematics, Giovanni Sommaruga, ed., University of Western Ontario Series, Springer Cohesiveness, Intellectica, 41, 2009. Types, Sets and Categories, Handbook of the History of Logic (Elsevier), forthcoming. Hermann Weyl, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2009 "The Axiom of Choice and the Law of Excluded Middle in Weak Set Theories", Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 54, no. 2, 2008. "The Axiom of Choice", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2008. Contribution to "Philosophy of Mathematics: 5 Questions", V. Hendricks and H. Leitgeb, eds., Automatic Press, 2007. "Incompleteness in a General Setting". Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 13, 2007. "Cover Schemes, Frame-Valued Sets and Their Potential Uses in Spacetime Physics". Spacetime Physics Research Trends, Horizons in World Physics, Volume 248, Nova Science Publishers, New York, 2007. "Cosmological Theories and the Question of the Existence of a Creator". Religion and the Challenges of Science, Ashgate Publishers, 2007. "Abstract and Variable Sets in Category Theory". In What is Category Theory?, Polimetrica, 2006. "Divergent Concepts of the Continuum in 19th and Early 20th Century Mathematics and Philosophy". Axiomathes 15, 2005. "The Development of Categorical Logic", Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Volume 12. Springer, 2005. "Continuity and Infinitesimals". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005. "Choice Principles in Intuitionistic Set Theory.", A Logical Approach to Philosophy, Essays in Honour of Graham Solomon, D. DeVidi and T. Kenyon, eds., Springer, 2006. "Oppositions and Paradoxes in Mathematics and Philosophy." Axiomathes 15, 2005. "Observations on Mathematics", Mathematics as Story, Proceedings of 2003 Fields Institute Conference, UWO, 2004. Whole and Part in Mathematics. Axiomathes 14, 2004. (With Geoffrey Hellman) "Pluralism and the Foundations of Mathematics". Proceedings of Workshop on Scientific Pluralism, University of Minnesota, 2002. Minnesota University Press, 2006. "Some New Intuitionistic Equivalents of Zorn's Lemma", Archive for Mathematical Logic, 42, Number 8, 2003. "Russell's Paradox and Diagonalization in a Constructive Context", 100 Years of Russell's Paradox, Munich 2001, Walter de Gruyter, 2004. "Hermann Weyl's Later Philosophical Views: His Divergence from Husserl", Husserl and the Sciences, R. Feist, ed. U. of Ottawa Press, 2003. "The Development of Categorical Logic", Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Volume 12. Springer, 2005. "Time and Causation in Gödel's Universe", Transcendent Philosophy 3, 2002. "Observations on Category Theory", Axiomathes 12, 2001 "The Continuum in Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis". In Reuniting the Antipodes-Constructive and Nonstandard Views of the Continuum. Symposion Proceedings, San Servolo/Venice, Italy, 1999. U. Berger, H. Osswald and P. Schuster, eds. Kluwer, 2001. "Continuity and the Logic of Perception", Transcendent Philosophy 1, no. 2, 2000. "Hermann Weyl on Intuition and the Continuum", Philosophia Mathematica (3), 8, 2000. "Sets and Classes as Many", Journal of Philosophical Logic, 29, 2000. "Infinitary Logic", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2000 "Finite Sets and Frege Structures", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, no. 4,1999. "Frege's Theorem in a Constructive Setting", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, no. 2, 1999. "Boolean Algebras and Distributive Lattices Treated Constructively", Math. Logic Quarterly 45, 1999. "Boolean Algebras", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1998. "Zorn's Lemma and Complete Boolean Algebras in Intuitionistic Type Theories", Journal of Symbolic Logic 62, no. 4, 1997. (With S. Gebellato) "Precovers, Modalities, and Universal Closure Operators in a Topos", Math. Logic Quarterly 42, 1996. "Polymodal Lattices and Polymodal Logic", Math. Logic Quarterly 42, 1996. (With W. Demopoulos) "Elementary Propositions and Independence", Notre Dame J. of Formal Logic, 37, no. 1, 1996. "Logical Reflections on the Kochen-Specker Theorem", in Perspectives on Quantum Reality, R. Clifton, ed., Kluwer, 1996. (With R.Clifton†) "Quasi Boolean Algebras and Simultaneously Definite Properties in Quantum Mechanics", Int. Journal of Theoretical Physics, 34, 12, 1995. "Infinitesimals and the Continuum", Mathematical Intelligencer, 17, no. 2, 1995. "Type-Reducing Correspondences and Well-Orderings: Frege's and Zermelo's Constructions Re-examined", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 60, no. 1, 1995. "Frege's Theorem and the Zermelo-Bourbaki Lemma". Appendix to Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics, W. Demopoulos, ed. Harvard U.P., 1995 "Fregean Extensions of First-Order Theories", Math. Logic Quarterly, 40, 1994. (Also reprinted in W. Demopoulos, ed. Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics, Harvard U.P. 1995) "Hilbert's Epsilon Operator in Intuitionistic Type Theories", Math. Logic Quarterly, 39, 1993. (with W. Demopoulos) "Frege's Theory of Concepts and Objects and the Interpretation of Second-Order Logic", Philosophia Mathematica, (3), 1, 1993. "Hilbert's Epsilon-Operator and Classical Logic", Journal of Philosophical Logic, 22, 1993. "Some Propositions Equivalent to the Sikorski Extension Theorem for Boolean Algebras", Fundamenta Mathematicae 130 (1988). "Infinitesimals", Synthese, 75, 1988. "Logic, the Paradoxes, and the Foundations of Mathematics", LSE Quarterly Vol.I, No.3, 1987. "From Absolute to Local Mathematics", Synthese 69, 1986. "A New Approach to Quantum Logic", Brit. J. Phil. Sc., 37, 1986. "Orthospaces and Quantum Logic", Foundations of Physics 15, 1985. "Orthologic, Forcing and the Manifestation of Attributes", Proceedings of 1981 S.E. Asian Conference in Mathematical Logic. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1983. "The Strength of the Sikorski Extension Theorem for Boolean Algebras", Journal of Symbolic Logic 48, 1983. (With M.F. Hallett), "Logic, Quantum Logic, and Empiricism", Philosophy of Science 49, 1982. "Categories, Toposes and Sets", Synthese, 51, No.3, 1982. "Some Aspects of the Category of Subobjects of Constant Objects in a Topos", Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 24, 1982. "Category Theory and the Foundations of Mathematics", Brit.J.Phil.Sci. 32, 1981. "Isomorphism of Structures in S-Toposes", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 46, 1981. "The Infinite Past Regained: A Reply to Whitrow", Brit.J.Phil.Sci. Sci, 1979 "Boolean Extensions as Toposes", Bull. de la Soc. Francaise de Logique, Methodologie et Phil.des Sci. 6, 1979. "Uncountable Standard Models of ZFC + V = L", in Set Theory and Hierarchy Theory, a Memorial Tribute to Andrzej Mostowski, Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 537,1976. "A Note on Generic Ultrafilters", Zeitschr. f. Math.Logik und Grund.der Math. 22, 1976. "Universal Complete Boolean Algebras and Cardinal Collapsing", Zeitsch. f. Math.Logik und Grund. der Math. 22, 1976. "A Characterization of Universal Complete Boolean Algebras", J. London Math.Soc. (2), 12, 1975. "On Compact Cardinals", Zeitschr.f. Math.Logik und Grund.der Math. 20.1974. (With D.H. Fremlin), "A Geometric Form of the Axiom of Choice", Fund. Math. LXXVII, 1972. (With D.H. Fremlin), "The Maximal Ideal Theorem for Lattices of Sets", Bull. London Math. Soc., 4, 1972. "On the Relationship between Weak Compactness and Restricted Second- Order Languages", Arch. Math. Logik 15, 1972. "Some Remarks on Current Mathematical Practice", in Proceedings of the Bertrand Russell Memorial Logic Conference, Denmark, 1971. (With F. Jellett). "On the Relationship between the Boolean Prime Ideal Theorem and Two Principles of Functional Analysis", Bull. de l'Acad. Pol. des Sci., XIX, No.3, 1971. "Weak Compactness in Restricted Second-Order Languages", Bull. de l'Acad. Pol. des Sci., No.3, 1970.   == References ==   == External links == John Bell's webpage John Bell at the Mathematics Genealogy Project



John of St. Thomas, (family name João Poinsot or Johannes Poinsot, since the 1980s in American texts also John Poinsot; 9 June 1589 – 17 June 1644), was a theologian and philosopher, born at Lisbon. Of noble parentage, he was sent early to the University of Coimbra, displayed talents of the first order, completed his humanities and philosophy, and obtained the degree of Master of Arts. He then entered the University of Louvain. Here, too, he showed remarkable ability, and won the title of Bachelor of Theology at an early age. He joined the Dominicans at Madrid in 1612 or 1613, taking the name of John of St. Thomas, by which he is known to history. As professor of philosophy and theology in a monastery at Alcalá, he soon took rank among the most learned men of the time, and was placed successively (1630 and 1640) in charge of the two principal chairs of theology in the university of that city. His renown drew the largest number of scholars that had ever attended its theological faculties. No man enjoyed a greater reputation in Spain, or was more frequently consulted on points of doctrine and ecclesiastical matters. His theological and philosophical writings, which have gone through many editions, are among the best expositions of Thomas Aquinas's doctrine, of which he is acknowledged to be one of the foremost interpreters. Though he took an active part in the scholastic discussions of his times, his courtesy was such that he is said never to have hurt an opponent's feelings. So faithful was he to the traditions of his order and the principles of the Angelic Doctor that in his last illness he could declare that, in all the thirty years he had devoted to teaching and writing, he had not taught or written anything contrary to St. Thomas. His humility and his devotion to education caused him to refuse many dignities offered him by the Church and his order. In 1643 Philip IV offered him the office of royal confessor, a position which only religious obedience could induce him to accept. His writings comprise: Cursus philosophicus Thomisticus (9 vols.); Cursus Theologici (9 vols.), which is a commentary on the Summa Theologica of St. Thomas; Tractatus de Approbatione, Auctoritate, et Puritate Doctrinae D. Thomae Aquinatis; A Compendium of Christian Doctrine (in Spanish); and A Treatise on a Happy Death (in Spanish), written at the command of Philip IV. He died at Fraga, Spain.   == Works == By John of St. Thomas Ioannes a S. Thoma, O. P. (1883). Cursus philosophicus Thomisticus (in Latin). Paris: Ludovicus Vivès. OCLC 7132509. Retrieved 2011-06-17. Volumes 1, 2, and 3 available gratis online.  Ioannes a S. Thoma, O. P. (1931–1964). Cursus theologici (in Latin). Paris, Rome: Desclée. OCLC 18001569. Retrieved 2011-06-17. 5 volumes. Volumes 1, 2a, and 2b of another edition available gratis online.  John of St. Thomas (2004). Introduction to the Summa Theologiae of Thomas Aquinas: The Isagogue of John of St. Thomas. Trans. McInerny, Ralph. South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine's Press. OCLC 46928729.  John of St. Thomas (1950). The Gifts of the Holy Ghost. foreword by Walter Farrell. London: Sheed and Ward. OCLC 224205817.  Poinsot, John (1985) [1632]. Tractatus de Signis. The semiotic of John Poinsot. Trans. Deely, John. Berkely: California University Press. OCLC 277224194. Retrieved 2011-06-17.  On John of St. Thomas Deely, John (1994). "What happened to philosophy between Aquinas and Descartes?". The Thomist 58 (4): 543–568. Retrieved 2011-06-17.   Deely, John (2008). Descartes and Poinsot: The Crossroad of Signs and Ideas. Scranton, PA: University of Scranton Press. ISBN 9781589661745.  Deely, John (2009). Augustine and Poinsot: The Protosemiotic Development. Scranton, PA: University of Scranton Press. ISBN 9781589661738.    == References == ^ Quétif and Echard, Scriptores Ord. Praed., II (Paris, 1721), 538; Touron, Hommes illustres de l'ordre de St. Dominique, V (Paris, 1749), 248; Hurter, Nomenclator, I (2nd ed., Innsbruck, 1892), 375; Année Dominicaine, II June, 358-365. ^  "John of St. Thomas". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913.    == Sources ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "John of St. Thomas". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company.    == External links == General Bibliography by Marco Forlivesi The rediscovery of John Poinsot Annotated bibliography about the contributions of John of St. Thomas to semiotics Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus Latin text by John of St. Thomas

John Pagus (active first half of the 13th century) was a scholastic philosopher at the University of Paris, generally considered the first logician writing at the Arts faculty at Paris.   == Life == He is thought to have been a Master of Arts in the 1220s and to have taught Peter of Spain. at that time he was writing on syncategorematic terms.   == Works == Appellationes Commentary on the Sentences Rationes super Predicamenta Aristotelis Syncategoremata   == References == Hein Hansen (ed.) John Pagus on Aristotle's Categories. A Study and Edition of the Rationes super Praedicamenta, Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2012. Alain De Libera, Les Appellationes de Jean le Page, in Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen âge, 51, 1984 pp. 193–255.   == Notes == ^ John Le Page, Johannes Pagus, Jean Le Page, Jean Lepage. ^ Bertil Malmberg, Histoire de la Linguistique, Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1991, p. 127. ^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, article Peter of Spain ^ Sten Ebbesen, Russell L. Friedman (editors), Medieval Analyses in Language and Cognition (1999), p. 36. ^ Parts published in H. A. G. Braakhuis, De 13de Eeuwse Tractaten over Syncategorematische Termen. Vol. I, Ph. Diss., Leiden University, 1979.   == External links == Jakob Hans Josef Schneider (1992). "Johannes Pagus (Pagius, Jean le Page, John Page)". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 3. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 505–507. ISBN 3-88309-035-2. (German) Works listed

John Robert Steel (born October 30, 1948) is an American set theorist at University of California, Berkeley (formerly at UCLA). He has made many contributions to the theory of inner models and determinacy. With Donald A. Martin, he proved projective determinacy, assuming the existence of sufficient large cardinals. He earned his Ph.D. in Logic & the Methodology of Science at Berkeley in 1977. In 2015 the European Set Theory Society awarded him and Ronald Jensen the Hausdorff medal for their paper "K without a measurable".   == External links == Home page at Berkeley John R. Steel at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

John Stuart Mill (20 May 1806 – 8 May 1873) was an English philosopher, political economist, feminist, and civil servant. He was an influential contributor to social theory, political theory and political economy. He has been called "the most influential English-speaking philosopher of the nineteenth century". Mill's conception of liberty justified the freedom of the individual in opposition to unlimited state control. Mill expresses his view on freedom by illustrating how an individual's drive to better their station, and for self-improvement, is the sole source of true freedom. Only when an individual is able to attain such improvements, without impeding others in their own efforts to do the same, can true freedom prevail. Mill's linking of freedom and self-improvement has inspired many. By establishing that individual efforts to excel have worth, Mill was able to show how they should achieve self-improvement without harming others, or society at large. He was a proponent of utilitarianism, an ethical theory developed by Jeremy Bentham. He worked on the theory of the scientific method. Mill was also a Member of Parliament belonging to the Liberal Party, as well as an important figure in liberal political philosophy.   == BiographyEdit == John Stuart Mill was born on Rodney Street in the Pentonville area of London, the eldest son of the Scottish philosopher, historian and economist James Mill, and Harriet Burrow. John Stuart was educated by his father, with the advice and assistance of Jeremy Bentham and Francis Place. He was given an extremely rigorous upbringing, and was deliberately shielded from association with children his own age other than his siblings. His father, a follower of Bentham and an adherent of associationism, had as his explicit aim to create a genius intellect that would carry on the cause of utilitarianism and its implementation after he and Bentham had died. Mill was a notably precocious child. He describes his education in his autobiography. At the age of three he was taught Greek. By the age of eight, he had read Aesop's Fables, Xenophon's Anabasis, and the whole of Herodotus, and was acquainted with Lucian, Diogenes Laërtius, Isocrates and six dialogues of Plato. He had also read a great deal of history in English and had been taught arithmetic, physics and astronomy. At the age of eight, Mill began studying Latin, the works of Euclid, and algebra, and was appointed schoolmaster to the younger children of the family. His main reading was still history, but he went through all the commonly taught Latin and Greek authors and by the age of ten could read Plato and Demosthenes with ease. His father also thought that it was important for Mill to study and compose poetry. One of Mill's earliest poetry compositions was a continuation of the Iliad. In his spare time, he also enjoyed reading about natural sciences and popular novels, such as Don Quixote and Robinson Crusoe. His father's work, The History of British India was published in 1818; immediately thereafter, about the age of twelve, Mill began a thorough study of the scholastic logic, at the same time reading Aristotle's logical treatises in the original language. In the following year he was introduced to political economy and studied Adam Smith and David Ricardo with his father, ultimately completing their classical economic view of factors of production. Mill's comptes rendus of his daily economy lessons helped his father in writing Elements of Political Economy in 1821, a textbook to promote the ideas of Ricardian economics; however, the book lacked popular support. Ricardo, who was a close friend of his father, used to invite the young Mill to his house for a walk in order to talk about political economy. At the age of fourteen, Mill stayed a year in France with the family of Sir Samuel Bentham, brother of Jeremy Bentham. The mountain scenery he saw led to a lifelong taste for mountain landscapes. The lively and friendly way of life of the French also left a deep impression on him. In Montpellier, he attended the winter courses on chemistry, zoology, logic of the Faculté des Sciences, as well as taking a course of the higher mathematics. While coming and going from France, he stayed in Paris for a few days in the house of the renowned economist Jean-Baptiste Say, a friend of Mill's father. There he met many leaders of the Liberal party, as well as other notable Parisians, including Henri Saint-Simon. This intensive study however had injurious effects on Mill's mental health, and state of mind. At the age of twenty he suffered a nervous breakdown. In chapter V of his Autobiography, he claims that this was caused by the great physical and mental arduousness of his studies which had suppressed any feelings he might have developed normally in childhood. Nevertheless, this depression eventually began to dissipate, as he began to find solace in the Mémoires of Jean-François Marmontel and the poetry of William Wordsworth. Mill had been engaged in a pen-friendship with Auguste Comte, the founder of positivism and sociology, since Mill first contacted Comte in November 1841. Comte's sociologie was more an early philosophy of science than we perhaps know it today, and the positive philosophy aided in Mill's broad rejection of Benthamism. As a nonconformist who refused to subscribe to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, Mill was not eligible to study at the University of Oxford or the University of Cambridge. Instead he followed his father to work for the East India Company until 1858, and attended University College, London, to hear the lectures of John Austin, the first Professor of Jurisprudence. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1856. In 1851, Mill married Harriet Taylor after 21 years of an intimate friendship. Taylor was married when they met, and their relationship was close but generally believed to be chaste during the years before her first husband died. Brilliant in her own right, Taylor was a significant influence on Mill's work and ideas during both friendship and marriage. His relationship with Harriet Taylor reinforced Mill's advocacy of women's rights. He cites her influence in his final revision of On Liberty, which was published shortly after her death. Taylor died in 1858 after developing severe lung congestion, after only seven years of marriage to Mill. Between the years 1865 and 1868 Mill served as Lord Rector of the University of St. Andrews. During the same period, 1865–68, he was a Member of Parliament for City and Westminster, sitting for the Liberal Party. During his time as an MP, Mill advocated easing the burdens on Ireland. In 1866, Mill became the first person in the history of Parliament to call for women to be given the right to vote, vigorously defending this position in subsequent debate. Mill became a strong advocate of such social reforms as labour unions and farm cooperatives. In Considerations on Representative Government, Mill called for various reforms of Parliament and voting, especially proportional representation, the Single Transferable Vote, and the extension of suffrage. He was godfather to the philosopher Bertrand Russell. In his views on religion, Mill was an atheist. Mill died in 1873 of erysipelas in Avignon, France, where he was buried alongside his wife.   == WorksEdit ==   === Theory of libertyEdit ===  Mill's On Liberty addresses the nature and limits of the power that can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual. However Mill is clear that his concern for liberty does not extend to all individuals and all societies. He states that "Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians". Mill states that it is acceptable to harm oneself as long as the person doing so is not harming others. He also argues that individuals should be prevented from doing lasting, serious harm to themselves or their property by the harm principle. Because no one exists in isolation, harm done to oneself may also harm others, and destroying property deprives the community as well as oneself. Mill excuses those who are "incapable of self-government" from this principle, such as young children or those living in "backward states of society". Though this principle seems clear, there are a number of complications. For example, Mill explicitly states that "harms" may include acts of omission as well as acts of commission. Thus, failing to rescue a drowning child counts as a harmful act, as does failing to pay taxes, or failing to appear as a witness in court. All such harmful omissions may be regulated, according to Mill. By contrast, it does not count as harming someone if – without force or fraud – the affected individual consents to assume the risk: thus one may permissibly offer unsafe employment to others, provided there is no deception involved. (Mill does, however, recognise one limit to consent: society should not permit people to sell themselves into slavery). In these and other cases, it is important to bear in mind that the arguments in On Liberty are grounded on the principle of Utility, and not on appeals to natural rights. The question of what counts as a self-regarding action and what actions, whether of omission or commission, constitute harmful actions subject to regulation, continues to exercise interpreters of Mill. It is important to emphasise that Mill did not consider giving offence to constitute "harm"; an action could not be restricted because it violated the conventions or morals of a given society. On Liberty involves an impassioned defence of free speech. Mill argues that free discourse is a necessary condition for intellectual and social progress. We can never be sure, he contends, that a silenced opinion does not contain some element of the truth. He also argues that allowing people to air false opinions is productive for two reasons. First, individuals are more likely to abandon erroneous beliefs if they are engaged in an open exchange of ideas. Second, by forcing other individuals to re-examine and re-affirm their beliefs in the process of debate, these beliefs are kept from declining into mere dogma. It is not enough for Mill that one simply has an unexamined belief that happens to be true; one must understand why the belief in question is the true one. Along those same lines Mill wrote, "unmeasured vituperation, employed on the side of prevailing opinion, really does deter people from expressing contrary opinions, and from listening to those who express them."   ==== Social liberty and tyranny of majorityEdit ==== Mill believed that "the struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous feature in the portions of history." For him, liberty in antiquity was a "contest... between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the government." Mill defined "social liberty" as protection from "the tyranny of political rulers." He introduced a number of different concepts of the form tyranny can take, referred to as social tyranny, and tyranny of the majority. Social liberty for Mill meant putting limits on the ruler's power so that he would not be able to use his power on his own wishes and make decisions which could harm society; in other words, people should have the right to have a say in the government's decisions. He said that social liberty was "the nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual". It was attempted in two ways: first, by obtaining recognition of certain immunities, called political liberties or rights; second, by establishment of a system of "constitutional checks". However, in Mill's view, limiting the power of government was not enough. He stated, "Society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practices a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul itself."   ==== LibertyEdit ==== John Stuart Mill's view on liberty, which was influenced by Joseph Priestley and Josiah Warren, is that the individual ought to be free to do as he wishes unless he harms others. Individuals are rational enough to make decisions about their well being. Government should interfere when it is for the protection of society. Mill explained:  The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right...The only part of the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely concerns him, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.  Mill added: "Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion."   ==== Freedom of speechEdit ==== An influential advocate of freedom of speech, Mill objected to censorship. He says:  I choose, by preference the cases which are least favourable to me – In which the argument opposing freedom of opinion, both on truth and that of utility, is considered the strongest. Let the opinions impugned be the belief of God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality... But I must be permitted to observe that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility. It is the undertaking to decide that question for others, without allowing them to hear what can be said on the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less if it is put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. However, positive anyone's persuasion may be, not only of the faculty but of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of opinion. – yet if, in pursuance of that private judgement, though backed by the public judgement of his country or contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal.  Mill outlines the benefits of 'searching for and discovering the truth' as a way to further knowledge. He argued that even if an opinion is false, the truth can be better understood by refuting the error. And as most opinions are neither completely true nor completely false, he points out that allowing free expression allows the airing of competing views as a way to preserve partial truth in various opinions. Worried about minority views being suppressed, Mill also argued in support of freedom of speech on political grounds, stating that it is a critical component for a representative government to have in order to empower debate over public policy. Mill also eloquently argued that freedom of expression allows for personal growth and self-realization. He said that freedom of speech was a vital way to develop talents and realise a person's potential and creativity. He repeatedly said that eccentricity was preferable to uniformity and stagnation.   === ColonialismEdit === Mill, an employee for the British East India Company from 1823 to 1858, argued in support of what he called a 'benevolent despotism' with regard to the colonies. Mill argued that "To suppose that the same international customs, and the same rules of international morality, can obtain between one civilized nation and another, and between civilized nations and barbarians, is a grave error....To characterize any conduct whatever towards a barbarous people as a violation of the law of nations, only shows that he who so speaks has never considered the subject."   === SlaveryEdit === Domenico Losurdo argues that "In Mill's view, 'any means were licit for those who took on the task of educating 'savage tribes'; 'slavery' was sometimes a mandatory stage for inducing them to work and making them useful to civilization and progress." In 1850, Mill sent an anonymous letter (which came to be known under the title "The Negro Question"), in rebuttal to Thomas Carlyle's anonymous letter to Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country which argued for slavery. Mill supported abolition in the United States.   === Women's rightsEdit ===  Mill's view of history was that right up until his time "the whole of the female" and "the great majority of the male sex" were simply "slaves". He countered arguments to the contrary, arguing that relations between sexes simply amounted to "the legal subordination of one sex to the other — [which] is wrong itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality." With this, Mill can be considered among the earliest women's rights advocates. His book The Subjection of Women (1861, published 1869) is one of the earliest written on this subject by a male author. In The Subjection of Women Mill attempts to make a case for perfect equality. He talks about the role of women in marriage and how it needed to be changed. There, Mill comments on three major facets of women's lives that he felt are hindering them: society and gender construction, education, and marriage. He argued that the oppression of women was one of the few remaining relics from ancient times, a set of prejudices that severely impeded the progress of humanity. Mill's ideas were opposed by Ernest Belfort Bax in his treatise, The Legal Subjection of Men.   === UtilitarianismEdit ===  The canonical statement of Mill's utilitarianism can be found in Utilitarianism. This philosophy has a long tradition, although Mill's account is primarily influenced by Jeremy Bentham and Mill's father James Mill. Jeremy Bentham's famous formulation of utilitarianism is known as the "greatest-happiness principle". It holds that one must always act so as to produce the greatest aggregate happiness among all sentient beings, within reason. Mill's major contribution to utilitarianism is his argument for the qualitative separation of pleasures. Bentham treats all forms of happiness as equal, whereas Mill argues that intellectual and moral pleasures (higher pleasures) are superior to more physical forms of pleasure (lower pleasures). Mill distinguishes between happiness and contentment, claiming that the former is of higher value than the latter, a belief wittily encapsulated in the statement that "it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, are of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the question." Mill defines the difference between higher and lower forms of pleasure with the principle that those who have experienced both tend to prefer one over the other. This is, perhaps, in direct contrast with Bentham's statement that "Quantity of pleasure being equal, push-pin is as good as poetry", that, if a simple child's game like hopscotch causes more pleasure to more people than a night at the opera house, it is more imperative upon a society to devote more resources to propagating hopscotch than running opera houses. Mill's argument is that the "simple pleasures" tend to be preferred by people who have no experience with high art, and are therefore not in a proper position to judge. Mill also argues that people who, for example, are noble or practice philosophy, benefit society more than those who engage in individualist practices for pleasure, which are lower forms of happiness. It is not the agent's own greatest happiness that matters "but the greatest amount of happiness altogether". The qualitative account of happiness that Mill advocates thus sheds light on his account presented in On Liberty. As Mill suggests in that text, utility is to be conceived in relation to humanity "as a progressive being", which includes the development and exercise of rational capacities as we strive to achieve a "higher mode of existence". The rejection of censorship and paternalism is intended to provide the necessary social conditions for the achievement of knowledge and the greatest ability for the greatest number to develop and exercise their deliberative and rational capacities.   === Economic philosophyEdit ===  Mill's early economic philosophy was one of free markets. However, he accepted interventions in the economy, such as a tax on alcohol, if there were sufficient utilitarian grounds. He also accepted the principle of legislative intervention for the purpose of animal welfare. Mill originally believed that "equality of taxation" meant "equality of sacrifice" and that progressive taxation penalised those who worked harder and saved more and was therefore "a mild form of robbery". Given an equal tax rate regardless of income, Mill agreed that inheritance should be taxed. A utilitarian society would agree that everyone should be equal one way or another. Therefore, receiving inheritance would put one ahead of society unless taxed on the inheritance. Those who donate should consider and choose carefully where their money goes—some charities are more deserving than others. Considering public charities boards such as a government will disburse the money equally. However, a private charity board like a church would disburse the monies fairly to those who are in more need than others. Later he altered his views toward a more socialist bent, adding chapters to his Principles of Political Economy in defence of a socialist outlook, and defending some socialist causes. Within this revised work he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system be abolished in favour of a co-operative wage system. Nonetheless, some of his views on the idea of flat taxation remained, albeit altered in the third edition of the Principles of Political Economy to reflect a concern for differentiating restrictions on "unearned" incomes, which he favoured, and those on "earned" incomes, which he did not favour. Mill's Principles, first published in 1848, was one of the most widely read of all books on economics in the period. As Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations had during an earlier period, Mill's Principles dominated economics teaching. In the case of Oxford University it was the standard text until 1919, when it was replaced by Marshall's Principles of Economics.   ==== Economic democracyEdit ==== Mill promoted economic democracy instead of capitalism, in the manner of substituting capitalist businesses with worker cooperatives. He says:  The form of association, however, which if mankind continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predominate, is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and work-people without a voice in the management, but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their operations, and working under managers elected and removable by themselves.   ==== Political democracyEdit ==== Mill's major work on political democracy, Considerations on Representative Government, defends two fundamental principles, extensive participation by citizens and enlightened competence of rulers. The two values are obviously in tension, and some readers have concluded that he is an elitist democrat, while others count him as an earlier participatory democrat. In one section he appears to defend plural voting, in which more competent citizens are given extra votes (a view he later repudiated). But in chapter 3 he presents what is still one of the most eloquent cases for the value of participation by all citizens. He believed that the incompetence of the masses could eventually be overcome if they were given a chance to take part in politics, especially at the local level. Mill is one of the few political philosophers ever to serve in government as an elected official. In his three years in Parliament, he was more willing to compromise than the "radical" principles expressed in his writing would lead one to expect.   ==== The environmentEdit ==== Mill demonstrated an early insight into the value of the natural world – in particular in Book IV, chapter VI of "Principles of Political Economy": "Of the Stationary State" in which Mill recognised wealth beyond the material, and argued that the logical conclusion of unlimited growth was destruction of the environment and a reduced quality of life. He concluded that a stationary state could be preferable to unending economic growth:  I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary states of capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested towards it by political economists of the old school.  If the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity compel them to it.   ==== Economic developmentEdit ==== Mill regarded economic development as a function of land, labour and capital. While land and labour are the two original factors of production, capital is "a stock, previously accumulated of the products of former labour." Increase in wealth is possible only if land and capital help to increase production faster than the labour force. It is productive labour that is productive of wealth and capital accumulation. "The rate of capital accumulation is the function of the proportion of the labour force employed ' productively. Profits earned by employing unproductive labours are merely transfers of income; unproductive labour does not generate wealth or income" . It is productive labourers who do productive consumption. Productive consumption is that "which maintains and increase the productive capacity of the community." It implies that productive consumption is an input necessary to maintain productive labourers.   ==== Control of population growthEdit ==== Mill supported the Malthusian theory of population. By population he meant the number of the working class only. He was therefore concerned about the growth in number of labourers who worked for hire. He believed that population control was essential for improving the condition of the working class so that they might enjoy the fruits of the technological progress and capital accumulation. Mill advocated birth control. In 1823 Mill and a friend were arrested while distributing pamphlets on birth control by Francis Place to women in working class areas.   ==== Wage fundEdit ==== According to Mill, supply is very elastic in response to wages. Wages generally exceed the minimum subsistence level, and are paid out of capital. Hence, wages are limited by existing capital for paying wages. Thus, wage per worker can be derived by dividing the total circulating capital by the size of the working population. Wages can increase by an increase in the capital used in paying wages, or by decrease in the number of workers. If wages rise, supply of labour will rise. Competition among workers not only brings down wages, but also keeps some workers out of employment. This is based on Mill's notion that "demand for commodities is not demand for labourers". It means that income invested as advances of wages to labour creates employment, and not income spent on consumer goods. An increase in consumption causes a decline in investment. So increased investment leads to increases in the wage fund and to economic progress. In 1869, Mill recanted his support of the Wage-Fund Doctrine due to recognition that capital is not necessarily fixed in that it can be supplemented through “income of the employer which might otherwise go into savings or be spent on consumption.” (Spiegel, p. 390) Walker also states in “The Wages Question” that the limits on capital and the growth in population “were accidental, not essential” to the formation of the doctrine. The limitation on the growth of industrial capacity placed a limit on the number of workers who could be accommodated more than the limit on capital. Furthermore, English agriculture “had reached the condition of diminishing returns." (Walker); therefore, each additional worker was not providing more output than he needed for himself for survival. Given the improvements in technology and productivity that followed 1848, the original reasons that gave rise to the doctrine were seen to be unusual and not the basis for a universal law.   ==== Rate of capital accumulationEdit ==== According to Mill, the rate of capital accumulation depends on: (1) "the amount of fund from which saving can be made" or "the size of the net produce of the industry", and (2) the "disposition to save". Capital is the result of savings, and the savings come from the "abstinence from present consumption for the sake of future goods". Although capital is the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed. This means saving is spending. Since saving depends on the net produce of the industry, it grows with profits and rent which go into making the net produce. On the other hand, the disposition to save depends on (1) the rate of profit and (2) the desire to save, or what Mill called "effective desire of accumulation". However, profit also depends on the cost of labour, and the rate of profit is the ratio of profits to wages. When profits rise or wages fall, the rate of profits increases, which in turn increases the rate of capital accumulation. Similarly, it is the desire to save which tends to increase the rate of capital accumulation.   ==== Rate of profitEdit ==== According to Mill, the ultimate tendency in an economy is for the rate of profit to decline due to diminishing returns in agriculture and increase in population at a Malthusian rate.   == Major publicationsEdit ==   == Popular cultureEdit == Mill is the subject of a 1905 clerihew by E. C. Bentley:  Mill is namechecked in Monty Python's "Philosophers Song".   == See alsoEdit ==  List of liberal theorists Mill's Methods Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom On Social Freedom   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Alican, Necip Fikri (1994). Mill’s Principle of Utility: A Defense of John Stuart Mill’s Notorious Proof. Amsterdam and Atlanta: Editions Rodopi B.V. ISBN 978-90-518-3748-3.  Bayles, M. D. (1968). Contemporary Utilitarianism. Anchor Books, Doubleday.  Bentham, Jeremy (2009). An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (Dover Philosophical Classics). Dover Publications Inc. ISBN 978-0486454528.  Brandt, Richard B. (1979). A Theory of the Good and the Right. Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-824550-5.  Lyons, David (1965). Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism. Oxford University Press(UK). ISBN 978-0198241973.  Mill, John Stuart (2011). A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive (Classic Reprint). Forgotten Books. ISBN 978-1440090820.  Mill, John Stuart (1981). "Autobiography". In Robson, John. Collected Works, volume XXXI. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-7100-0718-3.  Moore, G.E. (1903). Principia Ethica. Prometheus Books UK. ISBN 0879754982.  Rosen, Frederick (2003). Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill. Routledge.  Scheffler, Samuel (August 1994). The Rejection of Consequentialism: A Philosophical Investigation of the Considerations Underlying Rival Moral Conceptions, Second Edition. Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0198235118.  Smart, J. J. C.; Williams, Bernard (January 1973). Utilitarianism: For and Against. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521098229.    == External linksEdit ==   === Mill's worksEdit ===  John Stuart Mill's diary of a walking tour at Mount Holyoke College   === Secondary worksEdit ===   === Further informationEdit ===

John Venn, FRS, FSA (4 August 1834 – 4 April 1923) was an English logician and philosopher noted for introducing the Venn diagram, used in the fields of set theory, probability, logic, statistics, and computer science.   == Life and career == John Venn was born on 4 August 1834 in Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire to Martha Sykes and Rev. Henry Venn, who was the rector of the parish of Drypool. His mother died when he was three years old. Venn was descended from a long line of church evangelicals, including his grandfather John Venn.Venn was brought up in a very strict atmosphere at home. His father Henry had played a significant part in the Evangelical movement and he was also the secretary of the ‘Society for Missions to Africa and the East’. He began his education in London joining Sir Roger Cholmeley's School, now known as Highgate School, with his brother Henry in September 1846. He moved on to Islington proprietary school and in October 1853 he went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. In 1857, he obtained his degree in mathematics and became a fellow. In 1903 he was elected President of the College, a post he held until his death. He would follow his family vocation and become an Anglican priest, ordained in 1859, serving first at the church in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and later in Mortlake, Surrey. In 1862, he returned to Cambridge as a lecturer in moral science, studying and teaching logic and probability theory, and, beginning around 1869, giving intercollegiate lectures. These duties led to his developing the diagram which would eventually bear his name.  I began at once somewhat more steady work on the subjects and books which I should have to lecture on. I now first hit upon the diagrammatical device of representing propositions by inclusive and exclusive circles. Of course the device was not new then, but it was so obviously representative of the way in which any one, who approached the subject from the mathematical side, would attempt to visualise propositions, that it was forced upon me almost at once.  In 1868, he married Susanna Carnegie Edmonstone with whom he had one son, John Archibald Venn. In 1883, he resigned from the clergy, having concluded that Anglicanism was incompatible with his philosophical beliefs. In that same year, Venn was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and was awarded a Sc.D. by Cambridge. He died on 4 April 1923.   == Memorials == Venn is commemorated at the University of Hull by the Venn Building, built in 1928 A stained glass window in the dining hall of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, commemorates Venn's work. In commemoration of the 180th anniversary of Venn's birth, on 4 August 2014, Google replaced its normal logo on global search pages with an interactive and animated Google doodle that incorporated the use of a Venn diagram. In 1866, Venn published The Logic of Chance, a ground-breaking book which espoused the frequency theory of probability, offering that probability should be determined by how often something is forecast to occur as opposed to “educated” assumptions. Venn then further developed George Boole's theories in the 1881 work Symbolic Logic, where he highlighted what would become known as Venn diagrams.   == Publications == Venn compiled Alumni Cantabrigienses, a biographical register of former members of the University of Cambridge. This work is still being updated online, see #External links, below. His other works include:   == Notes ==   == References ==   == External links == A Cambridge Alumni Database The Venn archives clarify the confusing timeline of the various Venns. Obituary of John Venn (New York Times) Portrait of Venn by Charles Brock, and a link to a site about Venn Another (clearer) view of the Venn stained glass window John Venn at Find a Grave

John von Neumann (Hungarian: Neumann János, /vɒn ˈnɔɪmən/; December 28, 1903 – February 8, 1957) was a Hungarian-American pure and applied mathematician, physicist, inventor, and polymath. He made major contributions to a number of fields, including mathematics (foundations of mathematics, functional analysis, ergodic theory, geometry, topology, and numerical analysis), physics (quantum mechanics, hydrodynamics, fluid dynamics and quantum statistical mechanics), economics (game theory), computing (Von Neumann architecture, linear programming, self-replicating machines, stochastic computing), and statistics. He was a pioneer of the application of operator theory to quantum mechanics, in the development of functional analysis, a principal member of the Manhattan Project and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (as one of the few originally appointed), and a key figure in the development of game theory and the concepts of cellular automata, the universal constructor, and the digital computer. Von Neumann's mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA. In a short list of facts about his life he submitted to the National Academy of Sciences, he stated "The part of my work I consider most essential is that on quantum mechanics, which developed in Göttingen in 1926, and subsequently in Berlin in 1927–1929. Also, my work on various forms of operator theory, Berlin 1930 and Princeton 1935–1939; on the ergodic theorem, Princeton, 1931–1932." Along with theoretical physicist Edward Teller and mathematician Stanislaw Ulam, von Neumann worked out key steps in the nuclear physics involved in thermonuclear reactions and the hydrogen bomb. Von Neumann wrote 150 published papers in his life; 60 in pure mathematics, 20 in physics, and 60 in applied mathematics. His last work, an unfinished manuscript written while in the hospital and later published in book form as The Computer and the Brain, gives an indication of the direction of his interests at the time of his death.   == Early life and educationEdit == Von Neumann was born Neumann János Lajos (Hungarian pronunciation: [ˈnɒjmɒn ˈjaːnoʃ ˈlɒjoʃ]; in Hungarian the family name comes first) Hebrew name Yonah, in Budapest, Austro-Hungarian Empire, to wealthy Jewish parents of the Haskalah. He was the eldest of three brothers. His father, Neumann Miksa (Max Neumann) was a banker, who held a doctorate in law. He had moved to Budapest from Pécs at the end of the 1880s. Miksa's father (Mihály b. 1839) and grandfather (Márton) were both born in Ond (now part of the town of Szerencs), Zemplén County, northern Hungary. John's mother was Kann Margit (Margaret Kann) (1881–1956); her parents were Jakab Kann II (Pest (now Budapest) 1845–1928) and Katalin Meisels (Munkács, Carpathian Ruthenia c. 1854–1914). In 1913, his father was elevated to the nobility for his service to the Austro-Hungarian Empire by Emperor Francis Joseph. The Neumann family thus acquired the hereditary appellation Margittai, meaning of Marghita. Neumann János became Margittai Neumann János (John Neumann of Marghita), which he later changed to the German Johann von Neumann. He was an extraordinary child prodigy in the areas of language, memorization, and mathematics. As a 6-year-old, he could divide two 8-digit numbers in his head. By the age of 8, he was familiar with differential and integral calculus. Von Neumann was part of a Budapest generation noted for intellectual achievement: he was born in Budapest around the same time as Theodore von Kármán (b. 1881), George de Hevesy (b. 1885), Leó Szilárd (b. 1898), Eugene Wigner (b. 1902), Edward Teller (b. 1908), and Paul Erdős (b. 1913). John entered the Lutheran high school Fasori Evangelikus Gimnázium in Budapest in 1911. Although his father insisted he attend school at the grade level appropriate to his age, he agreed to hire private tutors to give him advanced instruction in those areas in which he had displayed an aptitude. At the age of 15, he began to study advanced calculus under the renowned analyst Gábor Szegő. On their first meeting, Szegő was so astounded with the boy's mathematical talent that he was brought to tears. Szegő subsequently visited the von Neumann house twice a week to tutor the child prodigy. Some of von Neumann's instant solutions to the problems in calculus posed by Szegő, sketched out with his father's stationery, are still on display at the von Neumann archive in Budapest. By the age of 19, von Neumann had published two major mathematical papers, the second of which gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, which superseded Georg Cantor's definition. He received his Ph.D. in mathematics (with minors in experimental physics and chemistry) from Pázmány Péter University in Budapest at the age of 22. He simultaneously earned a diploma in chemical engineering from the ETH Zürich in Switzerland at his father's request, who wanted his son to follow him into industry and therefore invest his time in a more financially useful endeavour than mathematics.   == Career and abilitiesEdit ==   === BeginningsEdit === Between 1928 and 1932, he taught as a Privatdozent at the University of Berlin. By the end of 1927, von Neumann had published twelve major papers in mathematics, and by the end of 1929, thirty-two papers, at a rate of nearly one major paper per month. Von Neumann's reputed powers of speedy, massive memorization and recall allowed him to recite volumes of information, and even entire directories, with ease. In 1930, von Neumann was invited to Princeton University, New Jersey. In 1933, he was offered a position on the faculty of the Institute for Advanced Study when the institute's plan to appoint Hermann Weyl fell through; von Neumann remained a mathematics professor there until his death. His mother and his brothers followed John to the United States; his father, Max Neumann, died in 1929. Von Neumann anglicized his first name to John, keeping the German-aristocratic surname of von Neumann. In 1937, von Neumann became a United States naturalized citizen and immediately tried to enlist in the US Army Reserve but was rejected because of his age. In 1938, he was awarded the Bôcher Memorial Prize for his work in analysis.   === Set theoryEdit ===  The axiomatization of mathematics, on the model of Euclid's Elements, had reached new levels of rigour and breadth at the end of the 19th century, particularly in arithmetic, thanks to the axiom schema of Richard Dedekind and Charles Sanders Peirce, and geometry, thanks to David Hilbert. At the beginning of the 20th century, efforts to base mathematics on naive set theory suffered a setback due to Russell's paradox (on the set of all sets that do not belong to themselves). The problem of an adequate axiomatization of set theory was resolved implicitly about twenty years later by Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel. Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory provided a series of principles that allowed for the construction of the sets used in the everyday practice of mathematics. But they did not explicitly exclude the possibility of the existence of a set that belongs to itself. In his doctoral thesis of 1925, von Neumann demonstrated two techniques to exclude such sets—the axiom of foundation and the notion of class.  The axiom of foundation established that every set can be constructed from the bottom up in an ordered succession of steps by way of the principles of Zermelo and Fraenkel, in such a manner that if one set belongs to another then the first must necessarily come before the second in the succession, hence excluding the possibility of a set belonging to itself. To demonstrate that the addition of this new axiom to the others did not produce contradictions, von Neumann introduced a method of demonstration, called the method of inner models, which later became an essential instrument in set theory. The second approach to the problem took as its base the notion of class, and defines a set as a class which belongs to other classes, while a proper class is defined as a class which does not belong to other classes. Under the Zermelo–Fraenkel approach, the axioms impede the construction of a set of all sets which do not belong to themselves. In contrast, under the von Neumann approach, the class of all sets which do not belong to themselves can be constructed, but it is a proper class and not a set. With this contribution of von Neumann, the axiomatic system of the theory of sets became fully satisfactory, and the next question was whether or not it was also definitive, and not subject to improvement. A strongly negative answer arrived in September 1930 at the historic mathematical Congress of Königsberg, in which Kurt Gödel announced his first theorem of incompleteness: the usual axiomatic systems are incomplete, in the sense that they cannot prove every truth which is expressible in their language. This result was sufficiently innovative as to confound the majority of mathematicians of the time. But von Neumann, who had participated at the Congress, confirmed his fame as an instantaneous thinker, and in less than a month was able to communicate to Gödel himself an interesting consequence of his theorem: namely that the usual axiomatic systems are unable to demonstrate their own consistency. However, Gödel had already discovered this consequence, now known as his second incompleteness theorem, and sent von Neumann a preprint of his article containing both incompleteness theorems. Von Neumann acknowledged Gödel's priority in his next letter.   === GeometryEdit === Von Neumann founded the field of continuous geometry. It followed his path-breaking work on rings of operators. In mathematics, continuous geometry is an analogue of complex projective geometry, where instead of the dimension of a subspace being in a discrete set 0, 1, ..., n, it can be an element of the unit interval [0,1]. Von Neumann was motivated by his discovery of von Neumann algebras with a dimension function taking a continuous range of dimensions, and the first example of a continuous geometry other than projective space was the projections of the hyperfinite type II factor.   === Measure theoryEdit ===  In a series of famous papers, von Neumann made spectacular contributions to measure theory. The work of Banach had implied that the problem of measure has a positive solution if n = 1 or n = 2 and a negative solution in all other cases. Von Neumann's work argued that the "problem is essentially group-theoretic in character, and that, in particular, for the solvability of the problem of measure the ordinary algebraic concept of solvability of a group is relevant. Thus, according to von Neumann, it is the change of group that makes a difference, not the change of space." In a number of von Neumann's papers, the methods of argument he employed are considered even more significant than the results. In anticipation of his later study of dimension theory in algebras of operators, von Neumann used results on equivalence by finite decomposition, and reformulated the problem of measure in terms of functions (anticipating his later work, Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, on almost periodic functions). In the 1936 paper on analytic measure theory, von Neumann used the Haar theorem in the solution of Hilbert's fifth problem in the case of compact groups.   === Ergodic theoryEdit === Von Neumann made foundational contributions to ergodic theory, in a series of articles published in 1932. Of the 1932 papers on ergodic theory, Paul Halmos writes that even "if von Neumann had never done anything else, they would have been sufficient to guarantee him mathematical immortality". By then von Neumann had already written his famous articles on operator theory, and the application of this work was instrumental in the von Neumann mean ergodic theorem.   === Operator theoryEdit ===  Von Neumann introduced the study of rings of operators, through the von Neumann algebras. A von Neumann algebra is a *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator. The von Neumann bicommutant theorem shows that the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely algebraic definition as an algebra of symmetries. The direct integral was introduced in 1949 by John von Neumann. One of von Neumann's analyses was to reduce the classification of von Neumann algebras on separable Hilbert spaces to the classification of factors.   === Lattice theoryEdit === Von Neumann worked on lattice theory between 1937 and 1939. Von Neumann provided an abstract exploration of dimension in completed complemented modular topological lattices: "Dimension is determined, up to a positive linear transformation, by the following two properties. It is conserved by perspective mappings ("perspectivities") and ordered by inclusion. The deepest part of the proof concerns the equivalence of perspectivity with "projectivity by decomposition"—of which a corollary is the transitivity of perspectivity." Garrett Birkhoff writes: "John von Neumann's brilliant mind blazed over lattice theory like a meteor". Additionally, "[I]n the general case, von Neumann proved the following basic representation theorem. Any complemented modular lattice L having a "basis" of n≥4 pairwise perspective elements, is isomorphic with the lattice ℛ(R) of all principal right-ideals of a suitable regular ring R. This conclusion is the culmination of 140 pages of brilliant and incisive algebra involving entirely novel axioms. Anyone wishing to get an unforgettable impression of the razor edge of von Neumann's mind, need merely try to pursue this chain of exact reasoning for himself—realizing that often five pages of it were written down before breakfast, seated at a living room writing-table in a bathrobe."   === Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanicsEdit ===  Von Neumann was the first to rigorously establish a mathematical framework for quantum mechanics, known as the Dirac–von Neumann axioms, with his 1932 work Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. After having completed the axiomatization of set theory, von Neumann began to confront the axiomatization of quantum mechanics. He realized, in 1926, that a state of a quantum system could be represented by a point in a (complex) Hilbert space that, in general, could be infinite-dimensional even for a single particle. This is in contrast to a classical system where a state is represented by a point in a (real) phase space with 6N dimensions where N is the number of particles (3 generalized coordinates and 3 conjugate generalized momenta for each particle). In this formalism of quantum mechanics, observable quantities such as position or momentum are represented as linear operators acting on the Hilbert space associated with the quantum system. The physics of quantum mechanics was thereby reduced to the mathematics of Hilbert spaces and linear operators acting on them. For example, the uncertainty principle, according to which the determination of the position of a particle prevents the determination of its momentum and vice versa, is translated into the non-commutativity of the two corresponding operators. This new mathematical formulation included as special cases the formulations of both Heisenberg and Schrödinger. Von Neumann's abstract treatment permitted him also to confront the foundational issue of determinism vs. non-determinism, and in the book he presented a proof that the statistical results of quantum mechanics could not possibly be averages of an underlying set of determined "hidden variables," as in classical statistical mechanics. In 1966, John S. Bell published a paper arguing that the proof contained a conceptual error and was therefore invalid (see the article on John Stewart Bell for more information). However, in 2010, Jeffrey Bub argued that Bell had misconstrued von Neumann's proof, and pointed out that the proof, though not valid for all hidden variable theories, does rule out a well-defined and important subset. Bub also suggests that von Neumann was aware of this limitation, and that von Neumann did not claim that his proof completely ruled out hidden variable theories. In any case, the proof inaugurated a line of research that ultimately led, through the work of Bell in 1964 on Bell's theorem, and the experiments of Alain Aspect in 1982, to the demonstration that quantum physics either requires a notion of reality substantially different from that of classical physics, or must include nonlocality in apparent violation of special relativity. In a chapter of The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, von Neumann deeply analyzed the so-called measurement problem. He concluded that the entire physical universe could be made subject to the universal wave function. Since something "outside the calculation" was needed to collapse the wave function, von Neumann concluded that the collapse was caused by the consciousness of the experimenter (although this view was accepted by Eugene Wigner, it never gained acceptance amongst the majority of physicists). Though theories of quantum mechanics continue to evolve to this day, there is a basic framework for the mathematical formalism of problems in quantum mechanics which underlies the majority of approaches and can be traced back to the mathematical formalisms and techniques first used by von Neumann. In other words, discussions about interpretation of the theory, and extensions to it, are now mostly conducted on the basis of shared assumptions about the mathematical foundations.   === Quantum logicEdit ===  In a famous paper of 1936 with Garrett Birkhoff, the first work ever to introduce quantum logics, von Neumann and Birkhoff first proved that quantum mechanics requires a propositional calculus substantially different from all classical logics and rigorously isolated a new algebraic structure for quantum logics. The concept of creating a propositional calculus for quantum logic was first outlined in a short section in von Neumann's 1932 work, but in 1936, the need for the new propositional calculus was demonstrated through several proofs. For example, photons cannot pass through two successive filters that are polarized perpendicularly (e.g., one horizontally and the other vertically), and therefore, a fortiori, it cannot pass if a third filter polarized diagonally is added to the other two, either before or after them in the succession, but if the third filter is added in between the other two, the photons will, indeed, pass through. This experimental fact is translatable into logic as the non-commutativity of conjunction . It was also demonstrated that the laws of distribution of classical logic,  and , are not valid for quantum theory. The reason for this is that a quantum disjunction, unlike the case for classical disjunction, can be true even when both of the disjuncts are false and this is, in turn, attributable to the fact that it is frequently the case, in quantum mechanics, that a pair of alternatives are semantically determinate, while each of its members are necessarily indeterminate. This latter property can be illustrated by a simple example. Suppose we are dealing with particles (such as electrons) of semi-integral spin (angular momentum) for which there are only two possible values: positive or negative. Then, a principle of indetermination establishes that the spin, relative to two different directions (e.g., x and y) results in a pair of incompatible quantities. Suppose that the state ɸ of a certain electron verifies the proposition "the spin of the electron in the x direction is positive." By the principle of indeterminacy, the value of the spin in the direction y will be completely indeterminate for ɸ. Hence, ɸ can verify neither the proposition "the spin in the direction of y is positive" nor the proposition "the spin in the direction of y is negative." Nevertheless, the disjunction of the propositions "the spin in the direction of y is positive or the spin in the direction of y is negative" must be true for ɸ. In the case of distribution, it is therefore possible to have a situation in which , while . Von Neumann proposes to replace classical logics with a logic constructed in orthomodular lattices (isomorphic to the lattice of subspaces of the Hilbert space of a given physical system).   === Game theoryEdit === Von Neumann founded the field of game theory as a mathematical discipline. Von Neumann proved his minimax theorem in 1928. This theorem establishes that in zero-sum games with perfect information (i.e. in which players know at each time all moves that have taken place so far), there exists a pair of strategies for both players that allows each to minimize his maximum losses, hence the name minimax. When examining every possible strategy, a player must consider all the possible responses of his adversary. The player then plays out the strategy that will result in the minimization of his maximum loss. Such strategies, which minimize the maximum loss for each player, are called optimal. Von Neumann showed that their minimaxes are equal (in absolute value) and contrary (in sign). Von Neumann improved and extended the minimax theorem to include games involving imperfect information and games with more than two players, publishing this result in his 1944 Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (written with Oskar Morgenstern). The public interest in this work was such that The New York Times ran a front-page story. In this book, von Neumann declared that economic theory needed to use functional analytic methods, especially convex sets and topological fixed-point theorem, rather than the traditional differential calculus, because the maximum-operator did not preserve differentiable functions. Independently, Leonid Kantorovich's functional analytic work on mathematical economics also focused attention on optimization theory, non-differentiability, and vector lattices. Von Neumann's functional-analytic techniques—the use of duality pairings of real vector spaces to represent prices and quantities, the use of supporting and separating hyperplanes and convex set, and fixed-point theory—have been the primary tools of mathematical economics ever since. Von Neumann was also the inventor of the method of proof, used in game theory, known as backward induction (which he first published in 1944 in the book co-authored with Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour). Morgenstern wrote a paper on game theory and thought he would show it to von Neumann because of his interest in the subject. He read it and said to Morgenstern that he should put more in it. This was repeated a couple of times, and then von Neumann became a coauthor and the paper became 100 pages long. Then it became a book.   === Mathematical economicsEdit === Von Neumann raised the intellectual and mathematical level of economics in several stunning publications. For his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann proved the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium using his generalization of the Brouwer fixed-point theorem. Von Neumann's model of an expanding economy considered the matrix pencil  A − λB with nonnegative matrices A and B; von Neumann sought probability vectors p and q and a positive number λ that would solve the complementarity equation pT (A − λ B) q = 0, along with two inequality systems expressing economic efficiency. In this model, the (transposed) probability vector p represents the prices of the goods while the probability vector q represents the "intensity" at which the production process would run. The unique solution λ represents the growth factor which is 1 plus the rate of growth of the economy; the rate of growth equals the interest rate. Proving the existence of a positive growth rate and proving that the growth rate equals the interest rate were remarkable achievements, even for von Neumann. Von Neumann's results have been viewed as a special case of linear programming, where von Neumann's model uses only nonnegative matrices. The study of von Neumann's model of an expanding economy continues to interest mathematical economists with interests in computational economics. This paper has been called the greatest paper in mathematical economics by several authors, who recognized its introduction of fixed-point theorems, linear inequalities, complementary slackness, and saddlepoint duality. In the proceedings of a conference on von Neumann's growth model, Paul Samuelson said that many mathematicians had developed methods useful to economists, but that von Neumann was unique in having made significant contributions to economic theory itself. The lasting importance of the work on general equilibria and the methodology of fixed point theorems is underscored by the awarding of Nobel prizes in 1972 to Kenneth Arrow, in 1983 to Gérard Debreu, and in 1994 to John Nash who used fixed point theorems to establish equilibria for non-cooperative games and for bargaining problems in his Ph.D. thesis. Arrow and Debreu also used linear programming, as did Nobel laureates Tjalling Koopmans, Leonid Kantorovich, Wassily Leontief, Paul Samuelson, Robert Dorfman, Robert Solow, and Leonid Hurwicz. Norman Macrae has traced the origins of von Neumann's famous 9-page paper. It started life as a talk at Princeton and then became a paper in Germany, which was eventually translated into English. His interest in economics that led to that paper began as follows: When lecturing at Berlin in 1928 and 1929 he spent his summers back home in Budapest, and so did the economist Nicholas Kaldor, and they hit it off. Kaldor recommended that von Neumann read a book by the mathematical economist Léon Walras. Von Neumann found some faults in that book and corrected them, for example, replacing equations by inequalities. He noticed that Walras's General Equilibrium Theory and Walras' Law, which led to systems of simultaneous linear equations, could produce the absurd result that the profit could be maximized by producing and selling a negative quantity of a product. He replaced the equations by inequalities, introduced dynamic equilibria, among other things, and eventually produced his 9-page paper.   === Linear programmingEdit === Building on his results on matrix games and on his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann invented the theory of duality in linear programming, after George Dantzig described his work in a few minutes, when an impatient von Neumann asked him to get to the point. Then, Dantzig listened dumbfounded while von Neumann provided an hour lecture on convex sets, fixed-point theory, and duality, conjecturing the equivalence between matrix games and linear programming. Later, von Neumann suggested a new method of linear programming, using the homogeneous linear system of Gordan (1873), which was later popularized by Karmarkar's algorithm. Von Neumann's method used a pivoting algorithm between simplices, with the pivoting decision determined by a nonnegative least squares subproblem with a convexity constraint (projecting the zero-vector onto the convex hull of the active simplex). Von Neumann's algorithm was the first interior point method of linear programming.   === Mathematical statisticsEdit === Von Neumann made fundamental contributions to mathematical statistics. In 1941, he derived the exact distribution of the ratio of the mean square of successive differences to the sample variance for independent and identically normally distributed variables. This ratio was applied to the residuals from regression models and is commonly known as the Durbin–Watson statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the errors are serially independent against the alternative that they follow a stationary first order autoregression. Subsequently, Denis Sargan and Alok Bhargava extended the results for testing if the errors on a regression model follow a Gaussian random walk (i.e., possess a unit root) against the alternative that they are a stationary first order autoregression.   === Nuclear weaponsEdit ===  Beginning in the late 1930s, von Neumann developed an expertise in explosions—phenomena that are difficult to model mathematically. During this period von Neumann was the leading authority of the mathematics of shaped charges. This led him to a large number of military consultancies, primarily for the Navy, which in turn led to his involvement in the Manhattan Project. The involvement included frequent trips by train to the project's secret research facilities in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Von Neumann's principal contribution to the atomic bomb was in the concept and design of the explosive lenses needed to compress the plutonium core of the Trinity test device and the "Fat Man" weapon that was later dropped on Nagasaki. While von Neumann did not originate the "implosion" concept, he was one of its most persistent proponents, encouraging its continued development against the instincts of many of his colleagues, who felt such a design to be unworkable. He also eventually came up with the idea of using more powerful shaped charges and less fissionable material to greatly increase the speed of "assembly" (compression). When it turned out that there would not be enough uranium-235 to make more than one bomb, the implosive lens project was greatly expanded and von Neumann's idea was implemented. Implosion was the only method that could be used with the plutonium-239 that was available from the Hanford Site. His calculations showed that implosion would work if it did not depart by more than 5% from spherical symmetry. After a series of failed attempts with models, 5% was achieved by George Kistiakowsky, and the construction of the Trinity bomb was completed in July 1945. In a visit to Los Alamos in September 1944, von Neumann showed that the pressure increase from explosion shock wave reflection from solid objects was greater than previously believed if the angle of incidence of the shock wave was between 90° and some limiting angle. As a result, it was determined that the effectiveness of an atomic bomb would be enhanced with detonation some kilometers above the target, rather than at ground level. Beginning in the spring of 1945, along with four other scientists and various military personnel, von Neumann was included in the target selection committee responsible for choosing the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as the first targets of the atomic bomb. Von Neumann oversaw computations related to the expected size of the bomb blasts, estimated death tolls, and the distance above the ground at which the bombs should be detonated for optimum shock wave propagation and thus maximum effect. The cultural capital Kyoto, which had been spared the firebombing inflicted upon militarily significant target cities like Tokyo in World War II, was von Neumann's first choice, a selection seconded by Manhattan Project leader General Leslie Groves. However, this target was dismissed by Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson. On July 16, 1945, with numerous other Los Alamos personnel, von Neumann was an eyewitness to the first atomic bomb blast, code named Trinity, conducted as a test of the implosion method device, on the White Sands Proving Ground, 35 miles (56 km) southeast of Socorro, New Mexico. Based on his observation alone, von Neumann estimated the test had resulted in a blast equivalent to 5 kilotons of TNT, but Enrico Fermi produced a more accurate estimate of 10 kilotons by dropping scraps of torn-up paper as the shock wave passed his location and watching how far they scattered. The actual power of the explosion had been between 20 and 22 kilotons. After the war, J. Robert Oppenheimer remarked that the physicists involved in the Manhattan project had "known sin". Von Neumann's response was that "sometimes someone confesses a sin in order to take credit for it." Von Neumann continued unperturbed in his work and became, along with Edward Teller, one of those who sustained the hydrogen bomb project. He then collaborated with Klaus Fuchs on further development of the bomb, and in 1946 the two filed a secret patent on "Improvement in Methods and Means for Utilizing Nuclear Energy", which outlined a scheme for using a fission bomb to compress fusion fuel to initiate nuclear fusion. The Fuchs–von Neumann patent used radiation implosion, but not in the same way as is used in what became the final hydrogen bomb design, the Teller–Ulam design. Their work was, however, incorporated into the "George" shot of Operation Greenhouse, which was instructive in testing out concepts that went into the final design. The Fuchs–von Neumann work was passed on, by Fuchs, to the Soviet Union as part of his nuclear espionage, but it was not used in the Soviets' own, independent development of the Teller–Ulam design. The historian Jeremy Bernstein has pointed out that ironically, "John von Neumann and Klaus Fuchs, produced a brilliant invention in 1946 that could have changed the whole course of the development of the hydrogen bomb, but was not fully understood until after the bomb had been successfully made."   === The Atomic Energy CommitteeEdit === In 1954 von Neumann was invited to become a member of the Atomic Energy Committee. He accepted this position and used it to further the production of compact H-bombs suitable for Intercontinental ballistic missile delivery. He involved himself in correcting the severe shortage of tritium and lithium 6 needed for these compact weapons, and he argued against settling for the intermediate range missiles that the Army wanted. He was adamant that H-bombs delivered into the heart of enemy territory by an ICBM would be the most effective weapon possible, and that the relative inaccuracy of the missile wouldn't be a problem with an H-bomb. He said the Russians would probably be building a similar weapon system, which turned out to be the case.   === The ICBM CommitteeEdit === In 1955, von Neumann became a commissioner of the United States Atomic Energy Program. Shortly before his death, when he was already quite ill, von Neumann headed the United States government's top secret intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) committee, and it would sometimes meet in his home. Its purpose was to decide on the feasibility of building an ICBM large enough to carry a thermonuclear weapon. Von Neumann had long argued that while the technical obstacles were sizable, they could be overcome in time. The SM-65 Atlas passed its first fully functional test in 1959, two years after his death. The feasibility of an ICBM owed as much to improved, smaller warheads as it did to developments in rocketry, and his understanding of the former made his advice invaluable.   === Mutual assured destructionEdit === John von Neumann is credited with the equilibrium strategy of mutual assured destruction, providing the deliberately humorous acronym, MAD. (Other humorous acronyms coined by von Neumann include his computer, the Mathematical Analyzer, Numerical Integrator, and Computer—or MANIAC). He also "moved heaven and earth" to bring MAD about. His goal was to quickly develop ICBMs and the compact hydrogen bombs that they could deliver to the USSR, and he knew the Soviets were doing similar work because the CIA interviewed German rocket scientists who were allowed to return to Germany, and von Neumann had planted a dozen technical people in the CIA. The Russians believed that bombers would soon be vulnerable, and they shared von Neumann's view that an H-bomb in an ICBM was the ne plus ultra of weapons, and they believed that whoever had superiority in these weapons would take over the world, without necessarily using them. von Neumann was afraid of a "missile gap" and took several more steps to achieve his goal of keeping up with the Soviets: He modified the ENIAC by making it programmable and then wrote programs for it to do the H-bomb calculations verifying that the Teller-Ulam design was feasible and to develop it further. He became a member of the Atomic Energy Committee to speed up the development of a compact H-bomb that would fit in an ICBM. He personally interceded to speed up the production of lithium-6 and tritium needed for the compact bombs. He caused several separate missile projects to be started, because he felt that competition combined with collaboration got the best results.   === ComputingEdit ===  Von Neumann was a founding figure in computing. Von Neumann's hydrogen bomb work was played out in the realm of computing, where he and Stanislaw Ulam developed simulations on von Neumann's digital computers for the hydrodynamic computations. During this time he contributed to the development of the Monte Carlo method, which allowed solutions to complicated problems to be approximated using random numbers. He was also involved in the design of the later IAS machine. Because using lists of "truly" random numbers was extremely slow, von Neumann developed a form of making pseudorandom numbers, using the middle-square method. Though this method has been criticized as crude, von Neumann was aware of this: he justified it as being faster than any other method at his disposal, and also noted that when it went awry it did so obviously, unlike methods which could be subtly incorrect. While consulting for the Moore School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania on the EDVAC project, von Neumann wrote an incomplete First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. The paper, whose premature distribution nullified the patent claims of EDVAC designers J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, described a computer architecture in which the data and the program are both stored in the computer's memory in the same address space. This architecture is to this day the basis of modern computer design, unlike the earliest computers that were "programmed" using a separate memory device such as a paper tape or plugboard. Although the single-memory, stored program architecture is commonly called von Neumann architecture as a result of von Neumann's paper, the architecture's description was based on the work of J. Presper Eckert and John William Mauchly, inventors of the ENIAC computer at the University of Pennsylvania. John von Neumann also consulted for the ENIAC project. The electronics of the new ENIAC ran at one-sixth the speed, but this in no way degraded the ENIAC's performance, since it was still entirely I/O bound. Complicated programs could be developed and debugged in days rather than the weeks required for plugboarding the old ENIAC. Some of von Neumann's early computer programs have been preserved. The next computer that von Neumann designed was the IAS machine at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. He arranged its financing, and the components were designed and built at the RCA Research Laboratory nearby. John von Neumann recommended that the IBM 701, nicknamed the defense computer include a magnetic drum. It was a faster version of the IAS machine and formed the basis for the commercially successful IBM 704. Stochastic computing was first introduced in a pioneering paper by von Neumann in 1953. However, the theory could not be implemented until advances in computing of the 1960s. Von Neumann also created the field of cellular automata without the aid of computers, constructing the first self-replicating automata with pencil and graph paper. The concept of a universal constructor was fleshed out in his posthumous work Theory of Self Reproducing Automata. Von Neumann proved that the most effective way of performing large-scale mining operations such as mining an entire moon or asteroid belt would be by using self-replicating machines, taking advantage of their exponential growth. Von Neumann's rigorous mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication (of the semiotic relationship between constructor, description and that which is constructed), preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA. Beginning in 1949, von Neumann's design for a self-reproducing computer program is considered the world's first computer virus, and he is considered to be the theoretical father of computer virology. Donald Knuth cites von Neumann as the inventor, in 1945, of the merge sort algorithm, in which the first and second halves of an array are each sorted recursively and then merged. His algorithm for simulating a fair coin with a biased coin is used in the "software whitening" stage of some hardware random number generators.   === Fluid dynamicsEdit === Von Neumann made fundamental contributions in exploration of problems in numerical hydrodynamics. For example, with Robert D. Richtmyer he developed an algorithm defining artificial viscosity that improved the understanding of shock waves. It is possible that we would not understand much of astrophysics, and might not have highly developed jet and rocket engines without the work of von Neumann. A problem was that when computers solved hydrodynamic or aerodynamic problems, they tried to put too many computational grid points at regions of sharp discontinuity (shock waves). The mathematics of artificial viscosity smoothed the shock transition without sacrificing basic physics. Other well known contributions to fluid dynamics included the classic flow solution to blast waves, and the co-discovery of the ZND detonation model of explosives.   === Politics and social affairsEdit ===  Von Neumann obtained, at the age of 29, one of the first five professorships at the new Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey (another had gone to Albert Einstein). He was a frequent consultant for the Central Intelligence Agency, the United States Army, the RAND Corporation, Standard Oil, General Electric, IBM, and others. Throughout his life, von Neumann had a respect and admiration for business and government leaders, something that was often at variance with the inclinations of his scientific colleagues. Von Neumann entered government service (Manhattan Project) primarily because he felt that, if freedom and civilization were to survive, it would have to be because the US would triumph over totalitarianism from Nazism, Fascism and Soviet Communism. As president of the von Neumann Committee for Missiles, and later as a member of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, from 1953 until his death in 1957, he was influential in setting US scientific and military policy. Through his committee, he developed various scenarios of nuclear proliferation, the development of intercontinental and submarine missiles with atomic warheads, and the controversial strategic equilibrium called mutual assured destruction. During a Senate committee hearing he described his political ideology as "violently anti-communist, and much more militaristic than the norm". He was quoted in 1950 remarking, "If you say why not bomb [the Soviets] tomorrow, I say, why not today. If you say today at five o'clock, I say why not one o'clock?"   === On the eve of World War IIEdit === Von Neumann's shrewd prewar analysis is often quoted. Asked about how France would stand up to Germany he said "Oh, France won't matter." Asked whether the US would enter the war and what their motives would be, he said they would enter the war as a purely defensive measure to protect their interests overseas and would not be motivated by imperialistic ambitions, but that such ambitions could arise after the war. He said the Roman Empire was purely defensive in the early days and only became imperialistic towards the end. He also said that it would not be profitable for the US to sell arms to combatants, because such sales are usually on credit, and such debts are never paid. He said this before 1935 when Roosevelt outlawed such sales.   === Weather systemsEdit === Von Neumann's team performed the world's first numerical weather forecasts on the ENIAC computer; von Neumann published the paper Numerical Integration of the Barotropic Vorticity Equation in 1950. Von Neumann's interest in weather systems and meteorological prediction led him to propose manipulating the environment by spreading colorants on the polar ice caps to enhance absorption of solar radiation (by reducing the albedo), thereby inducing global warming.   === Cognitive abilitiesEdit === Von Neumann's ability to instantaneously perform complex operations in his head stunned other mathematicians. Eugene Wigner wrote that, seeing von Neumann's mind at work, "one had the impression of a perfect instrument whose gears were machined to mesh accurately to a thousandth of an inch." Paul Halmos states that "von Neumann's speed was awe-inspiring." Israel Halperin said: "Keeping up with him was ... impossible. The feeling was you were on a tricycle chasing a racing car." Edward Teller wrote that von Neumann effortlessly outdid anybody he ever met, and said "I never could keep up with him". Teller also said "von Neumann would carry on a conversation with my 3-year-old son, and the two of them would talk as equals, and I sometimes wondered if he used the same principle when he talked to the rest of us. Most people avoid thinking if they can, some of us are addicted to thinking, but von Neumann actually enjoyed thinking, maybe even to the exclusion of everything else." Lothar Wolfgang Nordheim described von Neumann as the "fastest mind I ever met", and Jacob Bronowski wrote "He was the cleverest man I ever knew, without exception. He was a genius." George Pólya, whose lectures at ETH Zürich von Neumann attended as a student, said "Johnny was the only student I was ever afraid of. If in the course of a lecture I stated an unsolved problem, the chances were he'd come to me at the end of the lecture with the complete solution scribbled on a slip of paper." Halmos recounts a story told by Nicholas Metropolis, concerning the speed of von Neumann's calculations, when somebody asked von Neumann to solve the famous fly puzzle:  Two bicyclists start twenty miles apart and head toward each other, each going at a steady rate of 10 mph. At the same time a fly that travels at a steady 15 mph starts from the front wheel of the southbound bicycle and flies to the front wheel of the northbound one, then turns around and flies to the front wheel of the southbound one again, and continues in this manner till he is crushed between the two front wheels. Question: what total distance did the fly cover? The slow way to find the answer is to calculate what distance the fly covers on the first, northbound, leg of the trip, then on the second, southbound, leg, then on the third, etc., etc., and, finally, to sum the infinite series so obtained. The quick way is to observe that the bicycles meet exactly one hour after their start, so that the fly had just an hour for his travels; the answer must therefore be 15 miles. When the question was put to von Neumann, he solved it in an instant, and thereby disappointed the questioner: "Oh, you must have heard the trick before!" "What trick?" asked von Neumann, "All I did was sum the geometric series."  It's claimed that Von Neumann had a very strong eidetic memory, commonly called "photographic" memory—though such a phenomenon has never been scientifically documented in a human. Herman Goldstine writes: "One of his remarkable abilities was his power of absolute recall. As far as I could tell, von Neumann was able on once reading a book or article to quote it back verbatim; moreover, he could do it years later without hesitation. He could also translate it at no diminution in speed from its original language into English. On one occasion I tested his ability by asking him to tell me how A Tale of Two Cities started. Whereupon, without any pause, he immediately began to recite the first chapter and continued until asked to stop after about ten or fifteen minutes." "I have sometimes wondered whether a brain like von Neumann's does not indicate a species superior to that of man", said Nobel Laureate Hans Bethe of Cornell University. "It seems fair to say that if the influence of a scientist is interpreted broadly enough to include impact on fields beyond science proper, then John von Neumann was probably the most influential mathematician who ever lived," wrote Miklós Rédei in "Selected Letters." Glimm writes "he is regarded as one of the giants of modern mathematics". The mathematician Jean Dieudonné called von Neumann "the last of the great mathematicians", while Peter Lax described him as possessing the "most scintillating intellect of this century".   === Mastery of mathematicsEdit === Stan Ulam, who knew von Neumann well, described his mastery of mathematics this way: "Most mathematicians know one method. For example, Norbert Wiener had mastered Fourier transforms. Some mathematicians have mastered two methods and might really impress someone who knows only one of them. John von Neumann had mastered three methods." He went on to explain that the three methods were: A facility with the symbolic manipulation of linear operators; An intuitive feeling for the logical structure of any new mathematical theories; An intuitive feeling for the combinatorial superstructure of new theories.   == Personal lifeEdit == Von Neumann married twice. He married Mariette Kövesi in 1930, just prior to emigrating to the United States. Before his marriage he was baptized a Catholic. They had one daughter (von Neumann's only child), Marina, who is now a distinguished professor of international trade and public policy at the University of Michigan. The couple divorced in 1937. In 1938, von Neumann married Klara Dan, whom he had met during his last trips back to Budapest prior to the outbreak of World War II. Von Neumann was initially refused permission to immigrate into the United States, although considered a famous and talented mathematician, but later with the influence of fellow scientists in the US he was able to secure the permit and received US citizenship. Von Neumann predicted the German takeover of Europe, anticipated its consequences for the Jews, and succeeded in ensuring the escape and immigration of his own immediate family along with his second wife Klara's family to the US, in 1938 just before the annexations and battles by Germany and the beginnings of World War II. The von Neumanns, Klara and John were very active socially within the Princeton academic community. Von Neumann had a wide range of cultural interests. Since the age of six, von Neumann had been fluent in Latin and ancient Greek, and he held a lifelong passion for ancient history, being renowned for his prodigious historical knowledge. A professor of Byzantine history once said that von Neumann had greater expertise in Byzantine history than he did. Von Neumann took great care over his clothing, and would always wear formal suits, once riding down the Grand Canyon astride a mule in a three-piece pin-stripe. Mathematician David Hilbert is reported to have asked at von Neumann's 1926 doctoral exam: "Pray, who is the candidate's tailor?" as he had never seen such beautiful evening clothes. He was sociable and enjoyed throwing large parties at his home in Princeton, occasionally twice a week. His white clapboard house at 26 Westcott Road was one of the largest in Princeton. Despite being a notoriously bad driver, he nonetheless enjoyed driving—frequently while reading a book—occasioning numerous arrests, as well as accidents. When Cuthbert Hurd hired him as a consultant to IBM, Hurd often quietly paid the fines for his traffic tickets. He believed that much of his mathematical thought occurred intuitively, and he would often go to sleep with a problem unsolved, and know the answer immediately upon waking up. Von Neumann liked to eat and drink; his wife, Klara, said that he could count everything except calories. He enjoyed Yiddish and "off-color" humor (especially limericks). At Princeton he received complaints for regularly playing extremely loud German march music on his gramophone, which distracted those in neighbouring offices, including Albert Einstein, from their work. Von Neumann did some of his best work blazingly fast in noisy, chaotic environments, and once admonished his wife for preparing a quiet study for him to work in. He never used it, preferring the couple's living room with its television playing loudly. Von Neumann's closest friend in the United States was mathematician Stanislaw Ulam. A later friend of Ulam's, Gian-Carlo Rota writes: "They would spend hours on end gossiping and giggling, swapping Jewish jokes, and drifting in and out of mathematical talk." When von Neumann was dying in hospital, every time Ulam would visit he would come prepared with a new collection of jokes to cheer up his friend.   == Later life and deathEdit ==  In 1955, von Neumann was diagnosed with what was either bone or pancreatic cancer. A von Neumann biographer, Norman Macrae, has speculated that the cancer was caused by von Neumann's presence at the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests held in 1946 at Bikini Atoll. His mother, Margaret von Neumann, had been diagnosed with cancer in 1956 and died within two weeks. John had eighteen months from diagnosis till death. In this period von Neumann returned to the Roman Catholic faith that had also been significant to his mother after the family's conversion in 1929–1930. John had earlier said to his mother, "There is probably a God. Many things are easier to explain if there is than if there isn't." Von Neumann held on to his exemplary knowledge of Latin and quoted to a deathbed visitor the declamation "Judex ergo cum sedebit," and ends "Quid sum miser tunc dicturus? Quem patronum rogaturus, Cum vix iustus sit securus?" (When the judge His seat hath taken ... What shall wretched I then plead? Who for me shall intercede when the righteous scarce is freed?) On his deathbed, Von Neumann entertained his brother by using his photographic memory to recite from heart, word-for-word the first few lines of each page of Goethe's Faust. Von Neumann died a year and a half after the diagnosis of cancer, at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C. under military security lest he reveal military secrets while heavily medicated. He was buried at Princeton Cemetery in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey. While at Walter Reed, he invited a Roman Catholic priest, Father Anselm Strittmatter, O.S.B., to visit him for consultation. Von Neumann reportedly said in explanation that Pascal had a point, referring to Pascal's Wager. Father Strittmatter administered the last sacraments to him. Some of von Neumann's friends (such as Abraham Pais and Oskar Morgenstern) said they had always believed him to be "completely agnostic." Poundstone: "Of this deathbed conversion, Morgenstern told Heims, "He was of course completely agnostic all his life, and then he suddenly turned Catholic—it doesn't agree with anything whatsoever in his attitude, outlook and thinking when he was healthy." After the religious conversion, Father Strittmatter recalled that von Neumann did not receive much peace or comfort from it, as he still remained terrified of death.   == HonorsEdit == The John von Neumann Theory Prize of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS, previously TIMS-ORSA) is awarded annually to an individual (or group) who have made fundamental and sustained contributions to theory in operations research and the management sciences. The IEEE John von Neumann Medal is awarded annually by the IEEE "for outstanding achievements in computer-related science and technology." The John von Neumann Lecture is given annually at the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) by a researcher who has contributed to applied mathematics, and the chosen lecturer is also awarded a monetary prize. The crater von Neumann on the Moon is named after him. The John von Neumann Center in Plainsboro Township, New Jersey (40.348695°N 74.592251°W﻿ / 40.348695; -74.592251﻿ (John von Neumann Center)) was named in his honour. The professional society of Hungarian computer scientists, John von Neumann Computer Society, is named after John von Neumann. On February 15, 1956, von Neumann was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. On May 4, 2005 the United States Postal Service issued the American Scientists commemorative postage stamp series, a set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations designed by artist Victor Stabin. The scientists depicted were John von Neumann, Barbara McClintock, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman. The John von Neumann Award of the Rajk László College for Advanced Studies was named in his honour, and has been given every year since 1995 to professors who have made an outstanding contribution to the exact social sciences and through their work have strongly influenced the professional development and thinking of the members of the college.   === Infopark and Neumann János StreetEdit === Infopark is situated in the 11th district of Budapest, near the Buda side of Rákóczi bridge, in the university neighborhood, across the river from the National Theatre and the Palace of Arts. The streets bordering Infopark are Hevesy György Street, Boulevard of Hungarian Scientists, Street of Hungarian Nobel Prize Winners and Neumann János street.   == Selected worksEdit == 1923. On the introduction of transfinite numbers, 346–54. 1925. An axiomatization of set theory, 393–413. 1932. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Beyer, R. T., trans., Princeton Univ. Press. 1996 edition: ISBN 0-691-02893-1. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, with Morgenstern, O., Princeton Univ. Press, online at archive.org. 2007 edition: ISBN 978-0-691-13061-3. 1945. First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC TheFirstDraft.pdf 1963. Collected Works of John von Neumann, Taub, A. H., ed., Pergamon Press. ISBN 0-08-009566-6 1966. Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, Burks, A. W., ed., University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-598-37798-0 von Neumann, John (1998) [1960]. Continuous geometry. Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-05893-1. MR 0120174.  von Neumann, John (1981) [1937]. Halperin, Israel, ed. Continuous geometries with a transition probability. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society 34 (252). ISBN 9780821822524. MR 634656.    == See alsoEdit ==  PhD Students Donald B. Gillies, Ph.D. student Israel Halperin, Ph.D. student   == NotesEdit ==   === FootnotesEdit ===   === CitationsEdit ===   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.   == Further readingEdit == Aspray, William (1990), John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing. Bochner, S. (1958), John von Neumann 1903–1957, biographical memoir of the National Academy of Sciences. Dyson, George (2012), Turing's Cathedral, Pantheon Books, ISBN 978-0-375-42277-5 Halmos, Paul R. (1985), I Want To Be A Mathematician, Springer-Verlag. Israel, Giorgio; Ana Millan Gasca (1995). The World as a Mathematical Game: John von Neumann, Twentieth Century Scientist.  Macrae, Norman (1992), John von Neumann, The Scientific Genius who Pioneered the Modern Computer, Game Theory, Nuclear Deterrence, and Much More, Random House, reprinted by the AMS in 2008. von Neumann Whitman, Marina (2012), The Martian's Daughter—A Memoir, University of Michigan Press. Redei, Miklos (ed.) (2005), John von Neumann: Selected Letters, American Mathematical Society. Slater, Robert (1989). Portraits in Silicon. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. pp. 23–33. ISBN 0-262-69131-0.  Vonneuman, Nicholas A. (1987), John von Neumann as Seen by His Brother ISBN 0-9619681-0-9 1958, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 64(3). 1990, "The Legacy of John von Neumann", Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society Symposia in Pure Mathematics, 50. Popular periodicals Good Housekeeping Magazine, September 1956, "Married to a Man Who Believes the Mind Can Move the World" Video John von Neumann, A Documentary (60 min.), Mathematical Association of America   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John von Neumann", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . von Neumann's contribution to economics — International Social Science Review von Neumann's profile at Google Scholar Oral history interview with Alice R. Burks and Arthur W. Burks, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Alice Burks and Arthur Burks describe ENIAC, EDVAC, and IAS computers, and John von Neumann's contribution to the development of computers. Oral history interview with Eugene P. Wigner, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Oral history interview with Nicholas C. Metropolis, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Von Neumann vs. Dirac — from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Von Neumann's Universe, audio talk by George Dyson John von Neumann's 100th Birthday, article by Stephen Wolfram on von Neumann's 100th birthday. Annotated bibliography for John von Neumann from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues Budapest Tech Polytechnical Institution — John von Neumann Faculty of Informatics John von Neumann speaking at the dedication of the NORD, December 2, 1954 (audio recording) Citation Accompanying Medal of Freedom, The American Presidency Project John von Neumann (1903–1957). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.


Kenneth Jon Barwise (/ˈbɑrwaɪz/; June 29, 1942 – March 5, 2000) was an American mathematician, philosopher and logician who proposed some fundamental revisions to the way that logic is understood and used. Born in Independence, Missouri to Kenneth T. and Evelyn Barwise, he was a precocious child. A pupil of Solomon Feferman at Stanford University, Barwise started his research in infinitary logic. After positions as assistant professor at the Universities of Yale and Wisconsin, during which time his interests turned to natural language, he returned to Stanford in 1983 to direct the Center for the Study of Language and Information. He began teaching at Indiana University in 1990. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1999. Barwise contended that, by being explicit about the context in which a proposition is made, the situation, many problems in the application of logic can be eliminated. He sought ... to understand meaning and inference within a general theory of information, one that takes us outside the realm of sentences and relations between sentences of any language, natural or formal. In particular, he claimed that such an approach resolved the liar paradox. He made use of Peter Aczel's non-well-founded set theory in understanding "vicious circles" of reasoning. Barwise, along with his former colleague at Stanford John Etchemendy, was the author of the popular logic textbook Language, Proof and Logic. Unlike the Handbook of Mathematical Logic which was a survey of the state of the art of Mathematical Logic c. 1975, and of which he was the editor, this work targeted elementary logic. The text is notable for including computer-aided homework problems, some of which provide visual representations of logical problems. During his time at Stanford, he was also the first Director of the Symbolic Systems Program, an interdepartmental degree program focusing on the relationships between cognition, language, logic, and computation. The K. Jon Barwise Award for Distinguished Contributions to the Symbolic Systems Program has been given periodically since 2001.   == Works == Barwise, K. J. (1975) Admissible Sets and Structures. An Approach to Definability Theory ISBN 0-387-07451-1 Barwise, K. J. & Perry, John (1983) Situations and Attitudes. Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 1-57586-193-3 Barwise, K. J. & Etchemendy, J. (1987) The Liar: An Essay in Truth and Circularity ISBN 0-19-505944-1 Barwise, K. J. (1988) The Situation in Logic ISBN 0-937073-32-6 Barwise, K. J. & Moss, L. (1996) Vicious Circles. On the Mathematics of Non-Wellfounded Phenomena ISBN 1-57586-008-2 Barwise, K, J. & Seligman, J. (1997) Information Flow: the Logic of Distributed Systems ISBN 0-521-58386-1 Barwise, K. J. & Etchemendy, J. (2002) Language, Proof and Logic ISBN 1-57586-374-X Barwise, K. J. Editor (1977) Handbook of Mathematical Logic. xi+1165 pages ISBN 0-7204-2285-X   == See also == Barwise prize Barwise compactness theorem   == References ==   == External links == In Memoriam: Kenneth Jon Barwise by Solomon Feferman The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic vol. 6(4) Dec. 2000, pp505–8 (PostScript) K. Jon (Kenneth) Barwise at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Joseph Diaz Gergonne (19 June 1771 at Nancy, France – 4 May 1859 at Montpellier, France) was a French mathematician and logician.   == Life == In 1791, Gergonne enlisted in the French army as a captain. That army was undergoing rapid expansion because the French government feared a foreign invasion intended to undo the French Revolution and restore Louis XVI to the throne of France. He saw action in the major battle of Valmy on 20 September 1792. He then returned to civilian life but soon was called up again and took part in the French invasion of Spain in 1794. In 1795, Gergonne and his regiment were sent to Nîmes. At this point, he made a definitive transition to civilian life by taking up the chair of "transcendental mathematics" at the new École centrale. He came under the influence of Gaspard Monge, the Director of the new École polytechnique in Paris. In 1810, in response to difficulties he encountered in trying to publish his work, Gergonne founded his own mathematics journal, officially named the Annales de mathématiques pures et appliquées but generally referred to as the Annales de Gergonne. The most common subject of articles in his journal was geometry, Gergonne's specialty. Over a period of 22 years, the Annales de Gergonne published about 200 articles by Gergonne himself, and other articles by many distinguished mathematicians, including Poncelet, Servois, Bobillier, Steiner, Plücker, Chasles, Brianchon, Dupin, Lamé, even Galois. Gergonne was appointed to the chair of astronomy at the University of Montpellier in 1816. In 1830, he was appointed Rector of the University of Montpellier, at which time he ceased publishing his journal. He retired in 1844.   == Work == Gergonne was among the first mathematicians to employ the word polar. In a series of papers beginning in 1810, he contributed to elaborating the principle of duality in projective geometry, by noticing that every theorem in the plane connecting points and lines corresponds to another theorem in which points and lines are interchanged, provided that the theorem embodied no metrical notions. Gergonne was an early proponent of the techniques of analytical geometry and in 1816, he devised an elegant coordinate solution to the classical problem of Apollonius: to find a circle which touches three given circles, thus demonstrating the power of the new methods. In 1813, Gergonne wrote the prize-winning essay for the Bordeaux Academy, Methods of synthesis and analysis in mathematics, unpublished to this day and known only via a summary. The essay is very revealing of Gergonne's philosophical ideas. He called for the abandonment of the words analysis and synthesis, claiming they lacked clear meanings. Surprisingly for a geometer, he suggested that algebra is more important than geometry at a time when algebra consisted almost entirely of the elementary algebra of the real field. He predicted that one day quasi-mechanical methods would be used to discover new results. In 1815, Gergonne wrote the first paper on the optimal design of experiments for polynomial regression. According to S. M. Stigler, Gergonne is the pioneer of optimal design as well as response surface methodology. He published his "Essai sur la théorie des définitions" (An essay on the theory of definition) in his Annales in 1818. This essay is generally credited for first recognizing and naming the construct of implicit definition.   == Quote == "It is not possible to feel satisfied at having said the last word about some theory as long as it cannot be explained in a few words to any passer-by encountered in the street."   == Notes ==   == References == Gergonne, J. D. (November 1974) [1815]. "The application of the method of least squares to the interpolation of sequences". Historia Mathematica (Translated by Ralph St. John and S. M. Stigler from the 1815 French ed.) 1 (4): 439–447. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(74)90034-2.  Stigler, Stephen M. (November 1974). "Gergonne's 1815 paper on the design and analysis of polynomial regression experiments". Historia Mathematica 1 (4): 431–439. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(74)90033-0.    == External links == Biography in the MacTutor History of Mathematics archive: Joseph Gergonne.

Józef Maria Bocheński (Czuszów, Congress Poland, Russian Empire, 30 August 1902 – February 8, 1995, Fribourg, Switzerland) was a Polish Dominican, logician and philosopher.   == Life == After taking part in the 1920 campaign against aggression of the Soviet Russia, he took up legal studies in Lwów, then studied economics in Poznań. Bocheński earned a doctorate in philosophy (he studied in Freiburg, 1928–31). He was also an alumnus of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum in Rome where he studied Sacred Theology from 1931 to 1934 earning a doctorate in Sacred Theology. Bocheński was a professor of logic at the Angelicum until 1940. During World War II he served as chaplain to Polish forces during the 1939 invasion of Poland, was taken prisoner of war, escaped the Germans and reached Rome. He joined the Polish Army and served as chaplain first in France, then in England. He fought as a soldier in 1944 in the Italian campaign of the Polish II Corps at Monte Cassino. In 1945 he received the chair in the history of twentieth-century philosophy at the University of Fribourg (of which he was rector in 1964-66); he founded and ran the Institute of Eastern Europe there, and published the journal Studies in Soviet Thought and a book series concerned with the foundations of Marxist philosophy (Sovietica). Bocheński served as consultant to several governments: West Germany (under Konrad Adenauer), South Africa, the United States, Argentina, and Switzerland. Before 1989 none of his works were published officially in Poland.   == The Cracow Circle == Bocheński is perhaps the most famous exponent of the Cracow Circle, which has been called "the most significant expression of Catholic thought between the two World Wars." The Circle was founded by a group of philosophers and theologians that, in distinction from traditional neo-Thomism, embraced modern formal logic and it applied to traditional Thomist philosophy and theology. Inspired by the logical clarity of Aquinas, members of the Circle held both philosophy and theology to contain "propositions with truth-values…a structured body of propositions connected in meaning and subject matter, and linked by logical relations of compatibility and incompatibility, entailment etc." "The Cracow Circle set about investigating and where possible improving this logical structure with the most advanced logical tools available at the time, namely those of modern mathematical logic, then called ‘logistic’."  Other members of the Circle included Jan Salamucha and Jan F. Drewnowski.   == Précis de logique mathématique == In Bocheński's Précis de logique mathématique, he uses this notation, in the style of Łukasiewicz:   == The logical hexagon for the square of opposition == Robert Blanché quoted a passage of Bochenski’s Formale Logik in Structure intellectuelles (1966, 39): “Hindu logic knows of three logical propositions and not the four of western logic. For it Some S are P does not signify Some S at least are P but Some S are P but not all.” This passage shows that Indian tradition explicitly speaks of the existence of partial quantity, the third quantity to be considered along with totality apprehended by A the universal affirmative of the square, and zero quantity apprehended by E the universal negative of the square. To the two universals A and E entertaining a relationship of contrariety, one should add the third contrary constituted by the double negation of the first two. As the subcontrary I contradicts E and the subcontrary O contradicts A, the logical proposition apprehending partial quantity can be represented by the conjunction of I and O : I & O. In Blanché’s logical hexagon this conjunction is symbolized by the letter Y. Many scholars think that the logical square of opposition, representing four values, should be replaced by the logical hexagon, which has the power to express more relations of opposition.   == Works == Elementa logicae graecae (1937), Rome: Anonima Libraria Catolica Italiana. Manuale di filosofia bolscevica (1946) La logique de Théophraste (1947), 1987 reprint, New York, Garland Publishing. Europäische Philosophie der Gegenwart (1947), Bern: A. Francke. Précis de logique mathématique (1948), Bussum, North Holland: F. G. Kroonder. ABC tomizmu (1950), London: Veritas. Der sowjetrussische Dialektische Materialismus (1950) Ancient formal logic (1951) Szkice etyczne: Zebrał i ułożył Adam Bocheński (1953), London: Veritas. Die zeitgenössischen Denkmethoden (1954) Die kommunistische Ideologie und die Würde, Freiheit und Gleichheit der Menschen im Sinne des Grundgesetzes für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland vom 23.5.1949 (1956), [Bonn]: Bundeszentrale für Heimatdienst. Bibliographie der Sowietischen Philosophie (1959), Fribourg: Ost-Europa Institut. Formale Logik (1956) translated into English as A history of formal logic (1961) Der sowjetrussische dialektische Materialismus (Diamat) (1962) (co-edited with Gerhart Niemayer) Handbook on Communism(1962), New York: Praeger. The Logic of Religion (1965) Wege zum philosophischen Denken (1967) Guide to Marxist philosophy: an introductory bibliography (1972), Chicago: Swallow Press. Philosophy, an introduction (1972), New York: Harper & Row. Marxismus-Leninismus. Wissenschaft oder Glaube? (1973), München: Olzog. Was ist Autorität?: Einf. in d. Logik d. Autorität (1974), Fribourg: Herder. Logic and Ontology (1974) Sto zabobonów. Krótki filozoficzny słownik zabobonów ("One Hundred Superstitions. A Short Philosophical Dictionary of Superstitions", 1987). Logika i filosofia (1993) Miedzy logika a wiara (1994) Szkice o nacionalizmie i katolicyzmie polskim (1994), Komorów: Wydawn. Antyk, Marcin Dybowski. Wspomnienia (1994), Kraków: Philed. Lewica, religia, sowietologica (1996), Warsaw: Zakon Ojców Dominikanów. The Road to Understanding. More than Dreamt of in Your Philosophy (1996), ISBN 1-886670-06-4   == See also == Analytical Thomism History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles   == Notes ==   == References ==

Juan Luis Vives (Latin: Ioannes Lodovicus Vives; Catalan: Joan Lluís Vives i March; Dutch: Jan Ludovicus Vives; 6 March 1493 – 6 May 1540) was a Valencian scholar and humanist who spent most of his adult life in the Southern Netherlands. His beliefs on the soul, insight into early medical practice, and perspective on emotions, memory and learning earned him the title of the "father" of modern psychology.  Vives was the first to shed light on some key ideas that established how we perceive psychology today.   == Early life == Vives was born in Valencia to a family which had converted to Christianity. As a child, he saw his father, grandmother and great-grandfather, as well as members of their wider family, executed as Judaizers at the behest of the Spanish Inquisition; his mother was acquitted but died of the plague when he was 15 years old. Shortly thereafter, he left Spain never to return. While still in Spain, he attended the Valencia Academy, where he was taught by Jerome Amiguetus and Daniel Siso. The school was dominated by scholasticism, with the dialectic and disputation playing a central role in the delivery of education.  Even the youngest scholars are accustomed never to keep silence; they are always asserting vigorously whatever comes uppermost to their minds, lest they should seem to be giving up the dispute. Nor does one disputation, or even two a day prove sufficient, as for instance at dinner. They wrangle at breakfast; they wrangle after breakfast; they wrangle before supper and they wrangle after supper. At home they dispute, out of doors they dispute. They wrangle over their food, in the bath, in the sweating room, in the church, in the town, in the country, in public, in private. At all times they are wrangling.   == Academic career == He studied at the University of Paris from 1509 to 1512, and in 1519 was appointed professor of humanities at the University of Leuven. At the insistence of his friend Erasmus, he prepared an elaborate commentary on Augustine's De Civitate Dei, which was published in 1522 with a dedication to Henry VIII of England. Soon afterwards, he was invited to England, and acted as tutor to the Princess Mary, for whose use he wrote De ratione studii puerilis epistolae duae (1523) and, ostensibly, De Institutione Feminae Christianae, on the education of girls (a book he dedicated to the English queen Catherine of Aragon). While in England, he resided at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was made doctor of laws and lectured on philosophy. Having declared himself against the annulment of the marriage of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon, he lost royal favour and was confined to his house for six weeks. On his release, he withdrew to Bruges, where he devoted the rest of his life to the composition of numerous works, chiefly directed against the scholastic philosophy and the preponderant unquestioning authority of Aristotle. The most important of his treatises is the De Causis Corruptarum Artium, which has been ranked with Bacon's Organon. His most important pedagogic work are Introductio ad sapientiam (1524); De disciplinis, which stressed the urgent importance of more rational programs of studying; De prima philosophia; and the Exercitatio linguae latinae, which is a Latin textbook consisting of a series of brilliant dialogues. His philosophical works include De anima et vita (1538), De veritate fidei Christianae; and "De Subventione Pauperum Sive de Humanis Necessitatibus" (On Assistance To The Poor) (1526), the first tract of its kind in the Western world to treat the problem of urban poverty and propose concrete suggestions for a policy of social legislation. Vives detected through philological analysis that the supposed author of the so-called Letter of Aristeas, purporting to describe the Biblical translation of the Septuagint, could not have been a Greek but must have been a Jew who lived after the events he described had transpired. He died in Bruges in 1540, at the age of 47, and was buried in the St. Donatian's Cathedral.   == State assistance for those in poverty == During the Middle Ages, poor relief was usually the responsibility of the Church and individuals through almsgiving. As society became more advanced, these efforts became inadequate. In 1525, the Dutch city of Bruges requested Vives to suggest means to address the issue of relief for the poor. He set out his views in his essay De Subventione Pauperum Sive de Humanis Necessitatibus (On Assistance To The Poor). Vives argued that the state had a responsibility to provide some level of financial relief for the poor, as well as craft training for the unskilled poor. The city of Bruges did not implement Vives's suggestions until 1557, but his proposals influenced social relief legislation enacted in England and the German Empire during the 1530s.   == Contemporary relevance == Vives imagined and described a comprehensive theory of education. He may have directly influenced the essays of Michel Eyquem de Montaigne. He was admired by Thomas More and Erasmus, who wrote that Vives "will overshadow the name of Erasmus." Vives is considered the first scholar to analyze the psyche directly. He did extensive interviews with people, and noted the relation between their exhibition of affect and the particular words they used and the issues they were discussing. While it is unknown if Freud was familiar with Vives's work, historian of psychiatry Gregory Zilboorg considered Vives a godfather of psychoanalysis. (A History of Medical Psychology, 1941) and the father of modern psychology by Foster Watson (1915.) Vives taught monarchs. His idea of a diverse and concrete children's education long preceded Jean Jacques Rousseau, and may have indirectly influenced Rousseau through Montaigne. However influential he may have been in the 16th century, Vives now attracts minimal interest beyond specialized academic fields. The values of Vives inspired two Belgian Schools for higher education (KATHO and Katholieke Hogeschool Brugge-Oostende) to choose the name ‘Vives’ as the name for their cooperation/merger starting from September 2013. Also, the regional link of Vives with the province of West Flanders (Bruges is the capital of this province) played a role.   === Gender Roles and Responsibilities === Some see Vives altering classical rhetoric to express his own sort of pro-virginity half-feminism - which remains of interest to historians of gender. Among 16th century Spain's numerous "treatises for and against women," some see Vives "steer[ing] a middle path" (p. xxiv-xxv), neither misogynist nor sanctifying. Others see him as prescribing quite patriarchal and misogynistic views. He stated that women should not be educators: "For Adam was created first, then Eve, and Adam was not seduced but the woman was seduced and led astray. Therefore, since woman is a weak creature and of uncertain judgment and is easily deceived (as Eve, the first parent of mankind, demonstrated, whom the devil deluded with such a slight pretext), she should not teach, lest when she has convinced herself of some false opinion, she transmit it to her listeners in her role as a teacher and easily drag others into her error, since pupils willingly follow their teacher." His De institutione feminae christianae, published in 1523, was commissioned by Catherine of Aragon, Catholic Queen consort of Henry VIII of England, for her daughter, Mary to instruct her on the proper roles for her sex. Interestingly, it forbids the very role Queen regnant Elizabeth I would later fulfill with the support of England and its navy in defeating the Armada of Catholic Spain, originating from the country of the Catholic Monarchs, Catherine of Aragon's parents and leaders of the Spanish Inquisition that executed Vives' relatives: “An unmarried young woman should rarely appear in public . . . who can have respect for a man who he sees is ruled by a woman?”" The book describes a longer list of attributes for a married woman. She must be loyal, dedicated, and obedient to her spouse; she must dress appropriately, covering her face in public; she must not allow any man into her house without her husband’s permission. While a wife’s obedience and dedication to her spouse determined her honor, a husband’s honor stemmed from his ability to control his wife and ensure she remained virtuous. Vives’s text for husbands, De los deberes del marido, fills less than half the pages of his advice book for women and focuses substantially on selecting and governing a good wife rather than detailing how a husband should behave in his own right.   === Thoughts on the soul === Vives expressed an interest in the soul. He believed that understanding how the soul functions is more valuable than understanding the soul itself. “He was not concerned with what the soul is, but rather what the soul was like”. Norena explains that Vives thought that the soul had certain characteristics. He believed that the best part of the soul is its ability to "…understand, remember, reason, and judge."  Vives touched on the mind in terms of his explanations of the soul—he claims that one cannot simply define what the soul is, but by piecing together parts of it, a better concept of how the soul works can be achieved. He compared the soul to art with an analogy by stating: “How we perceive a painted picture is more telling than declaring what the picture is itself”. Vives rejected the deterministic view of human behavior, and said instead that our soul can "modify our behavior in ethically and socially." He also suggested that the way we feel day to day affects whether our soul is attaining good or evil.   === Insight on medicine === Vives is acknowledged for integrating psychology and medicine. “His ideas were new and they paved the way for other contributions that have greatly impacted our society today in terms of how we view the impact of medicine on humans”. He expressed the importance of animal testing before doing so on to people -–“Although Vives did not perform actual medical procedures, his suggestions were among the first of his time."  Vives had hopes that his ideas would influence the public. “With time, some may argue that a sort of social reform was created largely due to Vives’ ideas on medicine”. Clements described Vives’ contributions as being “original," yet many would classify him as being very underrated in terms of his accomplishments and ideas. Vives also made important early observations on the health of the human body-—he urged that “Personal habits of cleanliness and temperance greatly impacted health”. He claimed that the cleanliness of the body impacts the welfare of the body and the mind. He touched on how to medicate the mentally unstable by saying that mocking, exciting, and irritating those individuals who are mentally ill does not contribute to their treatment. Vives said that “Using the mentally ill as a form of entertainment is one of the most inhumane practices he had ever encountered”. His belief was that the some individuals who are mentally ill should be provided medication, but others just need friendly treatment.   === Emotions and the body === Another psychological contribution from Vives involves his thoughts on emotion. His ideas were largely influenced by the ideologies that came from Galen and Hippocrates in terms of how emotion is related to biles in the body. He agreed with the two with the belief that “different colored biles that humans have reflected different types of emotions”. Further, Vives believed that “Certain emotions color bile inside of human bodies and colored bodies likewise influences emotions”. According to Norena, Vives followed Galen’s recommendations of eating certain types of food for certain types of temperaments. Vives also suggested that almost all of our emotions, even those considered to be negative, are actually beneficial in a lot of ways. He expressed how there is potential to learn and grow from negative emotions as well as positive emotions. His emphasis on animism, or animal spirits, influenced Decartes according to Clements. Vives suggested in his work that the degree in which how strongly a person believes in his or her morals have a great impact on the way they feel about themselves-—“mental strength can influence physical strength”. Emotions, according to Vives, can be divided up into “Hot, cold, moist, dry, and varying combinations of the four”. Personality disturbances with emotions could be fixed when applying the correct temperature on to the body.   === Memory === Vives placed emphasis on memory. He defined memory as “…relating to the past, while perception relates to the present”. “Memory is something that is retained by either externally or internally perceiving it”.  He especially emphasized how humans imagine something internally and connect it with an event in order to create a memory. This, according to Vives, makes information retrieval of memory easier. He touched on memories in which we are unaware of, otherwise known as the unconscious. He said information is the “Most accessible from memory when a certain amount of attention is given." According to Murray, Vives showed understanding of the modern-day conception of how humans process retrieval. Vives observed that the more a memory is connected to a strong emotional experience, the easier it can be remembered. In terms of retaining memory, imagination was thought to play a key role, especially in children.  He also believed in a theory that pointed towards the fact that memory can be improved with practice. He advised that "One should memorize something every day, even a useless quotation." Vives even touched on childhood memory-—he believed that children learn quickly because their mind is less cluttered with worries that adult minds have. Vives also believed that recall of memory is brought about by a concept in which the soul processes the memory. Vives himself had a recall experience as a child where he ate cherries when he had a fever. When he was adult and had cherries again and he "felt as though he was sick just as he was when he was a child." He found this remarkable and determined that memory can exist unconsciously for a very long time. He also believed that “memory declines every day that the mind is not exercised."   === Learning === Vives used the word “intelligence” in a way that can be translated to the word “supervisor” as we know its meaning today: intelligence, according to Vives, involves functions directing attention from different kinds of stimulus. Intelligence is very much a cognitive structure according to Vives. When we learn, the memory of the experience is locked in an order of the actual intelligence. Vives’ perception on intelligence is that it is only important when it is put to use. Having an intelligent gift is only meaningful when the person is actively exercising it. The exercising of intelligence is important in retaining memory, which creates a better learning experience in general. Vives was among the first to suggest that the health of a student, the personality of the teacher, the classroom environment and the types of authors that the students are required to read from are all very important in how the student learns. “Vives placed special stress upon the proper environment of the school as the first ecological ingredient of the child’s sense experience." He compared learning and gaining knowledge to how humans digest food. Feeding the mind with knowledge is the same as feeding the body with food; it is essential to the human being.   == Major works ==  Opuscula varia (1519), collection of small works include Vives' first philosophical works, De initiis, sectis et laudibus philosophiae. Adversus pseudodialecticos (1520) De subventione pauperum. Sive de humanis necessitatibus libri II (1525), dealing with the problem of poverty. De Europae dissidis et Republica (1526). De concordia et discordia in humano genere (1529). De pacificatione (1529). Quam misera esset vita chistianorum sub Turca (1529). De disciplinis libri XX (1531). An encyclopedical work, divided into three parts: De causis corruptarum artium, De tradendis disciplinis and De artibus De conscribendis epistolis (1534), a treatise on letter writing. De anima et vita (1538) De Europeae statu ac tumultibus, a mediation addressing to the Pope to ask peace between the Christian princes. Introductio ad sapientiam (1524), the most important of his pedagogical works. De institutione feminae christianae, was dedicated to Catherine of Aragon.   == See also == Vives Network   == Notes ==   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Vives, Juan Luis". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   Lejay, Paul (1913). "Juan Luis Vives". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.  Clements, R. D. (1967). "Physiological-Psychological Thought in Juan Luis Vives". Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 3: 219–235. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(196707)3:3<219::aid-jhbs2300030302>3.0.co;2-r.  "JUAN LUIS VIVES (1492?-1540), by Ricardo Marín Ibáñez, Prospects: the quarterly review of comparative education (Paris, UNESCO: International Bureau of Education), vol. XXIV, no. 3/4, 1994, p. 743-759. UNESCO: International Bureau of Education, 2000 Murray, D. J., & Ross, H. E. (1982). "Memory and Recall." Canadian Psychology, 23, 22-30. Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org.ezproxy.umw.edu/journals/cap/23/1/22.pdf Norena, C. G. (1970). Juan Luis Vives. The Hague: Nijhoff. Watson, F. (September 1915). The Psychological Review: "The Father of Modern Psychology." Archive.org, Vol. XXII. No. 5. Retrieved from http://archive.org/stream/psychologicalrev22ameruoft#page/332/mode/2up   == Further reading == Carlos G. Noreňa, Jean Louis Vives, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1970. Charles Fantazzi (ed.), A Companion to Juan Luis Vives, Leiden: Brill, 2008 (Brill's Companions to the Christian Tradition, 12).   == External links ==  Media related to Juan Luis Vives at Wikimedia Commons Juan Luis Vives (Joannes Ludovicus Vives) at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Karel Lambert (born 1928) is a philosopher and logician at the University of California, Irvine and the University of Salzburg. He has written extensively on the subject of free logic, a term which he coined.   == Lambert's Law == Lambert's Law is the major principle in any free definite description theory that says: For all x, x = the y (A) if and only if (A(x/y) & for all y (if A then y = x)). Free logic itself is an adjustment of a given standard predicate logic such as to relieve it of existential assumptions, and so make it a free logic. Taking Bertrand Russell's predicate logic in his Principia Mathematica as standard, one replaces universal instantiation, , with universal specification . Thus universal statements, like "All men are mortal," or "Everything is a unicorn," do not presuppose that there are men or that there is anything. These would be symbolized, with the appropriate predicates, as  and , which in Principia Mathematica entail  and , but not in free logic. The truth of these last statements, when used in a free logic, depend on the domain of quantification, which may be the null set.   == Published works == Philosophical Applications of Free Logic, New York: Oxford University Press, 1991, "A Theory of Definite Descriptions", pp. 17-27, details an account of Russell's Theory of Descriptions in free logic. In the process, he demonstrates how a formulation from Hintikka allows for a contradiction by a correlate in logic to Russell's Paradox. He introduces the predicate  Free Logic. Selected Essays, Cambridge University Press, 2003.   == External links == Official Personal Page at Internet Archive   == References == ^ Lambert, Karel (1960). "The Definition of E! in Free Logic". Abstracts: The International Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press).

Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz (12 December 1890 – 12 April 1963) was a Polish philosopher and logician, a prominent figure in the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic. He originated many novel ideas in semantics. Among these was categorial grammar, a highly flexible framework for the analysis of natural language syntax and (indirectly) semantics that remains a major influence on work in formal linguistics. Ajdukiewicz's fields of research were model theory and the philosophy of science. Ajdukiewicz studied at the University of Lwów, and lectured there, as well as in Warsaw and in Poznań. He was Rector of the University of Poznań from 1948 to 1952. He was one of the founders of the journal Studia Logica in its current incarnation, editing it from 1953 to his death. In his early epistemological system, which he called Radical Conventionalism, Ajdukiewicz analyzed any language as a set of expressions or sentences, with inferential rules of meaning that specify the relation of one expression to another, or to external data. There are three kinds of rules: Axiomatic, Deductive, and Empirical. Following the rules, one can map all knowable sentences of a language. However, some languages' vocabularies can produce disconnected sentences, which are only partly mapped by the meaning rules. Therefore, when one uses a language, even scientific one, a conceptual apparatus, an untranslatable set of meanings, is needed too, and with it a choice of the problems to be settled. For this reason the theory is a form of Conventionalism, and it is radical because even simple experiential reports are exposed to these language-wide considerations. Ajdukiewicz discarded this theory as the 1930s progressed.   == Works == 1921 "Z metodologii nauk dedukcyjnych" 1923 "Główne kierunki filozofii" 1928 "Główne zasady metodologii nauk i logiki formalnej" 1931 "O znaczeniu wyrażeń" 1934 "Logiczne podstawy nauczania" 1938 "Propedeutyka filozofii" 1948 "Epistemologia i semantyka" 1949 "Zagadnienia i kierunki filozofii" 1952 "Zarys logiki" 1964 "Zagadnienia empiryzmu a koncepcja znaczenia" 1965 "Logika pragmatyczna" 1960-1965 "Język i poznanie. Wybór pism" 1966- Selected articles in "Logiczna Teoria Nauki" ( Logical Theory of Science) Ed. T.Pawłowski, Printed PWN, Warszawa.   == Bibliography == Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: The Scientific World-Perspective and Other essays 1931-1963, Dordrecht, Reidel, 1977 Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: Problems and Theories of Philosophy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: Pragmatic Logic, Dordrecht, Reidel, 1974.   == See also == History of philosophy in Poland   == External links == Polish Philosophy Page: Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz Lwów–Warsaw school of logic, at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Sections on Categorial Grammar and Radical Conventionalism.

Kazimierz Jerzy Skrzypna-Twardowski (20 October 1866 – 11 February 1938) was a Polish philosopher and logician.   == Life == Twardowski's family belonged to the Ogończyk coat of arms. Twardowski studied philosophy in Vienna with Franz Brentano and Robert Zimmermann. In 1892 he received his doctorate with his dissertation, Idee und Perzeption (Idea and Perception), and in 1894 he presented his habilitation thesis, Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen (On the Doctrine of the Content and Object of Presentations). He originated many novel ideas related to metaphilosophy. He lectured in Vienna in the years 1894–95, then was appointed professor at Lwów (Lemberg in Austrian Galicia, now Lviv in the Ukraine). An outstanding lecturer, he was also a rector of the Lwów University during World War I. There Twardowski established the Lwów-Warsaw School of logic and also became the "father of Polish logic", beginning the tradition of scientific philosophy in Poland. Among his students were the logicians Stanisław Leśniewski, Jan Łukasiewicz and Tadeusz Czeżowski, the historian of philosophy Władysław Tatarkiewicz, the phenomenologist and aesthetician Roman Ingarden, as well as philosophers close to the Vienna Circle such as Tadeusz Kotarbiński and Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz.   == Content and object == In his On the Content and Object of Presentations, Twardowski argues for a distinction between content and object in the frame of the theory of intentionality of his teacher Franz Brentano. According to him the mind is divided in two main areas: acts or mental phenomena, and a physical phenomenon. For example, an act of presentation is aimed at a presentation. This is what he called ‘intentionality’, aboutness. Every act is about something, but also every presentation goes together with an act of presentation. This theory suffers from the problem that it is not clear what the presentation exactly is. Is the presentation something only in the mind, or is it also in the world as object? Twardowski says that sometimes presentation is used for the object in the world and sometimes for the immanent content of a mental phenomena. Twardowski offers a solution for this problem and proposes to make a distinction between the content of a presentation and the object of a presentation. In his book Twardowski offers an analogy to clarify this distinction. He uses the example of a painting. People say of a landscape that it is painted, but also of a painting that it is painted. In the first case the word ‘painting’ is used in a modifying way (a painted landscape is not a landscape at all), while in the latter case the word painting is used in a qualitative or attributive way. Twardowski argues that presentations are similar. The content is the painted painting and the object is the painted landscape. The content resembles the present ‘picture’ in your mind, and the object the landscape.   == Works in German and Polish == Über den Unterschied zwischen der klaren und deutlichen Perzeption und der klaren und deutlichen Idee bei Descartes (1891) (Dissertation) Idee und perzeption. Eine erkenntnis-theoretische Untersuchung aus Descartes (1892) Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen (1894) Wyobrażenie i pojęcie (1898) O tzw. prawdach względnych (1900) Über sogenannte relative Wahrheiten (1902) Über begriffliche Vorstellungen (1903) Das Wesen der Begriffe allegato a Jahresbericht der Wiener philosophischen Gesellschaft (1903) O psychologii, jej przedmiocie, zadaniach, metodzie, stosunku do innych nauk i jej rozwoju (1913) Rozprawy i artykuły filozoficzne (1927) Wybrane pisma filozoficzne (1965) (Collection of the philosophical essays) Wybór pism psychologicznych i pedagogicznych (1992) (Collection of the psychological and pedagogical essays) Dzienniki (1997)   == Translations == On the Content and Object of Presentations. A Psychological Investigation. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff 1977. Translated and with an introduction by Reinhardt Grossmann. On Actions, Products and Other Topics in Philosophy. Edited by Johannes Brandl and Jan Wolenski. Amsterdam: Rodopi 1999. Translated and annotated by Arthur Szylewicz. Sur les objets intentionnels (1893–1901). Paris: Vrin 1993. French translation of Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen and other texts by Edmund Husserl.   == See also == School of Brentano Representationalism Lwów–Warsaw school of logic Polish logic History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles   == Notes ==   == References == Jens Cavallin, "Content and Object: Husserl, Twardowski and Psychologism", Phaenomenologica, 142, Dordrecht, Kluwer, 1997. Sandra Lapointe et al., (eds.), "The Golden Age of Polish philosophy. Kazimierz Twardowski's philosophical legacy". New York: Springer 2009.   == External links == Kazimierz Twardowski entry by Arianna Betti in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Kazimierz Twardowski at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Polish Philosophy Page: Kazimierz Twardowski Kazimierz Twardowski on the Content and Object of Presentations Annotated bibliography of and about Twardowski Archives of the Lvov-Varsovie School – Archiwum Kazimierza Twardowskiego Digital library of the works of Twardowski Lvov-Warsaw School entry by Jan Wolenski in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Kit Fine (born 26 March 1946) is a Silver Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics at New York University. He previously taught for several years at the University of Michigan and at UCLA. The author of several books and dozens of articles in international academic journals, he has made notable contributions to the fields of philosophical logic, metaphysics, and the philosophy of language and also has written on ancient philosophy, in particular on Aristotle's account of logic and modality. He is also a Distinguished Research Professor in the Department of Philosophy, University of Birmingham, UK.   == Life and writings == After graduating from the University of Oxford (B.A., 1967) Fine received his Ph.D. from the University of Warwick in 1969, under the supervision of A. N. Prior. He was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy in 2005 and a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences in 2006. He has held fellowships from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation and the American Council of Learned Societies and is a former editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic. In addition to his primary areas of research, he has written papers in ancient philosophy, linguistics, computer science, and economic theory. Fine has described his general approach to philosophy as follows: "I’m firmly of the opinion that real progress in philosophy can only come from taking common sense seriously. A departure from common sense is usually an indication that a mistake has been made." Fine has two daughters from his former mariage to Anne Fine. Anne Fine is an author of children's books; Cordelia Fine teaches at a university in Australia; Ione Fine is a professor at the University of Washington.   == Bibliography == Semantic Relationism. Blackwell, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4051-0844-7 Modality and Tense: Philosophical Papers. Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-19-927871-7 The Limits of Abstraction. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-924618-1 Reasoning With Arbitrary Objects. Blackwell, 1986. ISBN 0-631-13844-7 Worlds, Times, and Selves (with A. N. Prior). University of Massachusetts Press, 1977. ISBN 0-87023-227-4   == Notes == ^ "Professor Kit Fine - Department of Philosophy - University of Birmingham". Birmingham.ac.uk. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "British Academy | Elections to the Fellowship 2005 - British Academy". Britac.ac.uk. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "Leiter Reports: A Philosophy Blog: New Philosophy Fellows of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences (Leiter)". Leiterreports.typepad.com. 2006-04-22. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "Kit Fine, Faculty of Philosophy | NYU". Philosophy.fas.nyu.edu. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "Metaphysical Kit » 3:AM Magazine". 3ammagazine.com. 2012-03-23. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ Salter, Jessica (14 September 2010). "World of Anne Fine, author". The Daily Telegraph (London).  ^ "FineLab homepage". Faculty.washington.edu. Retrieved 2015-07-15.    == References == Silver Dialogues: Kit Fine Kit Fine's CV   == External links == Fine's web page at New York University. Fine's web page at University of Birmingham. Annotated bibliography of Fine's writings (1970-1995). Annotated bibliography of Fine's writings (1996-2012). Interview with 3AM Magazine

Kurt Friedrich Gödel (/ˈkɜrt ɡɜrdəl/; German: [ˈkʊʁt ˈɡøːdəl]; April 28, 1906 – January 14, 1978) was an Austrian, and later American, logician, mathematician, and philosopher. Considered with Aristotle and Gottlob Frege to be one of the most significant logicians in history, Gödel made an immense impact upon scientific and philosophical thinking in the 20th century, a time when others such as Bertrand Russell, A. N. Whitehead, and David Hilbert were pioneering the use of logic and set theory to understand the foundations of mathematics. Gödel published his two incompleteness theorems in 1931 when he was 25 years old, one year after finishing his doctorate at the University of Vienna. The first incompleteness theorem states that for any self-consistent recursive axiomatic system powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natural numbers (for example Peano arithmetic), there are true propositions about the naturals that cannot be proved from the axioms. To prove this theorem, Gödel developed a technique now known as Gödel numbering, which codes formal expressions as natural numbers. He also showed that neither the axiom of choice nor the continuum hypothesis can be disproved from the accepted axioms of set theory, assuming these axioms are consistent. The former result opened the door for mathematicians to assume the axiom of choice in their proofs. He also made important contributions to proof theory by clarifying the connections between classical logic, intuitionistic logic, and modal logic.   == Early life and educationEdit ==   === ChildhoodEdit === Gödel was born April 28, 1906, in Brünn, Austria-Hungary (now Brno, Czech Republic) into the ethnic German family of Rudolf Gödel, the manager of a textile factory, and Marianne Gödel (born Handschuh). At the time of his birth the city had a German-speaking majority which included his parents. The marriage of his parents was confessionally mixed, his father being a Catholic and his mother a Protestant. The children were raised in the Protestant confession. The ancestors of Kurt Gödel were often active in Brünn's cultural life. For example, his grandfather Joseph Gödel was a famous singer of that time and for some years a member of the "Brünner Männergesangverein". Gödel automatically became a Czechoslovak citizen at age 12 when the Austro-Hungarian Empire broke up at the end of World War I. According to his classmate Klepetař, like many residents of the predominantly German Sudetenländer, "Gödel considered himself always Austrian and an exile in Czechoslovakia". He chose to become an Austrian citizen at age 23. When Germany annexed Austria in 1938, Gödel automatically became a German citizen at age 32. After World War II, at the age of 42, he became an American citizen. In his family, young Kurt was known as Herr Warum ("Mr. Why") because of his insatiable curiosity. According to his brother Rudolf, at the age of six or seven Kurt suffered from rheumatic fever; he completely recovered, but for the rest of his life he remained convinced that his heart had suffered permanent damage. Gödel attended the Evangelische Volksschule, a Lutheran school in Brünn from 1912 to 1916, and was enrolled in the Deutsches Staats-Realgymnasium from 1916 to 1924, excelling with honors in all his subjects, particularly in mathematics, languages and religion. Although Kurt had first excelled in languages, he later became more interested in history and mathematics. His interest in mathematics increased when in 1920 his older brother Rudolf (born 1902) left for Vienna to go to medical school at the University of Vienna. During his teens, Kurt studied Gabelsberger shorthand, Goethe's Theory of Colours and criticisms of Isaac Newton, and the writings of Immanuel Kant.   === Studying in ViennaEdit === At the age of 18, Gödel joined his brother in Vienna and entered the University of Vienna. By that time, he had already mastered university-level mathematics. Although initially intending to study theoretical physics, he also attended courses on mathematics and philosophy. During this time, he adopted ideas of mathematical realism. He read Kant's Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft, and participated in the Vienna Circle with Moritz Schlick, Hans Hahn, and Rudolf Carnap. Gödel then studied number theory, but when he took part in a seminar run by Moritz Schlick which studied Bertrand Russell's book Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, he became interested in mathematical logic. According to Gödel, mathematical logic was "a science prior to all others, which contains the ideas and principles underlying all sciences." Attending a lecture by David Hilbert in Bologna on completeness and consistency of mathematical systems may have set Gödel's life course. In 1928, Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann published Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik (Principles of Mathematical Logic), an introduction to first-order logic in which the problem of completeness was posed: Are the axioms of a formal system sufficient to derive every statement that is true in all models of the system? This became the topic that Gödel chose for his doctoral work. In 1929, at the age of 23, he completed his doctoral dissertation under Hans Hahn's supervision. In it, he established the completeness of the first-order predicate calculus (Gödel's completeness theorem). He was awarded his doctorate in 1930. His thesis, along with some additional work, was published by the Vienna Academy of Science.   == CareerEdit ==   === The Incompleteness TheoremEdit === In 1931 and while still in Vienna, Gödel published his incompleteness theorems in Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der "Principia Mathematica" und verwandter Systeme (called in English "On Formally Undecidable Propositions of "Principia Mathematica" and Related Systems"). In that article, he proved for any computable axiomatic system that is powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natural numbers (e.g. the Peano axioms or Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice), that: If the system is consistent, it cannot be complete. The consistency of the axioms cannot be proven within the system. These theorems ended a half-century of attempts, beginning with the work of Frege and culminating in Principia Mathematica and Hilbert's formalism, to find a set of axioms sufficient for all mathematics. In hindsight, the basic idea at the heart of the incompleteness theorem is rather simple. Gödel essentially constructed a formula that claims that it is unprovable in a given formal system. If it were provable, it would be false, which contradicts the idea that in a consistent system, provable statements are always true. Thus there will always be at least one true but unprovable statement. That is, for any computably enumerable set of axioms for arithmetic (that is, a set that can in principle be printed out by an idealized computer with unlimited resources), there is a formula that is true of arithmetic, but which is not provable in that system. To make this precise, however, Gödel needed to produce a method to encode (as natural numbers) statements, proofs, and the concept of provability; he did this using a process known as Gödel numbering. In his two-page paper Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkül (1932) Gödel refuted the finite-valuedness of intuitionistic logic. In the proof he implicitly used what has later become known as Gödel–Dummett intermediate logic (or Gödel fuzzy logic).   === The mid-1930s: further work and visits to the USEdit === Gödel earned his habilitation at Vienna in 1932, and in 1933 he became a Privatdozent (unpaid lecturer) there. In 1933 Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany, and over the following years the Nazis rose in influence in Austria, and among Vienna's mathematicians. In June 1936, Moritz Schlick, whose seminar had aroused Gödel's interest in logic, was assassinated by Johann Nelböck, a former student of Moritz Schlick. This triggered "a severe nervous crisis" in Gödel. He developed paranoid symptoms, including a fear of being poisoned, and spent several months in a sanitarium for nervous diseases. In 1933, Gödel first traveled to the U.S., where he met Albert Einstein, who became a good friend. He delivered an address to the annual meeting of the American Mathematical Society. During this year, Gödel also developed the ideas of computability and recursive functions to the point where he was able to present a lecture on general recursive functions and the concept of truth. This work was developed in number theory, using Gödel numbering. In 1934 Gödel gave a series of lectures at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) in Princeton, New Jersey, entitled On undecidable propositions of formal mathematical systems. Stephen Kleene, who had just completed his PhD at Princeton, took notes of these lectures that have been subsequently published. Gödel visited the IAS again in the autumn of 1935. The traveling and the hard work had exhausted him, and the next year he took a break to recover from a depressive episode. He returned to teaching in 1937. During this time, he worked on the proof of consistency of the axiom of choice and of the continuum hypothesis; he went on to show that these hypotheses cannot be disproved from the common system of axioms of set theory. He married Adele Nimbursky (née Porkert, 1899–1981), whom he had known for over 10 years, on September 20, 1938. Their relationship had been opposed by his parents on the grounds that she was a divorced dancer, six years older than he was. Subsequently, he left for another visit to the USA, spending the autumn of 1938 at the IAS and the spring of 1939 at the University of Notre Dame.   === Relocation to Princeton, Einstein and U.S. citizenshipEdit === After the Anschluss in 1938, Austria had become a part of Nazi Germany. Germany abolished the title Privatdozent, so Gödel had to apply for a different position under the new order. His former association with Jewish members of the Vienna Circle, especially with Hahn, weighed against him. The University of Vienna turned his application down. His predicament intensified when the German army found him fit for conscription. World War II started in September 1939. Before the year was up, Gödel and his wife left Vienna for Princeton. To avoid the difficulty of an Atlantic crossing, the Gödels took the trans-Siberian railway to the Pacific, sailed from Japan to San Francisco (which they reached on March 4, 1940), then crossed the U.S. by train to Princeton, where Gödel accepted a position at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS). Gödel very quickly resumed his mathematical work. In 1940, he published his work Consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum-hypothesis with the axioms of set theory, which is a classic of modern mathematics. In that work he introduced the constructible universe, a model of set theory in which the only sets that exist are those that can be constructed from simpler sets. Gödel showed that both the axiom of choice (AC) and the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) are true in the constructible universe, and therefore must be consistent with the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory (ZF). This result has had considerable consequences for working mathematicians, as it means that they can assume the axiom of choice when proving the Hahn-Banach theorem. Paul Cohen later constructed a model of ZF in which AC and GCH are false; together these proofs mean that AC and GCH are independent of the ZF axioms for set theory. Albert Einstein was also living at Princeton during this time. Gödel and Einstein developed a strong friendship, and were known to take long walks together to and from the Institute for Advanced Study. The nature of their conversations was a mystery to the other Institute members. Economist Oskar Morgenstern recounts that toward the end of his life Einstein confided that his "own work no longer meant much, that he came to the Institute merely ... to have the privilege of walking home with Gödel". Gödel and his wife Adele spent the summer of 1942 in Blue Hill, Maine, at the Blue Hill Inn at the top of the bay. Gödel was not merely vacationing but had a very productive summer of work. Using Heft 15 [volume 15] of Gödel's still-unpublished Arbeitshefte [working notebooks], John W. Dawson, Jr. conjectures that Gödel discovered a proof for the independence of the axiom of choice from finite type theory, a weakened form of set theory, while in Blue Hill in 1942. Gödel's close friend Hao Wang supports this conjecture, noting that Gödel's Blue Hill notebooks contain his most extensive treatment of the problem. On December 5, 1947, Einstein and Morgenstern accompanied Gödel to his U.S. citizenship exam, where they acted as witnesses. Gödel had confided in them that he had discovered an inconsistency in the U.S. Constitution that could allow the U.S. to become a dictatorship. Einstein and Morgenstern were concerned that their friend's unpredictable behavior might jeopardize his application. Fortunately, the judge turned out to be Phillip Forman, who knew Einstein and had administered the oath at Einstein's own citizenship hearing. Everything went smoothly until Forman happened to ask Gödel if he thought a dictatorship like the Nazi regime could happen in the U.S. Gödel then started to explain his discovery to Forman. Forman understood what was going on, cut Gödel off, and moved the hearing on to other questions and a routine conclusion. Gödel became a permanent member of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton in 1946. Around this time he stopped publishing, though he continued to work. He became a full professor at the Institute in 1953 and an emeritus professor in 1976. During his many years at the Institute, Gödel's interests turned to philosophy and physics. In 1949, he demonstrated the existence of solutions involving closed time-like curves, to Albert Einstein's field equations in general relativity. He is said to have given this elaboration to Einstein as a present for his 70th birthday. His "rotating universes" would allow time travel to the past and caused Einstein to have doubts about his own theory. His solutions are known as the Gödel metric (an exact solution of the Einstein field equation). He studied and admired the works of Gottfried Leibniz, but came to believe that a hostile conspiracy had caused some of Leibniz's works to be suppressed. To a lesser extent he studied Immanuel Kant and Edmund Husserl. In the early 1970s, Gödel circulated among his friends an elaboration of Leibniz's version of Anselm of Canterbury's ontological proof of God's existence. This is now known as Gödel's ontological proof.   == Awards and honoursEdit == Gödel was awarded (with Julian Schwinger) the first Albert Einstein Award in 1951, and was also awarded the National Medal of Science, in 1974. Gödel was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1968.   == Later life and deathEdit == Later in his life, Gödel suffered periods of mental instability and illness. He had an obsessive fear of being poisoned; he would eat only food that his wife, Adele, prepared for him. Late in 1977, she was hospitalized for six months and could no longer prepare her husband's food. In her absence, he refused to eat, eventually starving to death. He weighed 65 pounds (approximately 30 kg) when he died. His death certificate reported that he died of "malnutrition and inanition caused by personality disturbance" in Princeton Hospital on January 14, 1978. Adele's death followed in 1981.   == Personal lifeEdit ==   === Religious viewsEdit === Gödel was a convinced theist, in the Christian tradition. He held the notion that God was personal, which differed from the religious views of his friend Albert Einstein. He believed firmly in an afterlife, stating: "Of course this supposes that there are many relationships which today's science and received wisdom haven't any inkling of. But I am convinced of this [the afterlife], independently of any theology." It is "possible today to perceive, by pure reasoning" that it "is entirely consistent with known facts." "If the world is rationally constructed and has meaning, then there must be such a thing [as an afterlife]." In an unmailed answer to a questionnaire, Gödel described his religion as "baptized Lutheran (but not member of any religious congregation). My belief is theistic, not pantheistic, following Leibniz rather than Spinoza." Describing religion(s) in general, Gödel said: "Religions are, for the most part, bad—but religion is not". According to his wife Adele, "Gödel, although he did not go to church, was religious and read the Bible in bed every Sunday morning", while of Islam, he said, "I like Islam: it is a consistent [or consequential] idea of religion and open-minded".   == LegacyEdit == The Kurt Gödel Society, founded in 1987, was named in his honor. It is an international organization for the promotion of research in the areas of logic, philosophy, and the history of mathematics. The University of Vienna hosts the Kurt Gödel Research Center for Mathematical Logic. The Association for Symbolic Logic has invited an annual Kurt Gödel lecturer each year since 1990. Five volumes of Gödel's collected works have been published. The first two include Gödel's publications; the third includes unpublished manuscripts from Gödel's Nachlass, and the final two include correspondence. A biography of Gödel was published by John Dawson in 2005. Gödel was also one of four mathematicians examined in the 2008 BBC documentary entitled Dangerous Knowledge by David Malone. Douglas Hofstadter wrote a popular book in 1979 called Gödel, Escher, Bach to celebrate the work and ideas of Gödel, along with those of artist M. C. Escher and composer Johann Sebastian Bach. The book partly explores the ramifications of the fact that Gödel's incompleteness theorem can be applied to any Turing-complete computational system, which may include the human brain. Gödel is the main character of Daniel Kehlmann's play Ghosts in Princeton (2011).   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Important publicationsEdit === In German: 1930, "Die Vollständigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalküls." Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 37: 349–60. 1931, "Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme, I." Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38: 173–98. 1932, "Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkül", Anzeiger Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 69: 65–66. In English: 1940. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory. Princeton University Press. 1947. "What is Cantor's continuum problem?" The American Mathematical Monthly 54: 515–25. Revised version in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam, eds., 1984 (1964). Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Cambridge Univ. Press: 470–85. 1950, "Rotating Universes in General Relativity Theory." Proceedings of the international Congress of Mathematicians in Cambridge, 1: 175–81 In English translation: Kurt Godel, 1992. On Formally Undecidable Propositions Of Principia Mathematica And Related Systems, tr. B. Meltzer, with a comprehensive introduction by Richard Braithwaite. Dover reprint of the 1962 Basic Books edition. Kurt Godel, 2000. On Formally Undecidable Propositions Of Principia Mathematica And Related Systems, tr. Martin Hirzel Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. 1930. "The completeness of the axioms of the functional calculus of logic," 582–91. 1930. "Some metamathematical results on completeness and consistency," 595–96. Abstract to (1931). 1931. "On formally undecidable propositions of Principia Mathematica and related systems," 596–616. 1931a. "On completeness and consistency," 616–17.  "My philosophical viewpoint", c. 1960, unpublished. "The modern development of the foundations of mathematics in the light of philosophy", 1961, unpublished. Collected Works: Oxford University Press: New York. Editor-in-chief: Solomon Feferman. Volume I: Publications 1929–1936 ISBN 978-0-19-503964-1 / Paperback:ISBN 978-0-19-514720-9, Volume II: Publications 1938–1974 ISBN 978-0-19-503972-6 / Paperback:ISBN 978-0-19-514721-6, Volume III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures ISBN 978-0-19-507255-6 / Paperback:ISBN 978-0-19-514722-3, Volume IV: Correspondence, A–G ISBN 978-0-19-850073-5, Volume V: Correspondence, H–Z ISBN 978-0-19-850075-9.   == See alsoEdit ==  Gödel machine Gödel Prize Gödel's speed-up theorem List of Austrian scientists Original proof of Gödel's completeness theorem Slingshot argument   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Dawson, John W., 1997. Logical dilemmas: The life and work of Kurt Gödel. Wellesley MA: A K Peters. 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Brünn. (September 19, 2007). In Wikisource, The Free Library. Retrieved 10 pm EST March 13, 2008. Rebecca Goldstein, 2005. Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel. W. W. Norton & Company, New York. ISBN 0-393-32760-4 pbk.   == Further readingEdit == John L. Casti and Werner DePauli, 2000. Gödel: A Life of Logic, Basic Books (Perseus Books Group), Cambridge, MA. ISBN 0-7382-0518-4. John W. Dawson, Jr. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel. AK Peters, Ltd., 1996. John W. Dawson, Jr, 1999. "Gödel and the Limits of Logic", Scientific American, vol. 280 num. 6, pp. 76–81 Torkel Franzén, 2005. Gödel's Theorem: An Incomplete Guide to Its Use and Abuse. Wellesley, MA: A K Peters. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton Univ. Press. Jaakko Hintikka, 2000. On Gödel. Wadsworth. Douglas Hofstadter, 1980. Gödel, Escher, Bach. Vintage. Stephen Kleene, 1967. Mathematical Logic. Dover paperback reprint ca. 2001. Stephen Kleene, 1980. Introduction to Metamathematics. North Holland ISBN 0-7204-2103-9 (Ishi Press paperback. 2009. ISBN 978-0-923891-57-2) J.R. Lucas, 1970. The Freedom of the Will. Clarendon Press, Oxford. Ernest Nagel and Newman, James R., 1958. Gödel's Proof. New York Univ. Press. Procházka, Jiří, 2006, 2006, 2008, 2008, 2010. Kurt Gödel: 1906–1978: Genealogie. ITEM, Brno. Volume I. Brno 2006, ISBN 80-902297-9-4. In Ger., Engl. Volume II. Brno 2006, ISBN 80-903476-0-6. In Germ., Engl. Volume III. Brno 2008, ISBN 80-903476-4-9. In Germ., Engl. Volume IV. Brno, Princeton 2008, ISBN 978-80-903476-5-6. In Germ., Engl. Volume V,Brno,Princeton 2010, ISBN 80-903476-9-X. In Germ., Engl. Procházka, Jiří, 2012. "Kurt Gödel: 1906–1978: Historie". ITEM,Brno, Wien, Princeton. Volume I. ISBN 978-80-903476-2-5. In Ger., Engl. Ed Regis, 1987. Who Got Einstein's Office? Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Raymond Smullyan, 1992. Godel's Incompleteness Theorems. Oxford University Press. Olga Taussky-Todd, 1983. Remembrances of Kurt Gödel. Engineering & Science, Winter 1988. Hao Wang, 1987. Reflections on Kurt Gödel. MIT Press. Hao Wang, 1996. A Logical Journey: From Godel to Philosophy. MIT Press. Yourgrau, Palle, 1999. Gödel Meets Einstein: Time Travel in the Gödel Universe. Chicago: Open Court. Yourgrau, Palle, 2004. A World Without Time: The Forgotten Legacy of Gödel and Einstein. Basic Books. Book review by John Stachel in the Notices of the American Mathematical Society (54 (7), pp. 861–868):   == External linksEdit == Kurt Gödel at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Weisstein, Eric W., Gödel, Kurt (1906–1978) from ScienceWorld. Kennedy, Juliette. "Kurt Gödel." In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Time Bandits: an article about the relationship between Gödel and Einstein by Jim Holt "Gödel and the limits of logic" by John W Dawson Jr. (June 2006) Notices of the AMS, April 2006, Volume 53, Number 4 Kurt Gödel Centenary Issue Paul Davies and Freeman Dyson discuss Kurt Godel "Gödel and the Nature of Mathematical Truth" Edge: A Talk with Rebecca Goldstein on Kurt Gödel. It's Not All In The Numbers: Gregory Chaitin Explains Gödel's Mathematical Complexities. Gödel photo g. Kurt Gödel at Find a Grave National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Kurt Gödel", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Kurt Schütte (14 October 1909, Salzwedel – 18 August 1998, Munich) was a German mathematician who worked on proof theory and ordinal analysis. The Feferman–Schütte ordinal, which he showed to be the precise ordinal bound for predicativity, is named after him.   == PublicationsEdit == Schütte, Kurt (1977), Proof theory, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 225, Berlin-New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. xii+299, ISBN 3-540-07911-4, MR 0505313 Beweistheorie, Springer, Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften, 1960; new edition trans. into English as Proof Theory, Springer-Verlag 1977  Vollständige Systeme modaler und intuitionistischer Logik, Springer 1968 with Wilfried Buchholz: Proof Theory of Impredicative Subsystems of Analysis, Bibliopolis, Naples 1988 with Helmut Schwichtenberg: Mathematische Logik, in Fischer, Hirzebruch et al. (eds.) Ein Jahrhundert Mathematik 1890-1990, Vieweg 1990   == ReferencesEdit ==  Pohlers, Wolfram (2000), "In Memoriam: Kurt Schütte, 1909-1998", The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 6 (1): 101–102  Wilfried Buchholz (2007), "Schütte, Kurt", Neue Deutsche Biographie (NDB) (in German) 23, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 653–654 ; (full text online)   == External linksEdit == Kurt Schütte at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

L. T. F. Gamut was a collective pseudonym for the Dutch logicians Johan van Benthem, Jeroen Groenendijk, Dick de Jongh, Martin Stokhof and Henk Verkuyl. Gamut stands for the Dutch universities of Groningen (G), Amsterdam (am), and Utrecht (ut), then the affiliations of the authors. The initials L. T. F. stand for the discussed topics, respectively, Logic (Dutch: Logica), Language (Dutch: Taal) and Philosophy (Dutch: Filosofie).   == References ==   == Publications == Logica, taal en betekenis I: inleiding in de logica, Het Spectrum, 1982. (Dutch) Logica, taal en betekenis II: intensionele logica en logische grammatica, Het Spectrum, 1982. (Dutch) Logic, Language and Meaning, Volume I: Introduction to Logic, University of Chicago Press, 1991. Translation and revision of Logica, taal en betekenis I. Logic, Language and Meaning, Volume II: Intensional Logic and Logical Grammar, University of Chicago Press, 1991. Translation and revision of Logica, taal en betekenis II.

Lennart Åqvist (born 1932 in Sweden) is a Swedish logician. He was a founding member of the editorial board of the Journal of Philosophical Logic. Åqvist received his PhD from Uppsala University in 1960 and has subsequently worked at Uppsala as Docent of Practical Philosophy. He is currently a Reader in Practical Philosophy in the College of Law at Uppsala.   == Published works == Some Logico-Semantical Themes in Karl Olivecrona's Philosophy of Law: A Non-Exegetical Approach. (2008) Theoria 74 (4):271-294. An Interpretation of Probability in the Law of Evidence Based on Pro-Et-Contra Argumentation. (2007) Artificial Intelligence and Law 15 (4). Some Remarks on Performatives in the Law. (2003) Artificial Intelligence and Law 11 (2-3). Old Foundations for the Logic of Agency and Action. (2002) Studia Logica 72 (3). The Logic of Historical Necessity as Founded on Two-Dimensional Modal Tense Logic. (1999) Journal of Philosophical Logic 28 (4). Discrete Tense Logic with Infinitary Inference Rules and Systematic Frame Constants: A Hilbert-Style Axiomatization. (1996) Journal of Philosophical Logic 25 (1). On the Logic of Causally Necessary and Sufficient Conditions: Towards a Theory of Motive-Explanations of Human Actions. (1989) Erkenntnis 31 (1). Some Results on Dyadic Deontic Logic and the Logic of Preference. (1986) Synthese 66 (1). On the Logical Syntax or Linguistic Deep Structure of Certain Crime Descriptions: Prolegomena to the Doctrine of Criminal Intent. (1985) Synthese 65 A Conjectured Axiomatization of Two-Dimensional Reichenbachian Tense Logic. (1979). Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1). Modal Logic with Subjunctive Conditionals and Dispositional Predicates. (1973) Journal of Philosophical Logic 2 (1). Improved Formulations of Act-Utilitarianism. (1969) Noûs 3 (3):299-323. Chisholm-Sosa Logics of Intrinsic Betterness and Value. (1968) Noûs 2 (3):253-270. Good Samaritans, Contrary-to-Duty Imperatives, and Epistemic Obligations. (1967) Noûs 1 (4):361-379. Semantic and Pragmatic Characterizability of Linguistic Usage. (1967) Synthese 17 (1). Results Concerning Some Modal Systems That Contain S. (1964) Journal of Symbolic Logic 29 (2). A Solution to Moore's Paradox. (1964) Philosophical Studies 15 (1-2). Interpretations of Deontic Logic. (1964) Mind 73 (290):246-253. Results Concerning Some Modal Systems That Contain S. (1964) Journal of Symbolic Logic 29 (2):79-87. A Note on Commitment. (1963) Philosophical Studies 14 (1-2). Semantic Concepts of Expression. (1962) Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 23 (1):89-100.   == References ==  Tom Pauli (Editor), Philosophical essays dedicated to Lennart Åqvist on his fiftieth birthday. Philosophical Society and Dept. of Philosophy, University of Uppsala, 1982

Leo Anthony Harrington (born 1946) is a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley who works in recursion theory, model theory, and set theory. Harrington and Jeff Paris proved the Paris–Harrington theorem. Harrington showed that if the Axiom of Determinacy holds for all analytic sets then x# exists for all reals x. Harrington and Saharon Shelah showed that the first order theory of the partially ordered set of recursively enumerable Turing degrees is undecidable.   == References ==   == External links == Home page. Leo Harrington at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Leon Chwistek (Kraków, Austria-Hungary, 13 June 1884 – 20 August 1944, Barvikha near Moscow, Russia) was a Polish avant-garde painter, theoretician of modern art, literary critic, logician, philosopher and mathematician.   == Logic and philosophy == Starting in 1929 Chwistek was a Professor of Logic at the University of Lwów in a position for which Alfred Tarski had also applied. His interests in the 1930s were in a general system of philosophy of science, which was published in a book translated in English 1948 as The Limits of Science. In the 1920s-30s, many European philosophers attempted to reform traditional philosophy by means of mathematical logic. Leon Chwistek did not believe that such reform could succeed. He thought that reality could not be described in one homogeneous system, based on the principles of formal logic, because there was not one reality but many. Chwistek demolishes the axiomatic method by demonstrating that the extant axiomatic systems are inconsistent.   == Artist == Chwistek developed his theory of the multiplicity of realities first with regard to the arts. He distinguished four basic types of realities, then matched them with four basic types of painting. The four types of realities were: 1. popular reality (common-sense realism) 2. physical reality (constructed by physics) 3. phenomenal reality (sensory impressions) 4. visionary/intuitive reality (dreams, hallucinations, subconscious states). The types of painting corresponding to the above were: 1. Primitivism 2. Realism 3. Impressionism 4. Futurism Chwistek never intended his views to constitute a new metaphysical theory. He was a defender of "common sense" against metaphysics and irrational feeling. His theory of plural reality was merely an attempt to specify the various ways in which the term, “real,” is used. Chwistek's fellow-artist and closest friend, Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz, harshly criticized his philosophical views. Witkiewicz’s own philosophy was based on a monadic character to the individual's existence, embracing a multiplicity of existences, with the world being made up of a multiplicity of Particular Existences.   == Works == The limits of science. Outline of logic and of the methodology of the exact sciences. Translated from the Polish by Helen Charlotte Brodie and Arthur P. Coleman; introduction and appendix by Helen Charlotte Brodie. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1948   == See also == History of philosophy in Poland   == References ==   == External links == Polish Philosophy Page: Leon Chwistek at the Wayback Machine (archived October 30, 2007) Profile of Leon Chwistek at Culture.pl

Leon Albert Henkin (19 April 1921, Brooklyn – 1 November 2006, Oakland, California) was a logician at the University of California, Berkeley. He was principally known for the "Henkin's completeness proof": his version of the proof of the semantic completeness of standard systems of first-order logic.   == The completeness proof == Henkin's result was not novel; it had first been proved by Kurt Gödel in his doctoral dissertation, which was completed in 1929. (See Gödel's completeness theorem. Gödel published a version of the proof in 1930.) Henkin's 1949 proof is much easier to survey than Gödel's and has thus become the standard choice of completeness proof for presentation in introductory classes and texts. The proof is non-constructive, i.e. it is a pure existence proof. While it guarantees that if a sentence α follows (semantically) from a set of sentences Σ, then there is a proof of α from Σ, it gives no indication of the nature of that proof. Henkin originally proved the completeness of Church's higher-order logic, and then observed that the same methods of proof could be applied to first-order logic. Henkin's proof for higher-order logic uses a variant of the standard semantics. This variant uses general models (models in general or Henkin semantics; models in Henkin semantics are not to be confused with Henkin models, which are models in classical first-order logic): the higher types need not be interpreted by the full space of functions; a subset of the function space may be used instead.   == Early life == He was born in Brooklyn, into a Russian Jewish immigrant family. His father expressed his high expectations for him by giving him the middle name "Albert"; at the time, the New York Times ran a series of articles on Albert Einstein's theory of relativity. However, Henkin did not use his middle name in his mathematical publications. His first degree was in mathematics and philosophy from Columbia College, in 1941. He then worked in the Signal Corps Radar Laboratory, Belmar, New Jersey. As participant in the Manhattan project, he worked on isotope diffusion, in New York, and Oak Ridge, Tennessee.   == Academic career == He was a doctoral student of Alonzo Church at Princeton University, receiving his Ph.D. in 1947. He became Professor of Mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, where he had a position from 1953. He received the 1964 Chauvenet Prize for exposition. He was a collaborator of Alfred Tarski, and an ally in promoting logic. Henkin was also a social activist who since the 1960s worked to increase higher education opportunities for women and minorities. In 1964 he spearheaded the formation of the Special Scholarships Committee at UC Berkeley, which resulted in setting up Special Opportunity Scholarships and other outreach programs at Berkeley. The Berkeley program served as a model for the federal Upward Bound Program that was founded several years later and for many outreach and special opportunities programs at other U.S. universities. His doctoral students include Carol Karp and Philip Treisman.   == Awards received == 1964 — The Chauvenet Prize, Mathematical Association of America award to the author of an outstanding expository article on a mathematical topic by a member of the Association. 1972 — Lester R. Ford Award — for Mathematical foundations for mathematics, American Mathematical Monthly 78 (1971), 463–487. 1990 — First recipient of the Gung and Hu Award for Distinguished Service to Mathematics. 1991 — Berkeley Citation — the highest honor/award bestowed by the University of California. 2000 — Leon Henkin Citation — for Distinguished Service, which is presented to a (UC) faculty member for "exceptional commitment to the educational development of students from groups who are underrepresented in the academy."   == See also == Branching quantifier   == References ==   == Further reading == G. Weaver (2001), "Henkin construction", in Hazewinkel, Michiel, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4  George Weaver (1997). Henkin-Keisler models. Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-4366-0.  Henkin, Leon. 1949. "The Completeness of the First-Order Functional Calculus", Journal of Symbolic Logic. 14: 159–166. Henkin, Leon. 1950. "Completeness in the theory of types", Journal of Symbolic Logic 15: 81–91.   == External links == Leon Henkin at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Berkeley Citation Award An interview with Henkin and others about their experiences at Princeton An interview with Henkin about his experience at Princeton Leon Henkin, advocate for diversity in math & science, has died by Robert Sanders, UC Berkeley News press release, November 9, 2006. Obituaries: Leon Henkin, 85: professor steered minorities and women to math by Valerie J. Nelson, Los Angeles Times, November 16, 2006, p. B-6. Leon A. Henkin—Cal math educator by Rick DelVecchio, San Francisco Chronicle, November 20, 2006, p. B-3. In Memoriam: Leon Albert Henkin by John Addison, William Craig, Carolyn Kane, and Alan Schoenfeld (University of California Academic Senate memorial). In Memoriam: Leon Albert Henkin, 1921–2006 by J. Donald Monk, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 15, no. 3 (Sept. 2009), pp. 326–331.

Leopold Kronecker (7 December 1823 – 29 December 1891) was a German mathematician who worked on number theory and algebra. He criticized Cantor's work on set theory, and was quoted by Weber (1893) as having said, "Die ganzen Zahlen hat der liebe Gott gemacht, alles andere ist Menschenwerk" ("God made the integers, all else is the work of man."). Kronecker was a student and lifelong friend of Ernst Kummer.   == BiographyEdit == Leopold Kronecker was born on 7 December 1823 in Liegnitz, Prussia (now Legnica, Poland) in a wealthy Jewish family. His parents, Isidor and Johanna (née Prausnitzer), took care of their children's education and provided them with private tutoring at home – Leopold's younger brother Hugo Kronecker would also follow a scientific path, later becoming a notable physiologist. Kronecker then went to the Liegnitz Gymnasium where he was interested in a wide range of topics including science, history and philosophy, while also practicing gymnastics and swimming. At the gymnasium he was taught by Ernst Kummer, who noticed and encouraged the boy's interest in mathematics. In 1841 Kronecker became a student at the University of Berlin where his interest did not immediately focus on mathematics, but rather spread over several subjects including astronomy and philosophy. He spent the summer of 1843 at the University of Bonn studying astronomy and 1843–44 at the University of Breslau following his former teacher Kummer. Back in Berlin, Kronecker studied mathematics with Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet and in 1845 defended his dissertation in algebraic number theory written under Dirichlet's supervision. After obtaining his degree, Kronecker did not follow his interest in research on an academic career path. He went back to his hometown to manage a large farming estate built up by his mother's uncle, a former banker. In 1848 married his cousin Fanny Prausnitzer, and the couple had six children. For several years Kronecker focused on business, and although he continued to study mathematics as a hobby and corresponded with Kummer, he published no mathematical results. In 1853 he wrote a memoir on the algebraic solvability of equations extending the work of Évariste Galois on the theory of equations.  Due to his business activity, Kronecker was financially comfortable, and thus he could return to Berlin in 1855 to pursue mathematics as a private scholar. Dirichlet, whose wife Rebecka came from the wealthy Mendelssohn family, had introduced Kronecker to the Berlin elite. He became a close friend of Karl Weierstrass, who had recently joined the university, and his former teacher Kummer who had just taken over Dirichlet's mathematics chair. Over the following years Kronecker published numerous papers resulting from his previous years' independent research. As a result of this published research, he was elected a member of the Berlin Academy in 1861. Although he held no official university position, Kronecker had the right as a member of the Academy to hold classes at the University of Berlin and he decided to do so, starting in 1862. In 1866, when Riemann died, Kronecker was offered the mathematics chair at the University of Göttingen (previously held by Carl Gauss and Dirichlet), but he refused, preferring to keep his position at the Academy. Only in 1883, when Kummer retired from the University, was Kronecker invited to succeed him and became an ordinary professor. Kronecker was the supervisor of Kurt Hensel, Adolf Kneser, Mathias Lerch, and Franz Mertens, amongst others. His philosophical view of mathematics put him in conflict with several mathematicians over the years, notably straining his relationship with Weierstrass, who almost decided to leave the University in 1888. Kronecker died on 29 December 1891 in Berlin, several months after the death of his wife. In the last year of his life, he converted to Christianity. He is buried in the Alter St Matthäus Kirchhof cemetery in Berlin-Schöneberg, close to Gustav Kirchhoff.   == Scientific activityEdit ==   === Mathematics researchEdit === An important part of Kronecker's research focused on number theory and algebra. In an 1853 paper on the theory of equations and Galois theory he formulated the Kronecker–Weber theorem, without however offering a definitive proof (the theorem was proved completely much later by David Hilbert). He also introduced the structure theorem for finitely-generated abelian groups. Kronecker studied elliptic functions and conjectured his "liebster Jugendtraum" ("dearest dream of youth"), a generalization that was later put forward by Hilbert in a modified form as his twelfth problem. In an 1850 paper, On the Solution of the General Equation of the Fifth Degree, Kronecker solved the quintic equation by applying group theory (though his solution was not in terms of radicals: that was already proven impossible by the Abel–Ruffini theorem). In algebraic number theory Kronecker introduced the theory of divisors as an alternative to Dedekind's theory of ideals, which he did not find acceptable for philosophical reasons. Although the general adoption of Dedekind's approach led Kronecker's theory to be ignored for a long time, his divisors were found useful and were revived by several mathematicians in the 20th century. Kronecker also contributed to the concept of continuity, reconstructing the form of irrational numbers in real numbers. In analysis, Kronecker rejected the formulation of a continuous, nowhere differentiable function by his colleague, Karl Weierstrass. Also named for Kronecker are the Kronecker limit formula, Kronecker's congruence, Kronecker delta, Kronecker comb, Kronecker symbol, Kronecker product, Kronecker's method for factorizing polynomials, Kronecker substitution, Kronecker's theorem in number theory, Kronecker's lemma, and Eisenstein–Kronecker numbers.   === Philosophy of mathematicsEdit === Kronecker's finitism made him a forerunner of intuitionism in foundations of mathematics.   == HonoursEdit == Kronecker was elected as a member of several academies: Prussian Academy of Sciences (1861) French Academy of Sciences (1868) Royal Society (1884). The 25624 Kronecker asteroid is named after him.   == PublicationsEdit == Kronecker, Leopold (1978) [1901], Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-08277-4, MR 529431  Kronecker, Leopold (1968) [1895], Hensel, Kurt, ed., Leopold Kronecker's Werke. Bände I–V, New York: Chelsea Publishing Co., MR 0237286    == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Eric Temple Bell, 1986. Men of Mathematics, Simon and Schuster, New York. Harold Edwards (1987), An Appreciation of Kronecker, Mathematical Intelligencer, vol. 9 no. 1, pp. 28–35 Harold Edwards (1989), Kronecker's Views on the Foundations of Mathematics, in: "The History of Modern Mathematics," D. E. Rowe and J. McCleary, eds., vol. 1, 67–78, Academic Press Davis, Martin (2001). Engines of Logic Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-32229-3.  Jean Van Heijenoort (1977). From Frege to Gödel A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-32449-7.  1887. "On the concept of number" in Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press: 947–55. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Leopold Kronecker", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Weber, H. (1893), "Leopold Kronecker", Mathematische Annalen (Springer Berlin / Heidelberg) 43: 1–25, doi:10.1007/BF01446613, ISSN 0025-5831    == External linksEdit == Leopold Kronecker at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Leopold Löwenheim (26 June 1878 in Krefeld – 5 May 1957 in Berlin) was a German mathematician, known for his work in mathematical logic. The Nazi regime forced him to retire because under the Nuremberg Laws he was considered only three quarters Aryan. In 1943 much of his work was destroyed during a bombing raid on Berlin. Nevertheless, he survived the Second World War, after which he resumed teaching mathematics. Löwenheim (1915) gave the first proof of what is now known as the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem, often considered the starting point for model theory.   == Important publications == 1915, "Über Möglichkeiten im Relativkalkül," Mathematische Annalen 76: 447–470. Translated as "On possibilities in the calculus of relatives" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 228–251.   == References ==   == Further reading == Brady, Geraldine, 2000. From Peirce to Skolem. North Holland. Contains a detailed exegesis of the proof in Löwenheim (1915), and discusses how Thoralf Skolem simplified that proof and extended the scope and generality of the theorem.

Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (/ˈtʃɑrlz ˈlʌtwɪdʒ ˈdɒdsən/; 27 January 1832 – 14 January 1898), better known by his pen name Lewis Carroll (/ˈkærəl/), was an English writer, mathematician, logician, Anglican deacon, and photographer. His most famous writings are Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, its sequel Through the Looking-Glass, which includes the poem Jabberwocky, and the poem The Hunting of the Snark, all examples of the genre of literary nonsense. He is noted for his facility at word play, logic, and fantasy. There are societies in many parts of the world dedicated to the enjoyment and promotion of his works and the investigation of his life.   == Antecedents == Dodgson's family was predominantly northern English, with Irish connections, conservative and High Church Anglican. Most of Dodgson's male ancestors were army officers or Church of England clergy. His great-grandfather, also named Charles Dodgson, had risen through the ranks of the church to become the Bishop of Elphin. His paternal grandfather, another Charles, had been an army captain, killed in action in Ireland in 1803 when his two sons were hardly more than babies. The oldest of these sons – yet another Charles Dodgson – was Carroll's father. He went to Westminster School and then to Christ Church, Oxford. He reverted to the other family tradition and took holy orders. He was mathematically gifted and won a double first degree, which could have been the prelude to a brilliant academic career. Instead, he married his first cousin Frances Jane Lutwidge in 1827 and became a country parson. Dodgson was born in the small parsonage at Daresbury in Cheshire near the towns of Warrington and Runcorn, the eldest boy but already the third child of the four-and-a-half-year-old marriage. Eight more children followed. When Charles was 11, his father was given the living of Croft-on-Tees in North Yorkshire, and the whole family moved to the spacious rectory. This remained their home for the next twenty-five years. Charles' father was an active and highly conservative cleric of the Church of England who later became the Archdeacon of Richmond and involved himself, sometimes influentially, in the intense religious disputes that were dividing the church. He was High Church, inclining to Anglo-Catholicism, an admirer of John Henry Newman and the Tractarian movement, and did his best to instill such views in his children. Young Charles was to develop an ambiguous relationship with his father's values and with the Church of England as a whole.   == Education ==   === Home life === During his early youth, Dodgson was educated at home. His "reading lists" preserved in the family archives testify to a precocious intellect: at the age of seven, he was reading books such as The Pilgrim's Progress. He also suffered from a stammer – a condition shared by most of his siblings – that often influenced his social life throughout his years. At the age of twelve, he was sent to Richmond Grammar School (now part of Richmond School) at nearby Richmond.   === Rugby === In 1846, Dodgson entered Rugby School where he was evidently unhappy, as he wrote some years after leaving:  I cannot say ... that any earthly considerations would induce me to go through my three years again ... I can honestly say that if I could have been ... secure from annoyance at night, the hardships of the daily life would have been comparative trifles to bear.  Scholastically, though, he excelled with apparent ease. "I have not had a more promising boy at his age since I came to Rugby", observed mathematics master R. B. Mayor.   === Oxford === He left Rugby at the end of 1849 and matriculated at Oxford in May 1850 as a member of his father's old college, Christ Church. After waiting for rooms in college to become available, he went into residence in January 1851. He had been at Oxford only two days when he received a summons home. His mother had died of "inflammation of the brain" – perhaps meningitis or a stroke – at the age of forty-seven. His early academic career veered between high promise and irresistible distraction. He did not always work hard, but was exceptionally gifted and achievement came easily to him. In 1852, he obtained first-class honours in Mathematics Moderations, and was shortly thereafter nominated to a Studentship by his father's old friend Canon Edward Pusey. In 1854, he obtained first-class honours in the Final Honours School of Mathematics, standing first on the list, graduating Bachelor of Arts. He remained at Christ Church studying and teaching, but the next year he failed an important scholarship through his self-confessed inability to apply himself to study. Even so, his talent as a mathematician won him the Christ Church Mathematical Lectureship in 1855, which he continued to hold for the next twenty-six years. Despite early unhappiness, Dodgson was to remain at Christ Church, in various capacities, until his death.   == Character and appearance ==   === Health challenges === The young adult Charles Dodgson was about 6 feet (1.83 m) tall and slender, and he had curly brown hair and blue or grey eyes (depending on the account). He was described in later life as somewhat asymmetrical, and as carrying himself rather stiffly and awkwardly, although this might be on account of a knee injury sustained in middle age. As a very young child, he suffered a fever that left him deaf in one ear. At the age of 17, he suffered a severe attack of whooping cough, which was probably responsible for his chronically weak chest in later life. Another defect which he carried into adulthood was what he referred to as his "hesitation", a stammer that he acquired in early childhood and which plagued him throughout his life. The stammer has always been a significant part of the image of Dodgson. It is said that he stammered only in adult company and was free and fluent with children, but there is no evidence to support this idea. Many children of his acquaintance remembered the stammer, while many adults failed to notice it. Dodgson himself seems to have been far more acutely aware of it than most people whom he met; it is said that he caricatured himself as the Dodo in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, referring to his difficulty in pronouncing his last name, but this is one of the many "facts" often repeated for which no first-hand evidence remains. He did indeed refer to himself as the dodo, but whether or not this reference was to his stammer is simply speculation. Dodgson's stammer did trouble him, but it was never so debilitating that it prevented him from applying his other personal qualities to do well in society. He lived in a time when people commonly devised their own amusements and when singing and recitation were required social skills, and the young Dodgson was well equipped to be an engaging entertainer. He reportedly could sing tolerably well and was not afraid to do so before an audience. He was adept at mimicry and storytelling, and was reputedly quite good at charades.   === Social connections === In the interim between his early published writing and the success of the Alice books, Dodgson began to move in the pre-Raphaelite social circle. He first met John Ruskin in 1857 and became friendly with him. He developed a close relationship with Dante Gabriel Rossetti and his family, and also knew William Holman Hunt, John Everett Millais, and Arthur Hughes, among other artists. He also knew fairy-tale author George MacDonald well – it was the enthusiastic reception of Alice by the young MacDonald children that convinced him to submit the work for publication.   === Politics, religion, and philosophy === In broad terms, Dodgson has traditionally been regarded as politically, religiously, and personally conservative. Martin Gardner labels Dodgson as a Tory who was "awed by lords and inclined to be snobbish towards inferiors." The Reverend W. Tuckwell, in his Reminiscences of Oxford (1900), regarded him as "austere, shy, precise, absorbed in mathematical reverie, watchfully tenacious of his dignity, stiffly conservative in political, theological, social theory, his life mapped out in squares like Alice's landscape." In The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll, the editor states that "his Diary is full of such modest depreciations of himself and his work, interspersed with earnest prayers (too sacred and private to be reproduced here) that God would forgive him the past, and help him to perform His holy will in the future." When a friend asked him about his religious views, Dodgson wrote in response that he was a member of the Church of England, but "doubt[ed] if he was fully a 'High Churchman'". He added:  I believe that when you and I come to lie down for the last time, if only we can keep firm hold of the great truths Christ taught us—our own utter worthlessness and His infinite worth; and that He has brought us back to our one Father, and made us His brethren, and so brethren to one another—we shall have all we need to guide us through the shadows. Most assuredly I accept to the full the doctrines you refer to—that Christ died to save us, that we have no other way of salvation open to us but through His death, and that it is by faith in Him, and through no merit of ours, that we are reconciled to God; and most assuredly I can cordially say, "I owe all to Him who loved me, and died on the Cross of Calvary."  Dodgson also expressed interest in other fields. He was an early member of the Society for Psychical Research, and one of his letters suggests that he accepted as real what was then called "thought reading". Dodgson wrote some studies of various philosophical arguments. In 1895, he developed a philosophical regressus-argument on deductive reasoning in his article "What the Tortoise Said to Achilles", which appeared in one of the early volumes of Mind. The article was reprinted in the same journal a hundred years later in 1995, with a subsequent article by Simon Blackburn titled "Practical Tortoise Raising".   == Artistic activities ==   === Literature === From a young age, Dodgson wrote poetry and short stories, contributing heavily to the family magazine Mischmasch and later sending them to various magazines, enjoying moderate success. Between 1854 and 1856, his work appeared in the national publications The Comic Times and The Train, as well as smaller magazines such as the Whitby Gazette and the Oxford Critic. Most of this output was humorous, sometimes satirical, but his standards and ambitions were exacting. "I do not think I have yet written anything worthy of real publication (in which I do not include the Whitby Gazette or the Oxonian Advertiser), but I do not despair of doing so some day," he wrote in July 1855. Sometime after 1850, he did write puppet plays for his siblings' entertainment, of which one has survived: La Guida di Bragia. In 1856, he published his first piece of work under the name that would make him famous. A romantic poem called "Solitude" appeared in The Train under the authorship of "Lewis Carroll". This pseudonym was a play on his real name: Lewis was the anglicised form of Ludovicus, which was the Latin for Lutwidge, and Carroll an Irish surname similar to the Latin name Carolus, from which comes the name Charles. The transition went as follows: "Charles Lutwidge" translated into Latin as "Carolus Ludovicus". This was then translated back into English as "Carroll Lewis" and then reversed to make "Lewis Carroll". This pseudonym was chosen by editor Edmund Yates from a list of four submitted by Dodgson, the others being Edgar Cuthwellis, Edgar U. C. Westhill, and Louis Carroll.   ==== Alice books ====  In 1856, Dean (i.e., head of the college) Henry Liddell arrived at Christ Church, bringing with him his young family, all of whom would figure largely in Dodgson's life over the following years, and would greatly influence his writing career. Dodgson became close friends with Liddell's wife Lorina and their children, particularly the three sisters Lorina, Edith, and Alice Liddell. He was widely assumed for many years to have derived his own "Alice" from Alice Liddell; the acrostic poem at the end of Through the Looking Glass spells out her name in full, and there are also many superficial references to her hidden in the text of both books. It has been noted that Dodgson himself repeatedly denied in later life that his "little heroine" was based on any real child, and he frequently dedicated his works to girls of his acquaintance, adding their names in acrostic poems at the beginning of the text. Gertrude Chataway's name appears in this form at the beginning of The Hunting of the Snark, and it is not suggested that this means that any of the characters in the narrative are based on her. Information is scarce (Dodgson's diaries for the years 1858–1862 are missing), but it seems clear that his friendship with the Liddell family was an important part of his life in the late 1850s, and he grew into the habit of taking the children on rowing trips (first the boy Harry, and later the three girls) accompanied by an adult friend to nearby Nuneham Courtenay or Godstow. It was on one such expedition on 4 July 1862 that Dodgson invented the outline of the story that eventually became his first and greatest commercial success. He told the story to Alice Liddell and she begged him to write it down, and Dodgson eventually (after much delay) presented her with a handwritten, illustrated manuscript entitled Alice's Adventures Under Ground in November 1864. Before this, the family of friend and mentor George MacDonald read Dodgson's incomplete manuscript, and the enthusiasm of the MacDonald children encouraged Dodgson to seek publication. In 1863, he had taken the unfinished manuscript to Macmillan the publisher, who liked it immediately. After the possible alternative titles were rejected — Alice Among the Fairies and Alice's Golden Hour — the work was finally published as Alice's Adventures in Wonderland in 1865 under the Lewis Carroll pen-name, which Dodgson had first used some nine years earlier. The illustrations this time were by Sir John Tenniel; Dodgson evidently thought that a published book would need the skills of a professional artist. Annotated versions provide insights into many of the ideas and hidden meanings that are prevalent in these books. The overwhelming commercial success of the first Alice book changed Dodgson's life in many ways. The fame of his alter ego "Lewis Carroll" soon spread around the world. He was inundated with fan mail and with sometimes unwanted attention. Indeed, according to one popular story, Queen Victoria herself enjoyed Alice In Wonderland so much that she commanded that he dedicate his next book to her, and was accordingly presented with his next work, a scholarly mathematical volume entitled An Elementary Treatise on Determinants. Dodgson himself vehemently denied this story, commenting "... It is utterly false in every particular: nothing even resembling it has occurred"; and it is unlikely for other reasons. As T.B. Strong comments in a Times article, "It would have been clean contrary to all his practice to identify [the] author of Alice with the author of his mathematical works". He also began earning quite substantial sums of money, but continued with his seemingly disliked post at Christ Church. Late in 1871, he published the sequel Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There. (The title page of the first edition erroneously gives "1872" as the date of publication.) Its somewhat darker mood possibly reflects the changes in Dodgson's life. His father had recently died (1868), plunging him into a depression that lasted some years.   ==== The Hunting of the Snark ==== In 1876, Dodgson produced his next great work The Hunting of the Snark, a fantastical "nonsense" poem exploring the adventures of a bizarre crew of tradesmen and one beaver, who set off to find the snark. Painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti reputedly became convinced that the poem was about him.   ==== Sylvie and Bruno ==== In 1895, 30 years after publication of his masterpieces, Carroll attempted a comeback, producing a two-volume tale of the fairy siblings Sylvie and Bruno. Carroll entwines two plots set in two alternate worlds, one set in rural England and the other in the fairytale kingdoms of Elfland, Outland, and others. The fairytale world satirizes English society, and more specifically the world of academia. Sylvie and Bruno came out in two volumes and is considered a lesser work, although it has remained in print for over a century.   === Photography ===  In 1856, Dodgson took up the new art form of photography under the influence first of his uncle Skeffington Lutwidge, and later of his Oxford friend Reginald Southey. He soon excelled at the art and became a well-known gentleman-photographer, and he seems even to have toyed with the idea of making a living out of it in his very early years. A study by Roger Taylor and Edward Wakeling exhaustively lists every surviving print, and Taylor calculates that just over half of his surviving work depicts young girls, though this may be a highly distorted figure, as about 60% of his original photographic portfolio is now missing. Dodgson also made many studies of men, women, boys, and landscapes; his subjects also include skeletons, dolls, dogs, statues, paintings, and trees. His pictures of children were taken with a parent in attendance and many of the pictures were taken in the Liddell garden because natural sunlight was required for good exposures. He also found photography to be a useful entrée into higher social circles. During the most productive part of his career, he made portraits of notable sitters such as John Everett Millais, Ellen Terry, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Julia Margaret Cameron, Michael Faraday, Lord Salisbury, and Alfred, Lord Tennyson. By the time that Dodgson abruptly ceased photography (1880, over 24 years), he had established his own studio on the roof of Tom Quad, created around 3,000 images, and was an amateur master of the medium, though fewer than 1,000 images have survived time and deliberate destruction. Dodgson reported that he stopped taking photographs because keeping his studio working was too time-consuming. He used the wet collodion process; commercial photographers who started using the dry-plate process in the 1870s took pictures more quickly. Popular taste changed with the advent of Modernism, affecting the types of photographs that he produced. In a 2015 BBC programme presented by journalist Martha Kearney, experts indicated their belief that a full-frontal photograph of a naked teenage girl was that of the oldest Liddell girl Lorina, and was the work of Dodgson. Nicolas Burnett, a photographic conservation specialist, ruled out the idea that the print is a modern fake. He also said that the image had been taken by a camera similar to the one which Carroll is known to have used, and that the developing process and paper was the same as that used by Carroll. He gave his "gut instinct" that the photograph was by Lewis Carroll. Forensic imagery analyst David Anley compared known images of Lorina at different ages with the suspected photograph. He said, "In my opinion, I would say it's her".   === Inventions === To promote letter writing, Dodgson invented "The Wonderland Postage-Stamp Case" in 1889. This was a cloth-backed folder with twelve slots, two marked for inserting the most commonly used penny stamp, and one each for the other current denominations up to one shilling. The folder was then put into a slip case decorated with a picture of Alice on the front and the Cheshire Cat on the back. All could be conveniently carried in a pocket or purse. The pack also included a copy of Carroll's pamphletted lecture Eight or Nine Wise Words About Letter-Writing.  Another invention was a writing tablet called the nyctograph that allowed note-taking in the dark, thus eliminating the need to get out of bed and strike a light when one woke with an idea. The device consisted of a gridded card with sixteen squares and system of symbols representing an alphabet of Dodgson's design, using letter shapes similar to the Graffiti writing system on a Palm device. He also devised a number of games, including an early version of what today is known as Scrabble. He appears to have invented — or at least certainly popularized — the "doublet" (see word ladder), a form of brain-teaser that is still popular today, changing one word into another by altering one letter at a time, each successive change always resulting in a genuine word. For instance, CAT is transformed into DOG by the following steps: CAT, COT, DOT, DOG. Other items include a rule for finding the day of the week for any date; a means for justifying right margins on a typewriter; a steering device for a velociam (a type of tricycle); new systems of parliamentary representation; more fair elimination rules for tennis tournaments; a new sort of postal money order; rules for reckoning postage; rules for a win in betting; rules for dividing a number by various divisors; a cardboard scale for the Senior Common Room at Christ Church which, held next to a glass, ensured the right amount of liqueur for the price paid; a double-sided adhesive strip to fasten envelopes or mount things in books; a device for helping a bedridden invalid to read from a book placed sideways; and at least two ciphers for cryptography.   == Mathematical work ==  Within the academic discipline of mathematics, Dodgson worked primarily in the fields of geometry, linear and matrix algebra, mathematical logic, and recreational mathematics, producing nearly a dozen books under his real name. Dodgson also developed new ideas in linear algebra (e.g., the first printed proof of the Kronecker-Capelli theorem), probability, and the study of elections (e.g., Dodgson's method) and committees; some of this work was not published until well after his death. His occupation as Mathematical Lecturer at Christ Church gave him some financial security. His mathematical work attracted renewed interest in the late 20th century. Martin Gardner's book on logic machines and diagrams, and William Warren Bartley's posthumous publication of the second part of Carroll's symbolic logic book have sparked a reevaluation of Carroll's contributions to symbolic logic. Robbins' and Rumsey's investigation of Dodgson condensation, a method of evaluating determinants, led them to the Alternating Sign Matrix conjecture, now a theorem. The discovery in the 1990s of additional ciphers that Carroll had constructed, in addition to his "Memoria Technica", showed that he had employed sophisticated mathematical ideas to their creation.   == Correspondence == Dodgson wrote and received as many as 98,721 letters, according to a special letter register which he devised. He documented his advice about how to write more satisfying letters in a missive entitled "Eight or Nine Wise Words About Letter-Writing".   == Later years ==  Dodgson's existence remained little changed over the remaining twenty years of his life, throughout his growing wealth and fame. He continued to teach at Christ Church until 1881, and remained in residence there until his death. The two volumes of his last novel Sylvie and Bruno were published in 1889 and 1893, but the intricacy of this work was apparently not appreciated by contemporary readers; it achieved nothing like the success of the Alice books, with disappointing reviews and sales of only 13,000 copies. The only known occasion on which he travelled abroad was a trip to Russia in 1867 as an ecclesiastical, together with the Reverend Henry Liddon. He recounts the travel in his "Russian Journal", which was first commercially published in 1935. On his way to Russia and back, he also saw different cities in Belgium, Germany, the partitioned Poland, and France. He died of pneumonia following influenza on 14 January 1898 at his sisters' home, "The Chestnuts" in Guildford. He was two weeks away from turning 66 years old. He is buried in Guildford at the Mount Cemetery.   == Controversies and mysteries ==   === Discussion of Dodgson's sexuality === Catherine Robson refers to Carroll as "the Victorian era's most famous (or infamous) girl lover", and writes:  For those who wish to map the contours of the don's desires, both his public, and more especially his voluminous private, writings provide acres and acres of relevant territory. Letter after letter, journal upon journal, dedicatory poem and book inscription bear witness to Carroll's ceaseless pursuit of juvenile feminine company. ... Is it innocent? Is it sexual?  Some late twentieth century biographers have suggested that Dodgson's interest in children had an erotic element, including Morton N. Cohen in his Lewis Carroll: A Biography (1995), Donald Thomas in his Lewis Carroll: A Portrait with Background (1995), and Michael Bakewell in his Lewis Carroll: A Biography (1996). Cohen, in particular, claims that Dodgson's "sexual energies sought unconventional outlets", and further writes:  We cannot know to what extent sexual urges lay behind Charles's preference for drawing and photographing children in the nude. He contended the preference was entirely aesthetic. But given his emotional attachment to children as well as his aesthetic appreciation of their forms, his assertion that his interest was strictly artistic is naïve. He probably felt more than he dared acknowledge, even to himself.  Cohen goes on to note that Dodgson "apparently convinced many of his friends that his attachment to the nude female child form was free of any eroticism", but adds that "later generations look beneath the surface" (p. 229). He and other biographers argue that Dodgson may have wanted to marry the 11-year-old Alice Liddell, and that this was the cause of the unexplained "break" with the family in June 1863, an event for which other explanations are offered. Biographers Derek Hudson and Roger Lancelyn Green stop short of identifying Dodgson as a paedophile (Green also edited Dodgson's diaries and papers), but they concur that he had a passion for small female children and next to no interest in the adult world. Several other writers and scholars have challenged the evidential basis for Cohen's and others' views about this interest of Dodgson. Lebailly has endeavoured to set Dodgson's child-photography within the "Victorian Child Cult", which perceived child-nudity as essentially an expression of innocence. Lebailly claims that studies of child nudes were mainstream and fashionable in Dodgson's time, and that most photographers made them as a matter of course, including Oscar Gustave Rejlander and Julia Margaret Cameron. Lebailly continues that child nudes even appeared on Victorian Christmas cards, implying a very different social and aesthetic assessment of such material. Lebailly concludes that it has been an error of Dodgson's biographers to view his child-photography with 20th- or 21st-century eyes, and to have presented it as some form of personal idiosyncrasy, when it was in fact a response to a prevalent aesthetic and philosophical movement of the time. Leach's reappraisal of Dodgson focused in particular on his controversial sexuality. She argues that the allegations of paedophilia rose initially from a misunderstanding of Victorian morals, as well as the mistaken idea—fostered by Dodgson's various biographers—that he had no interest in adult women. She termed the traditional image of Dodgson "the Carroll Myth". She drew attention to the large amounts of evidence in his diaries and letters that he was also keenly interested in adult women, married and single, and enjoyed several scandalous relationships with them (scandalous by the social standards of his time). She also pointed to the fact that many of those whom he described as "child-friends" were girls in their late teens and even twenties. She argues that suggestions of paedophilia emerged only many years after his death, when his well-meaning family had suppressed all evidence of his relationships with women in an effort to preserve his reputation, thus giving a false impression of a man interested only in little girls. Similarly, Leach points to a 1932 biography by Langford Reed as the source of the dubious claim that many of Carroll's female friendships ended when the girls reached the age of fourteen. In addition to the biographical works that have discussed Dodgson's sexuality, there are modern artistic interpretations of his life and work that do so as well — in particular, Dennis Potter in his play Alice and his screenplay for the motion picture Dreamchild, and Robert Wilson in his film Alice.   === Ordination === Dodgson had been groomed for the ordained ministry in the Church of England from a very early age and was expected to be ordained within four years of obtaining his master's degree, as a condition of his residency at Christ Church. He delayed the process for some time but was eventually ordained as a deacon on 22 December 1861. But when the time came a year later to be ordained as a priest, Dodgson appealed to the dean for permission not to proceed. This was against college rules and initially Dean Liddell told him that he would have to consult the college ruling body, which would almost certainly have resulted in his being expelled. For unknown reasons, Liddell changed his mind overnight and permitted Dodgson to remain at the college in defiance of the rules. Dodgson never became a priest, unique amongst senior students of his time. There is currently no conclusive evidence about why Dodgson rejected the priesthood. Some have suggested that his stammer made him reluctant to take the step, because he was afraid of having to preach. Wilson quotes letters by Dodgson describing difficulty in reading lessons and prayers rather than preaching in his own words. But Dodgson did indeed preach in later life, even though not in priest's orders, so it seems unlikely that his impediment was a major factor affecting his choice. Wilson also points out that Bishop of Oxford Samuel Wilberforce, who ordained Dodgson, had strong views against clergy going to the theatre, one of Dodgson's great interests. Others have suggested that he was having serious doubts about Anglicanism. He was interested in minority forms of Christianity (he was an admirer of F.D. Maurice) and "alternative" religions (theosophy). Dodgson became deeply troubled by an unexplained sense of sin and guilt at this time (the early 1860s) and frequently expressed the view in his diaries that he was a "vile and worthless" sinner, unworthy of the priesthood and this sense of sin and unworthiness may well have affected his decision to abandon being ordained to the priesthood.   === Missing diaries === At least four complete volumes and around seven pages of text are missing from Dodgson's 13 diaries. The loss of the volumes remains unexplained; the pages have been removed by an unknown hand. Most scholars assume that the diary material was removed by family members in the interests of preserving the family name, but this has not been proven. Except for one page, material is missing from his diaries for the period between 1853 and 1863 (when Dodgson was 21–31 years old). This was a period when Dodgson began suffering great mental and spiritual anguish and confessing to an overwhelming sense of his own sin. This was also the period of time when he composed his extensive love poetry, leading to speculation that the poems may have been autobiographical. Many theories have been put forward to explain the missing material. A popular explanation for one missing page (27 June 1863) is that it might have been torn out to conceal a proposal of marriage on that day by Dodgson to the 11-year-old Alice Liddell. However, there has never been any evidence to suggest that this was so, and a paper offers some evidence to the contrary which was discovered by Karoline Leach in the Dodgson family archive in 1996.  This paper is known as the "cut pages in diary document", and was compiled by various members of Carroll's family after his death. Part of it may have been written at the time when the pages were destroyed, though this is unclear. The document offers a brief summary of two diary pages that are missing, including the one for 27 June 1863. The summary for this page states that Mrs. Liddell told Dodgson that there was gossip circulating about him and the Liddell family's governess, as well as about his relationship with "Ina", presumably Alice's older sister Lorina Liddell. The "break" with the Liddell family that occurred soon after was presumably in response to this gossip. An alternative interpretation has been made regarding Carroll's rumoured involvement with "Ina": Lorina was also the name of Alice Liddell's mother. What is deemed most crucial and surprising is that the document seems to imply that Dodgson's break with the family was not connected with Alice at all; until a primary source is discovered, the events of 27 June 1863 will remain in doubt.   === Migraine and epilepsy === In his diary for 1880, Dodgson recorded experiencing his first episode of migraine with aura, describing very accurately the process of 'moving fortifications' that are a manifestation of the aura stage of the syndrome. Unfortunately, there is no clear evidence to show whether this was his first experience of migraine per se, or if he may have previously suffered the far more common form of migraine without aura, although the latter seems most likely, given the fact that migraine most commonly develops in the teens or early adulthood. Another form of migraine aura called Alice in Wonderland syndrome has been named after Dodgson's little heroine because its manifestation can resemble the sudden size-changes in the book. It is also known as micropsia and macropsia, a brain condition affecting the way that objects are perceived by the mind. For example, an afflicted person may look at a larger object such as a basketball and perceive it as if it were the size of a golf ball. Some authors have suggested that Dodgson may have suffered from this type of aura and used it as an inspiration in his work, but there is no evidence that he did. Dodgson also suffered two attacks in which he lost consciousness. He was diagnosed by a Dr. Morshead, Dr. Brooks, and Dr. Stedman, and they believed the attack and a consequent attack to be an "epileptiform" seizure (initially thought to be fainting, but Brooks changed his mind). Some have concluded from this that he was a lifetime sufferer of this condition, but there is no evidence of this in his diaries beyond the diagnosis of the two attacks already mentioned. Some authors, in particular Sadi Ranson, have suggested that Carroll may have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy in which consciousness is not always completely lost, but altered, and in which the symptoms mimic many of the same experiences as Alice in Wonderland. Carroll had at least one incident in which he suffered full loss of consciousness and awoke with a bloody nose, which he recorded in his diary and noted that the episode left him not feeling himself for "quite sometime afterward". This attack was diagnosed as possibly "epileptiform" and Carroll himself later wrote of his "seizures" in the same diary. Most of the standard diagnostic tests of today were not available in the nineteenth century. Recently, Dr Yvonne Hart, consultant neurologist at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, considered Dodgson's symptoms. Her conclusion, quoted in Jenny Woolf's The Mystery of Lewis Carroll, is that Dodgson very likely had migraine, and may have had epilepsy, but she emphasises that she would have considerable doubt about making a diagnosis of epilepsy without further information.   == Memorials == On Copenhagen Street in Islington is the Lewis Carroll Children's Library. In 1982, his great-nephew unveiled a memorial stone to him in Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey.   == Works ==   == See also == Lewis Carroll identity Lewis Carroll Shelf Award RGS Worcester and The Alice Ottley School – Miss Ottley, the first Headmistress of The Alice Ottley School, was a friend of Lewis Carroll. One of the school's houses was named after him.   == References ==   == Bibliography == Clark, Ann (1979). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. London: J. M. Dent. ISBN 0-460-04302-1.  Cohen, Morton (1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 30–35. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4.  Collingwood, Stuart Dodgson (1898). The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll. London: T. Fisher Unwin.  Leach, Karoline (1999). In the Shadow of the Dreamchild: A New Understanding of Lewis Carroll. London: Peter Owen.  Reed, Langford, The Life of Lewis Carroll (1932. London: W. and G. Foyle) Taylor, Alexander L., Knight, The White Knight (1952. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd) Taylor, Roger & Wakeling, Edward, Lewis Carroll, Photographer (2002. Princeton University Press) (ISBN 0691074437). Catalogues nearly every Carroll photograph known to be still in existence. Thomas, Donald (1996). Lewis Carroll / A Biography. Barnes and Noble, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7607-1232-0.  Wilson, Robin (2008). Lewis Carroll in Numberland: His Fantastical Mathematical Logical Life. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9757-6.    == Further reading == Black, Duncan (1958). The Circumstances in which Rev. C. L. Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) wrote his Three Pamphlets and Appendix: Text of Dodgson's Three Pamphlets and of 'The Cyclostyled Sheet' in The Theory of Committees and Elections, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Bowman, Isa (1899). The Story of Lewis Carroll: Told for Young People by the Real Alice in Wonderland, Miss Isa Bowman. London: J.M. Dent & Co.  Dodgson, Charles L., Euclid and His Modern Rivals (1879. Macmillan; reissued 2009 by Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-1-108-00100-7) Dodgson, Charles L. "The Pamphlets of Lewis Carroll" v.1 The Oxford Pamphlets (1993) ISBN 0-8139-1250-4 v.2 The Mathematical Pamphlets (1994) ISBN 0-9303-26-09-1 v.3 The Political Pamphlets (2001) ISBN 0-930326-14-8 v.4 The Logic Pamphlets (2010) ISBN 978-0-930326-25-8.  Goodacre, Selwyn (2006). All the snarks : the illustrated editions of the hunting of the snark. Oxford: Inky Parrot Press.  Graham-Smith, Darien (2005), Contextualising Carroll, University of Wales, Bangor: PhD Thesis (library.bangor.ac.uk) Huxley, Francis The Raven and the Writing Desk (1976) (ISBN 0-06-012113-0). Kelly, Richard, Lewis Carroll (1990. Boston: Twayne Publishers) Kelly, Richard, ed. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (2000. Peterborough, Ontario: broadviewpress.com) Lovett, Charlie, 'Lewis Carroll Among His Books: A Descriptive Catalogue of the Private Library of Charles L. Dodgson' (2005) (ISBN 0786421053) Wullschläger, Jackie, Inventing Wonderland, (ISBN 0-7432-2892-8)—also looks at Edward Lear (of the "nonsense" verses), J. M. Barrie (Peter Pan), Kenneth Grahame (The Wind in the Willows), and A. A. Milne (Winnie-the-Pooh). n.n., Dreaming in Pictures: The Photography of Lewis Carroll. Yale University Press & SFMOMA, 2004. (Places Carroll firmly in the art photography tradition.)   == External links == A calendar of events in 2015 commemorating the 150th anniversary of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland The Fales Library Guide to the Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll Works by Lewis Carroll at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Lewis Carroll at Internet Archive Works by Lewis Carroll at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Works by Lewis Carroll at Open Library Lewis Carroll at Goodreads Lewis Carroll at the Internet Book List Lewis Carroll at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Lewis Carroll at the Internet Movie Database Edward Wakeling's Lewis Carroll site — extensive information on Lewis Carroll by scholar Edward Wakeling. Lewis Carroll: Reality & Myth — comparing some of the legends with the factual reality. The Poems of Lewis Carroll The Nude Photography of Lewis Carroll The Lewis Carroll Society Lewis Carroll Society of North America Lewis Carroll at victorianweb.org Contrariwise: the Association for New Lewis Carroll Studies — articles by leading members of the 'new scholarship' Sewell, Byron W.; Sewell, Susan R. "Byron W. Sewell and Susan R. Sewell: A Preliminary Inventory of Their Collection of Lewis Carroll at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center". Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin. Archived from the original on 12 September 2009. Retrieved 12 September 2009.  Archival material relating to Lewis Carroll listed at the UK National Archives Lewis Carroll online exhibition at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin Lewis Carroll's Shifting Reputation Guide to The Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll in the Fales Library at New York University Guide to Harcourt Amory collection of Lewis Carroll at Houghton Library, Harvard University Lists and images of 1st editions Images of the illustrated editions of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland from 1899 to the present day Illustrators of The Hunting of the Snark Lewis Carroll Scrapbook Collection at the Library of Congress

Abraham Robinson (born Robinsohn; October 6, 1918 – April 11, 1974) was a mathematician who is most widely known for development of non-standard analysis, a mathematically rigorous system whereby infinitesimal and infinite numbers were reincorporated into modern mathematics. Nearly half of Robinson's papers were in Applied mathematics rather than in Pure mathematics (according to MacTutor).   == Biography == He was born to a Jewish family with strong Zionist beliefs, in Waldenburg, Germany, which is now Wałbrzych, in Poland. In 1933, he emigrated to British Mandate of Palestine, where he earned a first degree from the Hebrew University. Robinson was in France when the Nazis invaded during World War II, and escaped by train and on foot, being alternately questioned by French soldiers suspicious of his German passport and asked by them to share his map, which was more detailed than theirs. While in London, he joined the Free French Air Force and contributed to the war effort by teaching himself aerodynamics and becoming an expert on the airfoils used in the wings of fighter planes. After the war, Robinson worked in London, Toronto, and Jerusalem, but ended up at University of California, Los Angeles in 1962.   == Work in model theory == He became known for his approach of using the methods of mathematical logic to attack problems in analysis and abstract algebra. He "introduced many of the fundamental notions of model theory". Using these methods, he found a way of using formal logic to show that there are self-consistent nonstandard models of the real number system that include infinite and infinitesimal numbers. Others, such as Wilhelmus Luxemburg, showed that the same results could be achieved using ultrafilters, which made Robinson's work more accessible to mathematicians who lacked training in formal logic. Robinson's book Non-standard Analysis was published in 1966. Robinson was strongly interested in the history and philosophy of mathematics, and often remarked that he wanted to get inside the head of Leibniz, the first mathematician to attempt to articulate clearly the concept of infinitesimal numbers. While at UCLA his colleagues remember him as working hard to accommodate PhD students of all levels of ability by finding them projects of the appropriate difficulty. He was courted by Yale, and after some initial reluctance, he moved there in 1967. He died of pancreatic cancer in 1974.   == Notes ==   == Publications == Robinson, Abraham (1963), Introduction to model theory and to the metamathematics of algebra, Amsterdam: North-Holland, ISBN 978-0-7204-2222-1, MR 0153570  Robinson, Abraham (1977) [1956], Keisler, H. Jerome, ed., Complete theories, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics (2nd ed.), Amsterdam: North-Holland, ISBN 978-0-7204-0690-0, MR 0472504  Robinson, Abraham (1979), Keisler, H. Jerome, ed., Selected papers of Abraham Robinson. Vol. I Model theory and algebra, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-02071-7, MR 533887  Robinson, Abraham (1979), Luxemburg, W. A. J.; Körner, S., eds., Selected papers of Abraham Robinson. Vol. II Nonstandard analysis and philosophy, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-02072-4, MR 533888  Robinson, Abraham (1979), Young, A. D., ed., Selected papers of Abraham Robinson. Vol. III Aeronautics, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-02073-1, MR 533889  Robinson, Abraham (1996) [1966], Non-standard analysis, Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics (2nd ed.), Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-04490-3, MR 0205854    == See also == Influence of non-standard analysis   == References == J. W. Dauben, Abraham Robinson: The Creation of Nonstandard Analysis, A Personal and Mathematical Odyssey, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Abraham Robinson", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Abraham Robinson at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Abraham Robinson — Biographical Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences



Adolf Lindenbaum (June 12, 1904 in Warsaw, Kingdom of Poland, Russian Empire (now Poland) – 1941 in Paneriai), was a Polish logician and mathematician. He was a student of Wacław Sierpiński, became a distinguished author of works on set theory and had served as an Assistant Professor at Warsaw University. He was killed by the Nazis in Paneriai (Ponary), near Vilnius. Among his most famous works are the Lindenbaum's lemma and Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra.   == References == Page on Sierpinski, contains fragments of his memoirs mentioning the murder of Lindenbaum An entry about Lindenbaum written by Edward Marczewski and Andrzej Mostowski, Polski słownik biograficzny, Tom XVII, p. 364–365 An Open Access article on Lindenbaum′s life and works in Logica Universalis, Volume 8, Issue 3–4 (December 2014), pp 285–320



Alan Richard Bundy, CBE, FRS, FREng, FRSE, FBCS, FAAAI, FECCAI, FAISB, is a professor at the School of Informatics at the University of Edinburgh, known for his contributions to automated reasoning, especially to proof-planning, the use of meta-level reasoning to guide proof search.   == Education == Alan Bundy was educated as a Mathematician, obtaining an honours degree in Mathematics in 1968 from the University of Leicester and a PhD in Mathematical Logic in 1971, also from Leicester.   == Career == Since 1971, Bundy has been at the University of Edinburgh: initially in the 'Metamathematics' Unit, which in 1972 became the Department of Computational Logic, in 1974 was absorbed into the new Department of Artificial Intelligence and in 1998 was absorbed into the new School of Informatics. From 1971–73, he was a research fellow on Prof. B. Meltzer's SERC grant Theorem Proving by Computer; in 1973 he became a university lecturer; in 1984 he was promoted to reader; in 1987 he was promoted to professorial fellow; and in 1990 he was promoted to professor. From 1987–92 he held an Science and Engineering Research Council Senior Fellowship. From 1998–2001 he was Head of the newly formed of Division (subsequently School) of Informatics at Edinburgh. From 2000–2005 he was a founder and convener of the UK Computing Research Committee, which plays an advocacy role for computing research in the UK. From 2010 he is a Vice-President and Trustee of the British Computer Society with special responsibility for the Academy of Computing. Bundy is the leader of the Mathematical Reasoning Group at Edinburgh.   == Honours and awards == Bundy was elected a founding Fellow of AAAI in 1990, a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1996, a founding fellow of AISB in 1997, a founding fellow of ECCAI in 1999, a fellow of the British Computer Society in 2004, and a Fellow of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in 2005. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering in 2008. He was elected to ACM Fellow (2014) "For contributions to artificial intelligence, automated reasoning, and the formation and evolution of representations.". He is the winner of the 2007 IJCAI Award for Research Excellence and Herbrand Award for Distinguished Contributions to Automated Deduction. He was one of the 41 professors selected worldwide to receive one of the HP Labs Innovation Research Awards 2008. Bundy was appointed CBE in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to computing science. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2012, his certificate of election reads   == References ==

Alan Ross Anderson (1925–1973) was an American logician and professor of philosophy at Yale University and the University of Pittsburgh. A frequent collaborator with Nuel Belnap, Anderson was instrumental in the development of relevance logic and deontic logic. Anderson died of cancer in 1973.   == Relevance logic == Anderson believed that the conclusion of a valid inference ought to have something to do with (i.e. be relevant to) the premises. Formally, he captured this "relevance condition" with the principle that A entails B only if A and B share at least one non-logical constant. As simple as this idea appears, implementing it in a formal system requires a radical departure from the semantics of classical logic. Anderson and Belnap (with contributions from J. Michael Dunn, Kit Fine, Alasdair Urquhart, Robert K. Meyer, Anil Gupta (logician), and others) explored the formal consequences of the relevance condition in great detail in their influential Entailment books (see references below), which are the most frequently cited works in the field of relevance logic. Anderson and Belnap were quick to observe that the concept of relevance had been central to logic since Aristotle, but had been unduly neglected since Gottlob Frege and George Boole laid the foundations for what would come to be known, somewhat ironically, as "classical" logic. (For an example of classical logic's failure to satisfy the relevance condition, see the article on the principle of explosion.)   == Deontic logic == Anderson advocated the view that sentences of the form "It ought to be (the case) that A" should be interpreted logically as: Not-A entails v, where v means something like a norm has been violated. He developed systems of deontic relevance logic containing a special constant v (notation varies) for this purpose. Such systems have sometimes been characterized as "reductions" of deontic logic to alethic modal logic. This is misleading at best, however, since alethic modal logics generally do not contain anything like Anderson's special v constant.   == Philosophy of logic == Anderson was known for being a Platonist (or realist, or monist) about logic; he believed in "The One True Logic," and he believed that it was a relevance logic.   == Resources == Anderson, A. R. 1967. Some nasty problems in the formal logic of ethics. Nous I(4): 345-60. Anderson, A. R. and Belnap, N. D. 1975. Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and Necessity. Vol. 1. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Anderson, A. R., Belnap, N. D., and Dunn, J. M. 1992. Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and Necessity. Vol. 2. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-07339-2 Mares, E. D. 1992. Andersonian deontic logic. Theoria 58: 3-20.

Alan Mathison Turing, OBE, FRS (/ˈtjʊərɪŋ/; 23 June 1912 – 7 June 1954) was a British pioneering computer scientist, mathematician, logician, cryptanalyst and theoretical biologist. He was highly influential in the development of computer science, providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine, which can be considered a model of a general purpose computer. Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science and artificial intelligence. During the Second World War, Turing worked for the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS) at Bletchley Park, Britain's codebreaking centre. For a time he led Hut 8, the section responsible for German naval cryptanalysis. He devised a number of techniques for breaking German ciphers, including improvements to the pre-war Polish bombe method and an electromechanical machine that could find settings for the Enigma machine. Turing played a pivotal role in cracking intercepted coded messages that enabled the Allies to defeat the Nazis in many crucial engagements, including the Battle of the Atlantic; it has been estimated that this work shortened the war in Europe by as many as two to four years. After the war, he worked at the National Physical Laboratory, where he designed the ACE, among the first designs for a stored-program computer. In 1948 Turing joined Max Newman's Computing Laboratory at the University of Manchester, where he helped develop the Manchester computers and became interested in mathematical biology. He wrote a paper on the chemical basis of morphogenesis, and predicted oscillating chemical reactions such as the Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction, first observed in the 1960s. Turing was prosecuted in 1952 for homosexual acts, when such behaviour was still a criminal act in the UK. He accepted treatment with oestrogen injections (chemical castration) as an alternative to prison. Turing died in 1954, 16 days before his 42nd birthday, from cyanide poisoning. An inquest determined his death as suicide, but it has been noted that the known evidence is equally consistent with accidental poisoning. In 2009, following an Internet campaign, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown made an official public apology on behalf of the British government for "the appalling way he was treated". Queen Elizabeth II granted him a posthumous pardon in 2013.   == Early life and familyEdit == Turing was born in Maida Vale, London, while his father, Julius Mathison Turing (1873–1947), was on leave from his position with the Indian Civil Service (ICS) at Chhatrapur, Bihar and Orissa Province, in British India. Turing's father was the son of a clergyman, the Rev. John Robert Turing, from a Scottish family of merchants which had been based in the Netherlands and included a baronet. Turing's mother, Julius' wife, was Ethel Sara (née Stoney; 1881–1976), daughter of Edward Waller Stoney, chief engineer of the Madras Railways. The Stoneys were a Protestant Anglo-Irish gentry family from both County Tipperary and County Longford, while Ethel herself had spent much of her childhood in County Clare. Julius' work with the ICS brought the family to British India, where his grandfather had been a general in the Bengal Army. However, both Julius and Ethel wanted their children to be brought up in Britain, so they moved to Maida Vale, London, where Turing was born on 23 June 1912, as recorded by a blue plaque on the outside of the house of his birth, later the Colonnade Hotel. He had an elder brother, John (the father of Sir John Dermot Turing, 12th Baronet of the Turing baronets). Turing's father's civil service commission was still active and during Turing's childhood years Turing's parents travelled between Hastings in England and India, leaving their two sons to stay with a retired Army couple. At Hastings, Turing stayed at Baston Lodge, Upper Maze Hill, St Leonards-on-Sea, now marked with a blue plaque. Very early in life, Turing showed signs of the genius that he was later to display prominently. His parents purchased a house in Guildford in 1927, and Turing lived there during school holidays. The location is also marked with a blue plaque.   == EducationEdit ==   === SchoolEdit === Turing's parents enrolled him at St Michael's, a day school at 20 Charles Road, St Leonards-on-Sea, at the age of six. The headmistress recognised his talent early on, as did many of his subsequent educators. In 1926, at the age of 13, he went on to Sherborne School, an independent school in the market town of Sherborne in Dorset. The first day of term coincided with the 1926 General Strike in Britain, but he was so determined to attend that he rode his bicycle unaccompanied more than 60 miles (97 km) from Southampton to Sherborne, stopping overnight at an inn. Turing's natural inclination towards mathematics and science did not earn him respect from some of the teachers at Sherborne, whose definition of education placed more emphasis on the classics. His headmaster wrote to his parents: "I hope he will not fall between two stools. If he is to stay at public school, he must aim at becoming educated. If he is to be solely a Scientific Specialist, he is wasting his time at a public school". Despite this, Turing continued to show remarkable ability in the studies he loved, solving advanced problems in 1927 without having studied even elementary calculus. In 1928, aged 16, Turing encountered Albert Einstein's work; not only did he grasp it, but it is possible that he managed to deduce Einstein's questioning of Newton's laws of motion from a text in which this was never made explicit. At Sherborne, Turing formed a significant friendship with fellow pupil Christopher Morcom, who has been described as Turing's "first love". Their relationship provided inspiration in Turing's future endeavours, but it was cut short by Morcom's death, in February 1930, from complications of bovine tuberculosis, contracted after drinking infected cow's milk some years previously. The event caused Turing great sorrow. He coped with his grief by working that much harder on the topics of science and mathematics that he had shared with Morcom. In a letter to Morcom's mother Turing said:  I am sure I could not have found anywhere another companion so brilliant and yet so charming and unconceited. I regarded my interest in my work, and in such things as astronomy (to which he introduced me) as something to be shared with him and I think he felt a little the same about me ... I know I must put as much energy if not as much interest into my work as if he were alive, because that is what he would like me to do.  Some have speculated that Morcom's death was the cause of Turing's atheism and materialism, but this seems unlikely. Apparently, at this point in his life he still believed in such concepts as a spirit, independent of the body and surviving death. In a later letter, also written to Morcom's mother, Turing said:  Personally, I believe that spirit is really eternally connected with matter but certainly not by the same kind of body ... as regards the actual connection between spirit and body I consider that the body [can] hold on to a 'spirit', whilst the body is alive and awake the two are firmly connected. When the body is asleep I cannot guess what happens but when the body dies, the 'mechanism' of the body, holding the spirit is gone and the spirit finds a new body sooner or later, perhaps immediately.   === University and work on computabilityEdit === After Sherborne, Turing studied as an undergraduate from 1931 to 1934 at King's College, Cambridge, whence he gained first-class honours in mathematics. In 1935, at the age of 22, he was elected a fellow of King's on the strength of a dissertation in which he proved the central limit theorem, despite the fact that the committee had failed to identify that it had already been proven, in 1922, by Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg. In 1928, German mathematician David Hilbert had called attention to the Entscheidungsproblem (decision problem). In his paper "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem" (submitted on 28 May 1936 and delivered 12 November), Turing reformulated Kurt Gödel's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing Gödel's universal arithmetic-based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines. He proved that some such machine would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm. He went on to prove that there was no solution to the Entscheidungsproblem by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: in general, it is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a given Turing machine will ever halt.  Although Turing's proof was published shortly after Alonzo Church's equivalent proof using his lambda calculus, Turing's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive than Church's. It also included a notion of a 'Universal Machine' (now known as a universal Turing machine), with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other computation machine (as indeed could Church's lambda calculus). According to the Church–Turing thesis, Turing machines and the lambda calculus are capable of computing anything that is computable. John von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to Turing's paper. To this day, Turing machines are a central object of study in theory of computation. From September 1936 to July 1938, Turing spent most of his time studying under Church at Princeton University. In addition to his purely mathematical work, he studied cryptology and also built three of four stages of an electro-mechanical binary multiplier. In June 1938, he obtained his PhD from Princeton; his dissertation, Systems of Logic Based on Ordinals, introduced the concept of ordinal logic and the notion of relative computing, where Turing machines are augmented with so-called oracles, allowing a study of problems that cannot be solved by a Turing machine. When Turing returned to Cambridge, he attended lectures given in 1939 by Ludwig Wittgenstein about the foundations of mathematics. Remarkably, the lectures have been reconstructed verbatim, including interjections from Turing and other students, from students' notes. Turing and Wittgenstein argued and disagreed, with Turing defending formalism and Wittgenstein propounding his view that mathematics does not discover any absolute truths but rather invents them.   == CryptanalysisEdit == During the Second World War, Turing was a leading participant in the breaking of German ciphers at Bletchley Park. The historian and wartime codebreaker Asa Briggs has said, "You needed exceptional talent, you needed genius at Bletchley and Turing's was that genius." From September 1938, Turing had been working part-time with the GC&CS, the British code breaking organisation. He concentrated on cryptanalysis of the Enigma, with Dilly Knox, a senior GC&CS codebreaker. Soon after the July 1939 Warsaw meeting at which the Polish Cipher Bureau had provided the British and French with the details of the wiring of Enigma rotors and their method of decrypting Enigma code messages, Turing and Knox started to work on a less fragile approach to the problem. The Polish method relied on an insecure indicator procedure that the Germans were likely to change, which they did in May 1940. Turing's approach was more general, using crib-based decryption for which he produced the functional specification of the bombe (an improvement of the Polish Bomba).  On 4 September 1939, the day after the UK declared war on Germany, Turing reported to Bletchley Park, the wartime station of GC&CS. Specifying the bombe was the first of five major cryptanalytical advances that Turing made during the war. The others were: deducing the indicator procedure used by the German navy; developing a statistical procedure for making much more efficient use of the bombes dubbed Banburismus; developing a procedure for working out the cam settings of the wheels of the Lorenz SZ 40/42 (Tunny) dubbed Turingery and, towards the end of the war, the development of a portable secure voice scrambler at Hanslope Park that was codenamed Delilah. By using statistical techniques to optimise the trial of different possibilities in the code breaking process, Turing made an innovative contribution to the subject. He wrote two papers discussing mathematical approaches which were entitled The Applications of Probability to Cryptography and Paper on Statistics of Repetitions, which were of such value to GC&CS and its successor GCHQ that they were not released to the UK National Archives until April 2012, shortly before the centenary of his birth. A GCHQ mathematician said at the time that the fact that the contents had been restricted for some 70 years demonstrated their importance. Turing had something of a reputation for eccentricity at Bletchley Park. He was known to his colleagues as 'Prof' and his treatise on Enigma was known as 'The Prof's Book'. Jack Good, a cryptanalyst who worked with him, is quoted by Ronald Lewin as having said of Turing:  In the first week of June each year he would get a bad attack of hay fever, and he would cycle to the office wearing a service gas mask to keep the pollen off. His bicycle had a fault: the chain would come off at regular intervals. Instead of having it mended he would count the number of times the pedals went round and would get off the bicycle in time to adjust the chain by hand. Another of his eccentricities is that he chained his mug to the radiator pipes to prevent it being stolen.  While working at Bletchley, Turing, who was a talented long-distance runner, occasionally ran the 40 miles (64 km) to London when he was needed for high-level meetings, and he was capable of world-class marathon standards. Turing tried out for the 1948 British Olympic team, hampered by an injury. His tryout time for the marathon was only 11 minutes slower than British silver medalist Thomas Richards' Olympic race time of 2 hours 35 minutes. He was Walton Athletic Club's best runner, a fact discovered when he passed the group while running alone. In 1945, Turing was awarded the OBE by King George VI for his wartime services, but his work remained secret for many years.   === BombeEdit === Within weeks of arriving at Bletchley Park, Turing had specified an electromechanical machine that could help break Enigma more effectively than the Polish bomba kryptologiczna, from which its name was derived. The bombe, with an enhancement suggested by mathematician Gordon Welchman, became one of the primary tools, and the major automated one, used to attack Enigma-enciphered messages. Jack Good opined:  Turing's most important contribution, I think, was of part of the design of the bombe, the cryptanalytic machine. He had the idea that you could use, in effect, a theorem in logic which sounds, to the untrained ear, rather absurd; namely that, from a contradiction, you can deduce everything.  The bombe searched for possible correct settings used for an Enigma message (i.e., rotor order, rotor settings and plugboard settings), using a suitable crib: a fragment of probable plaintext. For each possible setting of the rotors (which had on the order of 1019 states, or 1022 states for the four-rotor U-boat variant), the bombe performed a chain of logical deductions based on the crib, implemented electrically. The bombe detected when a contradiction had occurred, and ruled out that setting, moving on to the next. Most of the possible settings would cause contradictions and be discarded, leaving only a few to be investigated in detail. The first bombe was installed on 18 March 1940. By late 1941, Turing and his fellow cryptanalysts Gordon Welchman, Hugh Alexander, and Stuart Milner-Barry were frustrated. Building on the work of the Poles, they had set up a good working system for decrypting Enigma signals but they only had a few people and a few bombes so they did not have time to translate all the signals. In the summer they had had considerable success and shipping losses had fallen to under 100,000 tons a month but they were still on a knife-edge. They badly needed more resources to keep abreast of German adjustments. They had tried to get more people and fund more bombes through the proper channels but they were getting nowhere. Finally, breaking all the rules, on 28 October they wrote directly to Winston Churchill spelling out their difficulties, with Turing as the first named. They emphasised how small their need was compared with the vast expenditure of men and money by the forces and compared with the level of assistance they could offer to the forces. As Andrew Hodges, biographer of Turing, later wrote, "This letter had an electric effect." Churchill wrote a memo to General Ismay which read: "ACTION THIS DAY. Make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done." On 18 November, the chief of the secret service reported that every possible measure was being taken. The cryptographers at Bletchley Park did not know of the prime minister's response, but as Milner-Barry later recalled, "All that we did notice was that almost from that day the rough ways began miraculously to be made smooth." More than two hundred bombes were in operation by the end of the war.   === Hut 8 and Naval EnigmaEdit ===  Turing decided to tackle the particularly difficult problem of German naval Enigma "because no one else was doing anything about it and I could have it to myself". In December 1939, Turing solved the essential part of the naval indicator system, which was more complex than the indicator systems used by the other services. That same night he also conceived of the idea of Banburismus, a sequential statistical technique (what Abraham Wald later called sequential analysis) to assist in breaking naval Enigma, "though I was not sure that it would work in practice, and was not, in fact, sure until some days had actually broken."  For this, he invented a measure of weight of evidence that he called the ban. Banburismus could rule out certain sequences of the Enigma rotors, substantially reducing the time needed to test settings on the bombes. In 1941, Turing proposed marriage to Hut 8 colleague Joan Clarke, a fellow mathematician and cryptanalyst, but their engagement was short-lived. After admitting his homosexuality to his fiancée, who was reportedly "unfazed" by the revelation, Turing decided that he could not go through with the marriage.  Turing travelled to the United States in November 1942 and worked with US Navy cryptanalysts on naval Enigma and bombe construction in Washington; he also visited their Computing Machine Laboratory in Dayton, Ohio. His reaction to the American bombe design was far from enthusiastic:  It seems a pity for them to go out of their way to build a machine to do all this stopping if it is not necessary. I am now converted to the extent of thinking that, starting from scratch on the design of a bombe, this method is about as good as our own. The American bombe program was to produce 336 bombes, one for each wheel order. I used to smile inwardly at the conception of test (of commutators) can hardly be considered conclusive, as they were not testing for the bounce with electronic stop finding devices.  During this trip, he also assisted at Bell Labs with the development of secure speech devices. He returned to Bletchley Park in March 1943. During his absence, Hugh Alexander had officially assumed the position of head of Hut 8, although Alexander had been de facto head for some time (Turing had little interest in the day-to-day running of the section). Turing became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at Bletchley Park. Alexander wrote as follows about his contribution:  There should be no question in anyone's mind that Turing's work was the biggest factor in Hut 8's success. In the early days, he was the only cryptographer who thought the problem worth tackling and not only was he primarily responsible for the main theoretical work within the Hut, but he also shared with Welchman and Keen the chief credit for the invention of the bombe. It is always difficult to say that anyone is 'absolutely indispensable', but if anyone was indispensable to Hut 8, it was Turing. The pioneer's work always tends to be forgotten when experience and routine later make everything seem easy and many of us in Hut 8 felt that the magnitude of Turing's contribution was never fully realised by the outside world.   === TuringeryEdit === In July 1942, Turing devised a technique termed Turingery (or jokingly Turingismus) for use against the Lorenz cipher messages produced by the Germans' new Geheimschreiber (secret writer) machine. This was a teleprinter rotor cipher attachment codenamed Tunny at Bletchley Park. Turingery was a method of wheel-breaking, i.e., a procedure for working out the cam settings of Tunny's wheels. He also introduced the Tunny team to Tommy Flowers who, under the guidance of Max Newman, went on to build the Colossus computer, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer, which replaced a simpler prior machine (the Heath Robinson), and whose superior speed allowed the statistical decryption techniques to be applied usefully to the messages. Some have mistakenly said that Turing was a key figure in the design of the Colossus computer. Turingery and the statistical approach of Banburismus undoubtedly fed into the thinking about cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher, but he was not directly involved in the Colossus development.   === DelilahEdit === Following his work at Bell Labs in the US, Turing pursued the idea of electronic enciphering of speech in the telephone system, and in the latter part of the war, he moved to work for the Secret Service's Radio Security Service (later HMGCC) at Hanslope Park. There he further developed his knowledge of electronics with the assistance of engineer Donald Bayley. Together they undertook the design and construction of a portable secure voice communications machine codenamed Delilah. It was intended for different applications, lacking capability for use with long-distance radio transmissions, and in any case, Delilah was completed too late to be used during the war. Though the system worked fully, with Turing demonstrating it to officials by encrypting and decrypting a recording of a Winston Churchill speech, Delilah was not adopted for use. Turing also consulted with Bell Labs on the development of SIGSALY, a secure voice system that was used in the later years of the war.   == Early computers and the Turing testEdit ==  From 1945 to 1947, Turing lived in Hampton, London while he worked on the design of the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine) at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). He presented a paper on 19 February 1946, which was the first detailed design of a stored-program computer. Von Neumann's incomplete First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC had predated Turing's paper, but it was much less detailed and, according to John R. Womersley, Superintendent of the NPL Mathematics Division, it "contains a number of ideas which are Dr. Turing's own". Although ACE was a feasible design, the secrecy surrounding the wartime work at Bletchley Park led to delays in starting the project and he became disillusioned. In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year during which he produced a seminal work on Intelligent Machinery that was not published in his lifetime. While he was at Cambridge, the Pilot ACE was being built in his absence. It executed its first program on 10 May 1950, and a number of later computers around the world owe much to it, including the English Electric DEUCE and the American Bendix G-15. The full version of Turing's ACE was not built until after his death. According to the memoirs of the German computer pioneer Heinz Billing from the Max Planck Institute for Physics, published by Genscher, Düsseldorf, there was a meeting between Alan Turing and Konrad Zuse. It took place in Göttingen in 1947. The interrogation had the form of a colloquium. Participants were Womersley, Turing, Porter from England and a few German researchers like Zuse, Walther, and Billing. (For more details see Herbert Bruderer, Konrad Zuse und die Schweiz). In 1948 Turing was appointed Reader in the Mathematics Department at the University of Manchester. In 1949, he became Deputy Director of the Computing Laboratory there, working on software for one of the earliest stored-programme computers—the Manchester Mark 1. During this time he continued to do more abstract work in mathematics, and in "Computing Machinery and Intelligence" (Mind, October 1950), Turing addressed the problem of artificial intelligence, and proposed an experiment which became known as the Turing test, an attempt to define a standard for a machine to be called "intelligent". The idea was that a computer could be said to "think" if a human interrogator could not tell it apart, through conversation, from a human being. In the paper, Turing suggested that rather than building a programme to simulate the adult mind, it would be better rather to produce a simpler one to simulate a child's mind and then to subject it to a course of education. A reversed form of the Turing test is widely used on the Internet; the CAPTCHA test is intended to determine whether the user is a human or a computer. In 1948 Turing, working with his former undergraduate colleague, D. G. Champernowne, began writing a chess program for a computer that did not yet exist. By 1950, the programme was completed and dubbed the Turochamp. In 1952, he tried to implement it on a Ferranti Mark 1, but lacking enough power, the computer was unable to execute the programme. Instead, Turing played a game in which he simulated the computer, taking about half an hour per move. The game was recorded. The program lost to Turing's colleague Alick Glennie, although it is said that it won a game against Champernowne's wife. His Turing test was a significant, characteristically provocative and lasting contribution to the debate regarding artificial intelligence, which continues after more than half a century. He also invented the LU decomposition method in 1948, used today for solving matrix equations.   == Pattern formation and mathematical biologyEdit == Towards the end of his life, Turing turned to mathematical biology, publishing the "The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis" in 1952. He was interested in morphogenesis, the development of patterns and shapes in biological organisms. His central interest in the field was understanding Fibonacci phyllotaxis, the existence of Fibonacci numbers in plant structures. He suggested that a system of chemicals reacting with each other and diffusing across space, termed a reaction-diffusion system, could account for "the main phenomena of morphogenesis." Instability in the system of linear partial differential equations used to model the system allows for small random perturbations to homogeneous initial state to drive the development of patterns. Though published before even the structure or role of DNA was understood, Turing's work on morphogenesis remains relevant today, and is considered a seminal piece of work in mathematical biology. Experiments suggest that Turing's work can partially explain growth of "feathers, hair follicles, the branching pattern of lungs, and even the left-right asymmetry that puts the heart on the left side of the chest." In 2012, Sheh, et al. found that in mice, removal of Hox genes causes an increase in the number of digits without an increase in the overall size of the limb, suggesting that Hox genes control digit formation by tuning the wavelength of a Turing-type mechanism. Later papers, though promised, were not available until Collected Works of A. M. Turing was published in 1992.   == Conviction for indecencyEdit == In January 1952, Turing, then 39, started a relationship with Arnold Murray, a 19-year-old unemployed man. Turing had met Murray just before Christmas outside the Regal Cinema when walking down Manchester's Oxford Road and invited him to lunch. On 23 January Turing's house was burgled. Murray told Turing that the burglar was an acquaintance of his, and Turing reported the crime to the police. During the investigation he acknowledged a sexual relationship with Murray. Homosexual acts were criminal offences in the United Kingdom at that time, and both men were charged with gross indecency under Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885. Initial committal proceedings for the trial were held on 27 February during which Turing's solicitor "reserved his defence". Later, convinced by the advice of his brother and his own solicitor, Turing entered a plea of guilty. The case, Regina v. Turing and Murray, was brought to trial on 31 March 1952, when Turing was convicted and given a choice between imprisonment and probation, which would be conditional on his agreement to undergo hormonal treatment designed to reduce libido. He accepted the option of treatment via injections of stilboestrol, a synthetic oestrogen; this treatment was continued for the course of one year. The treatment rendered Turing impotent and caused gynaecomastia, fulfilling in the literal sense Turing's prediction that "no doubt I shall emerge from it all a different man, but quite who I've not found out". Murray was given a conditional discharge. Turing's conviction led to the removal of his security clearance and barred him from continuing with his cryptographic consultancy for the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the British signals intelligence agency that had evolved from GC&CS in 1946 (though he kept his academic job). He was denied entry into the United States after his conviction in 1952, but was free to visit other European countries, even though this was viewed by some as a security risk. At the time, there was acute public anxiety about homosexual entrapment of spies by Soviet agents, because of the recent exposure of the first two members of the Cambridge Five, Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, as KGB double agents. Turing was never accused of espionage, but in common with all who had worked at Bletchley Park, he was prevented by the Official Secrets Act from discussing his war work.   == DeathEdit == On 8 June 1954, Turing's housekeeper found him dead. He had died the previous day. A post-mortem examination established that the cause of death was cyanide poisoning. When his body was discovered, an apple lay half-eaten beside his bed, and although the apple was not tested for cyanide, it was speculated that this was the means by which a fatal dose was consumed. An inquest determined that he had committed suicide, and he was cremated at Woking Crematorium on 12 June 1954. Turing's ashes were scattered there, just as his father's had been.   === Alternative death theoriesEdit === Philosophy professor Jack Copeland has questioned various aspects of the coroner's historical verdict, suggesting the alternative explanation of the accidental inhalation of cyanide fumes from an apparatus for gold electroplating spoons, using potassium cyanide to dissolve the gold, which Turing had set up in his tiny spare room. Copeland notes that the autopsy findings were more consistent with inhalation than with ingestion of the poison. Turing also habitually ate an apple before bed, and it was not unusual for it to be discarded half-eaten. In addition, Turing had reportedly borne his legal setbacks and hormone treatment (which had been discontinued a year previously) "with good humour" and had shown no sign of despondency prior to his death, setting down, in fact, a list of tasks he intended to complete upon return to his office after the holiday weekend. At the time, Turing's mother believed that the ingestion was accidental, resulting from her son's careless storage of laboratory chemicals. Biographer Andrew Hodges suggests that Turing may have arranged the cyanide experiment deliberately, to give his mother some plausible deniability. Andrew Hodges, and another biographer, David Leavitt, have both suggested that Turing was re-enacting a scene from the Walt Disney film Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), his favourite fairy tale, both noting that (in Leavitt's words) he took "an especially keen pleasure in the scene where the Wicked Queen immerses her apple in the poisonous brew".   == Recognition and tributesEdit == A biography published by the Royal Society shortly after Turing's death, while his wartime work was still subject to the Official Secrets Act, recorded:  Three remarkable papers written just before the war, on three diverse mathematical subjects, show the quality of the work that might have been produced if he had settled down to work on some big problem at that critical time. For his work at the Foreign Office he was awarded the OBE.  Since 1966, the Turing Award has been given annually by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) for technical or theoretical contributions to the computing community. It is widely considered to be the computing world's highest honour, equivalent to the Nobel Prize.  On 23 June 1998, on what would have been Turing's 86th birthday, his biographer, Andrew Hodges, unveiled an official English Heritage blue plaque at his birthplace and childhood home in Warrington Crescent, London, later the Colonnade Hotel. To mark the 50th anniversary of his death, a memorial plaque was unveiled on 7 June 2004 at his former residence, Hollymeade, in Wilmslow, Cheshire. On 13 March 2000, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines issued a set of postage stamps to celebrate the greatest achievements of the 20th century, one of which carries a portrait of Turing against a background of repeated 0s and 1s, and is captioned: "1937: Alan Turing's theory of digital computing". On 1 April 2003, Turing's work at Bletchley Park was named an IEEE Milestone. On 28 October 2004, a bronze statue of Alan Turing sculpted by John W. Mills was unveiled at the University of Surrey in Guildford, marking the 50th anniversary of Turing's death; it portrays him carrying his books across the campus. In 2006, Boston Pride named Turing their Honorary Grand Marshal. Turing was one of four mathematicians examined in the BBC documentary entitled Dangerous Knowledge (2008). The Princeton Alumni Weekly named Turing the second most significant alumnus in the history of Princeton University, second only to President James Madison. A 1.5-ton, life-size statue of Turing was unveiled on 19 June 2007 at Bletchley Park. Built from approximately half a million pieces of Welsh slate, it was sculpted by Stephen Kettle, having been commissioned by the American billionaire Sidney Frank. Turing has been honoured in various ways in Manchester, the city where he worked towards the end of his life. In 1994, a stretch of the A6010 road (the Manchester city intermediate ring road) was named "Alan Turing Way". A bridge carrying this road was widened, and carries the name Alan Turing Bridge. A statue of Turing was unveiled in Manchester on 23 June 2001 in Sackville Park, between the University of Manchester building on Whitworth Street and Canal Street. The memorial statue depicts the "father of Computer Science" sitting on a bench at a central position in the park. Turing is shown holding an apple. The cast bronze bench carries in relief the text 'Alan Mathison Turing 1912–1954', and the motto 'Founder of Computer Science' as it could appear if encoded by an Enigma machine: 'IEKYF ROMSI ADXUO KVKZC GUBJ'.  A plaque at the statue's feet reads 'Father of computer science, mathematician, logician, wartime codebreaker, victim of prejudice'. There is also a Bertrand Russell quotation saying 'Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty — a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture.' The sculptor buried his own old Amstrad computer under the plinth as a tribute to "the godfather of all modern computers". In 1999, Time Magazine named Turing as one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century and stated: "The fact remains that everyone who taps at a keyboard, opening a spreadsheet or a word-processing program, is working on an incarnation of a Turing machine." Turing is featured in the Neal Stephenson novel Cryptonomicon (1999). In 2002, a new building named after Alan Turing was constructed on the Malvern site of QinetiQ. It houses about 200 scientists and engineers, some of whom work on big data computing. In 2002, Turing was ranked twenty-first on the BBC nationwide poll of the 100 Greatest Britons. In 2006 British writer and mathematician Ioan James chose Turing as one of twenty people to feature in his book about famous historical figures who may have had some of the traits of Asperger syndrome. In 2010, actor/playwright Jade Esteban Estrada portrayed Turing in the solo musical, ICONS: The Lesbian and Gay History of the World, Vol. 4. In 2011, in The Guardian's "My hero" series, writer Alan Garner chose Turing as his hero and described how they had met whilst out jogging in the early 1950s. Garner remembered Turing as "funny and witty" and said that he "talked endlessly".  In 2006, Alan Turing was named with online resources as an LGBT History Month Icon.  In February 2011, Turing's papers from the Second World War were bought for the nation with an 11th-hour bid by the National Heritage Memorial Fund, allowing them to stay at Bletchley Park. The logo of Apple Inc. is often erroneously referred to as a tribute to Alan Turing, with the bite mark a reference to his death. Both the designer of the logo and the company deny that there is any homage to Turing in the design of the logo. Stephen Fry has recounted asking Steve Jobs whether the design was intentional, saying that Jobs' response was, "God, we wish it were." The Turing Rainbow Festival, held in Madurai, India in 2012 for celebrating the LGBT and Genderqueer cause, was named in honour of Alan Turing by Gopi Shankar of Srishti Madurai. Also in 2012 Turing was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display which celebrates LGBT history and people. The francophone singer-songwriter Salvatore Adamo makes a tribute to Turing with his song "Alan et la Pomme". Turing's life and work featured in a BBC children's programme about famous scientists – Absolute Genius with Dick and Dom – the episode was first broadcast on 12 March 2014. On 17 May 2014, the world's first work of public art to recognise Alan Turing as gay was commissioned in Bletchley, close by to Bletchley Park where his war-time work was carried out. The commission was announced by the owners of Milton Keynes-based LGBT venue and nightclub, Pink Punters to mark International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia. The work was unveiled at a ceremony on Turing's birthday, 23 June 2014, and is placed outside Pink Punter's alongside the busy Watling Street, the old main road to London where Turing himself would have passed by on many occasions. On 22 October 2014, Turing was inducted into the NSA Hall of Honor.   === Tributes by universities and research institutionsEdit === The computer room at King's College, Cambridge, Alan Turing's alma mater, is called the Turing Room. The Turing Room at the University of Edinburgh's School of Informatics houses a bust of Turing by Eduardo Paolozzi, and a set (No. 42/50) of his Turing prints (2000). The University of Surrey has a statue of Turing on their main piazza and one of the buildings of Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences is named after him. Istanbul Bilgi University organises an annual conference on the theory of computation called "Turing Days". The University of Texas at Austin has an honours computer science programme named the Turing Scholars. In the early 1960s Stanford University named the sole lecture room of the Polya Hall Mathematics building "Alan Turing Auditorium". One of the amphitheatres of the Computer Science department (LIFL) at the University of Lille in Northern France is named in honour of Alan M. Turing (the other amphitheatre is named after Kurt Gödel).  The Department of Computer Science at Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, the University of Buenos Aires, the Polytechnic University of Puerto Rico, Los Andes University in Bogotá, Colombia, King's College, Cambridge, Bangor University in Wales, the Universities of Ghent and Mons in Belgium, the University of Turin (Università degli Studi di Torino), the University of Puerto Rico at Humacao, Keele University and the University of Washington have computer laboratories named after Turing. The University of Manchester, the Open University, Oxford Brookes University and Aarhus University (in Aarhus, Denmark) all have buildings named after Turing. Alan Turing Road in the Surrey Research Park and the Alan Turing Way, part of the Manchester inner ring road are named after Alan Turing. Carnegie Mellon University has a granite bench, situated in the Hornbostel Mall, with the name "A. M. Turing" carved across the top, "Read" down the left leg, and "Write" down the other. The École Internationale des Sciences du Traitement de l'Information has named its third building "Turing". The University of Oregon has a bust of Turing on the side of the Deschutes Hall, the computer science building. The École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne has a road and a square named after Alan Turing (Chemin de Alan Turing and Place de Alan Turing). The Faculty of Informatics and Information Technologies Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava, Slovakia has a lecture room named "Turing Auditorium". The Paris Diderot University has a lecture room named "Amphithéâtre Turing". The Paul Sabatier University has a lecture room named "Amphithéâtre Turing" (Bâtiment U4). The Department of Computer Science at the College of Engineering, Guindy has named its lecture hall as the "Turing Hall". The Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the University of Würzburg has a lecture hall named "Turing Hörsaal". The largest conference hall at the Amsterdam Science Park is named Turingzaal. In the summer of 2014, King's College London's School of Natural and Mathematical Sciences awarded the Alan Turing Centenary Prize to "the student ... who has not only achieved outstanding academic performance, but also made a significant contribution to the life of [the department]". The University of Kent will open a brand new college, named Turing College at their Canterbury campus, to provide more than 800 new rooms to accommodate undergraduate and postgraduate students and keep up with increased demand for 'on campus living'. Other features of the new college include a hub to provide a social space for residents, study areas, office space and catering. Scientist George McVittie, an Honorary Professor at Kent from 1972 to 1988, worked with Alan Turing at Bletchley Park. The campus of the École polytechnique has a building named after Alan Turing; it is a research centre of which premises are shared by the École Polytechnique, the INRIA and Microsoft. The University of Toronto developed the Turing programming language in 1982, named after Alan Turing The Faculty of Exact Sciences at the University of Buenos Aires has a computer laboratory named after Alan Turing.   == Government apology and pardonEdit ==  In August 2009, John Graham-Cumming started a petition urging the British Government to apologise for Turing's prosecution as a homosexual. The petition received more than 30,000 signatures. Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged the petition, releasing a statement on 10 September 2009 apologising and describing the treatment of Turing as "appalling":  Thousands of people have come together to demand justice for Alan Turing and recognition of the appalling way he was treated. While Turing was dealt with under the law of the time and we can't put the clock back, his treatment was of course utterly unfair and I am pleased to have the chance to say how deeply sorry I and we all are for what happened to him ... So on behalf of the British government, and all those who live freely thanks to Alan's work I am very proud to say: we're sorry, you deserved so much better.  In December 2011, William Jones created an e-petition requesting the British Government pardon Turing for his conviction of "gross indecency":  We ask the HM Government to grant a pardon to Alan Turing for the conviction of "gross indecency". In 1952, he was convicted of "gross indecency" with another man and was forced to undergo so-called "organo-therapy" – chemical castration. Two years later, he killed himself with cyanide, aged just 41. Alan Turing was driven to a terrible despair and early death by the nation he'd done so much to save. This remains a shame on the British government and British history. A pardon can go to some way to healing this damage. It may act as an apology to many of the other gay men, not as well-known as Alan Turing, who were subjected to these laws.  The petition gathered over 37,000 signatures, but the request was discouraged by Lord McNally, who gave the following opinion in his role as the Justice Minister:  A posthumous pardon was not considered appropriate as Alan Turing was properly convicted of what at the time was a criminal offence. He would have known that his offence was against the law and that he would be prosecuted. It is tragic that Alan Turing was convicted of an offence which now seems both cruel and absurd—particularly poignant given his outstanding contribution to the war effort. However, the law at the time required a prosecution and, as such, long-standing policy has been to accept that such convictions took place and, rather than trying to alter the historical context and to put right what cannot be put right, ensure instead that we never again return to those times.  On 26 July 2012, a bill was introduced in the House of Lords to grant a statutory pardon to Turing for offences under section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, of which he was convicted on 31 March 1952. Late in the year in a letter to The Daily Telegraph, the physicist Stephen Hawking and 10 other signatories including the Astronomer Royal Lord Rees, President of the Royal Society Sir Paul Nurse, Lady Trumpington (who worked for Turing during the war) and Lord Sharkey (the bill's sponsor) called on Prime Minister David Cameron to act on the pardon request. The Government indicated it would support the bill, and it passed its third reading in the Lords in October. Before the bill could be debated in the House of Commons, the Government elected to proceed under the royal prerogative of mercy. On 24 December 2013, Queen Elizabeth II signed a pardon for Turing's conviction for gross indecency, with immediate effect. Announcing the pardon, Justice Secretary Chris Grayling said Turing deserved to be "remembered and recognised for his fantastic contribution to the war effort" and not for his later criminal conviction. The Queen officially pronounced Turing pardoned in August 2014. The Queen's action is only the fourth royal pardon granted since the conclusion of the Second World War. This case is unusual in that pardons are normally granted only when the person is technically innocent, and a request has been made by the family or other interested party. Neither condition was met in regard to Turing's conviction. In a letter to Prime Minister David Cameron after announcement of the pardon, human rights advocate Peter Tatchell criticised the decision to single out Turing due to his fame and achievements, when thousands of others convicted under the same law have not received pardons. Tatchell also called for a new investigation into Turing's death:  A new inquiry is long overdue, even if only to dispel any doubts about the true cause of his death – including speculation that he was murdered by the security services (or others). I think murder by state agents is unlikely. There is no known evidence pointing to any such act. However, it is a major failing that this possibility has never been considered or investigated.   == Centenary celebrationsEdit ==  To mark the 100th anniversary of Turing's birth, the Turing Centenary Advisory Committee (TCAC) co-ordinated the Alan Turing Year, a year-long programme of events around the world honouring Turing's life and achievements. The TCAC, chaired by S. Barry Cooper with Alan Turing's nephew Sir John Dermot Turing acting as Honorary President, worked with the University of Manchester faculty members and a broad spectrum of people from Cambridge University and Bletchley Park. On 23 June 2012, Google featured an interactive doodle where visitors had to change the instructions of a Turing Machine, so when run, the symbols on the tape would match a provided sequence, featuring "Google" in Baudot-Murray code. The Bletchley Park Trust collaborated with Winning Moves to publish an Alan Turing edition of the board game Monopoly. The game's squares and cards have been revised to tell the story of Alan Turing's life, from his birthplace in Maida Vale to Hut 8 at Bletchley Park. The game also includes a replica of an original hand-drawn board created by William Newman, son of Turing's mentor, Max Newman, which Turing played on in the 1950s. In the Philippines, the Department of Philosophy at De La Salle University-Manila hosted Turing 2012, an international conference on philosophy, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science from 27 to 28 March 2012 to commemorate the centenary birth of Turing. Madurai, India held celebrations, in conjunction with Asia's first Gay Pride festival, with a programme attended by 6,000 students.   === UK celebrationsEdit ===  There was a three-day conference in Manchester in June, a two-day conference in San Francisco, organised by the ACM, and a birthday party and Turing Centenary Conference in Cambridge organised at King's College, Cambridge and the University of Cambridge, the latter organised by the association Computability in Europe. The Science Museum in London launched a free exhibition devoted to Turing's life and achievements in June 2012, to run until July 2013. In February 2012, the Royal Mail issued a stamp featuring Turing as part of its "Britons of Distinction" series. The London 2012 Olympic Torch flame was passed on in front of Turing's statue in Sackville Gardens, Manchester, on the evening of 23 June 2012, the 100th anniversary of his birth. On 22 June 2012 Manchester City Council, in partnership with the Lesbian and Gay Foundation, launched the Alan Turing Memorial Award which will recognise individuals or groups who have made a significant contribution to the fight against homophobia in Manchester. At the University of Oxford, a new course in Computer Science and Philosophy was established to coincide with the centenary of Turing's birth. Previous events have included a celebration of Turing's life and achievements, at the University of Manchester, arranged by the British Logic Colloquium and the British Society for the History of Mathematics on 5 June 2004.   == Portrayal in adaptationsEdit ==   === TheatreEdit ===  Breaking the Code is a 1986 play by Hugh Whitemore about Alan Turing. The play ran in London's West End beginning in November 1986 and on Broadway from 15 November 1987 to 10 April 1988. There was also a 1996 BBC television production (broadcast in the United States by PBS). In all three performances Turing was played by Derek Jacobi. The Broadway production was nominated for three Tony Awards including Best Actor in a Play, Best Featured Actor in a Play, and Best Direction of a Play, and for two Drama Desk Awards, for Best Actor and Best Featured Actor. Turing was again portrayed by Jacobi in the 1996 television film adaptation of Breaking the Code. In 2012, in honour of the Turing Centennial, American Lyric Theater commissioned an operatic exploration of the life and death of Alan Turing from composer Justine F. Chen and librettist David Simpatico. Titled The Life and Death(s) of Alan Turing, the opera is a historical fantasia on the life of the brilliant scientist. The opera will receive a concert performance in October 2015 in New York City. In November 2014, the opera and several other artistic works inspired by Turing's life were featured on Studio 360.   === LiteratureEdit === The 2006 novel A Madman Dreams of Turing Machines contrasts fictionalised accounts of the lives and ideas of Turing and Kurt Gödel.   === MusicEdit === Electronic music duo Matmos released an EP titled For Alan Turing in 2006, which was based on material commissioned by Dr. Robert Osserman and David Elsenbud of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute. In one of its tracks, an original Enigma Machine is sampled. In 2012, Spanish group Hidrogenesse dedicated their LP Un dígito binario dudoso. Recital para Alan Turing (A dubious binary digit. Concert for Alan Turing) to the memory of the mathematician. A musical work inspired by Turing's life, written by Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe of the Pet Shop Boys, entitled A Man from the Future, was announced in late 2013. It was performed by the Pet Shop Boys and Juliet Stevenson (narrator), the BBC Singers, and the BBC Concert Orchestra conducted by Dominic Wheeler at the BBC Proms in the Royal Albert Hall on 23 July 2014. Codebreaker is also the title of a choral work by the composer James McCarthy. It includes settings of texts by the poets Wilfred Owen, Sara Teasdale, Walt Whitman, Oscar Wilde and Robert Burns that are used to illustrate aspects of Turing's life. It was premiered on 26 April 2014 at the Barbican Centre in London, where it was performed by the Hertfordshire Chorus, who commissioned the work, led by David Temple with the soprano soloist Naomi Harvey providing the voice of Turing's mother.   === FilmEdit === The drama-documentary Codebreaker, about Turing's life, was aired by UK's Channel 4 in November 2011 and was released in the US in October 2012. It is also known as Britain's Greatest Codebreaker. The film features Ed Stoppard as Turing and Henry Goodman as Franz Greenbaum. The historical drama film The Imitation Game, directed by Morten Tyldum and starring Benedict Cumberbatch as Turing and Keira Knightley as Joan Clarke, was released in the UK on 14 November 2014 and released theatrically in the US on 28 November 2014. It is about Alan Turing breaking the Enigma code with other codebreakers in Bletchley Park.   == Awards and honoursEdit == Turing was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1951. In addition, he has had several things named in his honour.  Good–Turing frequency estimation Turing completeness Turing degree Turing Institute Turing Lecture Turing machine examples Turing patterns Turing reduction Turing switch Unorganised machine   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit ==   === PapersEdit === List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search Alan Turing's publications indexed by Google Scholar, a service provided by Google Turing, Alan (October 1950), "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind LIX (236): 433–460, doi:10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433, ISSN 0026-4423, retrieved 2008-08-18  Oral history interview with Nicholas C. Metropolis, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Metropolis was the first director of computing services at Los Alamos National Laboratory; topics include the relationship between Alan Turing and John von Neumann   == External linksEdit == Turing family house in Coonoor, India A podcast program about Turing made by Radio Lab. Alan Turing RKBExplorer Alan Turing Year CiE 2012: Turing Centenary Conference Alan Turing site maintained by Andrew Hodges including a short biography AlanTuring.net – Turing Archive for the History of Computing by Jack Copeland The Turing Archive – contains scans of some unpublished documents and material from the King's College, Cambridge archive Jones, G. James (11 December 2001). "Alan Turing – Towards a Digital Mind: Part 1". System Toolbox (The Binary Freedom Project).  Happy 100th Birthday, Alan Turing by Stephen Wolfram. Sherborne School Archives – holds papers relating to Alan Turing's time at Sherborne School Alan Turing plaques recorded on openplaques.org Turing's treatise on Enigma (The Prof's Book) Codebreaker film, official site Turing 2012 Codebreaker choral work on YouTube

Alasdair Ian Fenton Urquhart /ˈɜrkərt/, born 20 December 1945, is an emeritus Professor of Philosophy at the University of Toronto. He has made notable contributions to the field of logic, especially non-classical logic. One of his most notable achievements is proving the undecidability of the relevance logic R. He also published numerous papers in major theoretical computer science venues, mostly on mathematical logic topics of relevance to computer science. A native of Scotland, Urquhart received his MA in Philosophy from the University of Edinburgh in 1967, and his Ph.D. from the University of Pittsburgh in 1973 under the supervision of Alan Ross Anderson and Nuel Belnap.   == Selected publications == "The Undecidability of Entailment and Relevant Implication." Journal of Symbolic Logic 49(4): 1059-1073 (1984). with Stephen A. Cook, "Functional Interpretations of Feasibly constructive Arithmetic", Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 1993; preliminary version at STOC'89 "The Complexity of Decision Procedures in Relevance Logic II", J. Symbolic Logic, Volume 64, Issue 4 (1999), 1774-1802.   == References ==  Curriculum vitae   == External links == home page Math genealogy DBLP publications


Alcuin of York (Latin: Alcuinus, c. 735 – 19 May 804), also called Ealhwine, Albinus or Flaccus, was an English scholar, ecclesiastic, poet and teacher from York, Northumbria. He was born around 735 and became the student of Archbishop Ecgbert at York. At the invitation of Charlemagne, he became a leading scholar and teacher at the Carolingian court, where he remained a figure in the 780s and 790s. He wrote many theological and dogmatic treatises, as well as a few grammatical works and a number of poems. He was made Abbot of Tours in 796, where he remained until his death. "The most learned man anywhere to be found", according to Einhard's Life of Charlemagne, he is considered among the most important architects of the Carolingian Renaissance. Among his pupils were many of the dominant intellectuals of the Carolingian era.   == BiographyEdit ==   === BackgroundEdit === Alcuin was born in Northumbria, presumably sometime in the 730s. Virtually nothing is known of his parents, family background, or origin. In common hagiographical fashion, the Vita Alcuini asserts that Alcuin was 'of noble English stock,' and this statement has usually been accepted by scholars. Alcuin's own work only mentions such collateral kinsmen as Wilgils, father of the missionary saint Willibrord; and Beornred, abbot of Echternach and bishop of Sens, who was more distantly related. In his Life of St Willibrord, Alcuin writes that Wilgils, called a paterfamilias, had founded an oratory and church at the mouth of the Humber, which had fallen into Alcuin's possession by inheritance. Because in early Anglo-Latin writing paterfamilias ("head of a family, householder") usually referred to a ceorl, Donald A. Bullough suggests that Alcuin's family was of cierlisc status: i.e., free but subordinate to a noble lord, and that Alcuin and other members of his family rose to prominence through beneficial connections with the aristocracy. If so, Alcuin's origins may lie in the southern part of what was formerly known as Deira.   === YorkEdit === The young Alcuin came to the cathedral church of York during the golden age of Archbishop Ecgbert and his brother, the Northumbrian King Eadberht. Ecgbert had been a disciple of the Venerable Bede, who urged him to raise York to an archbishopric. King Eadberht and Archbishop Ecgbert oversaw the re-energising and re-organisation of the English church, with an emphasis on reforming the clergy and on the tradition of learning that Bede had begun. Ecgbert was devoted to Alcuin, who thrived under his tutelage. The York school was renowned as a centre of learning in the liberal arts, literature, and science, as well as in religious matters. It was from here that Alcuin drew inspiration for the school he would lead at the Frankish court. He revived the school with the trivium and quadrivium disciplines, writing a codex on the trivium, while his student Hraban wrote one on the quadrivium. Alcuin graduated to become a teacher during the 750s. His ascendancy to the headship of the York school, the ancestor of St Peter's School, began after Aelbert became Archbishop of York in 767. Around the same time Alcuin became a deacon in the church. He was never ordained as a priest and there is no real evidence that he became an actual monk, but he lived his life as one. In 781, King Elfwald sent Alcuin to Rome to petition the Pope for official confirmation of York's status as an archbishopric and to confirm the election of the new archbishop, Eanbald I. On his way home he met Charlemagne (whom he had met once before), this time in the Italian city of Parma.   === CharlemagneEdit === Alcuin's intellectual curiosity allowed him to be reluctantly persuaded to join Charlemagne's court. He joined an illustrious group of scholars that Charlemagne had gathered around him, the mainsprings of the Carolingian Renaissance: Peter of Pisa, Paulinus of Aquileia, Rado, and Abbot Fulrad. Alcuin would later write that "the Lord was calling me to the service of King Charles." He was welcomed at the Palace School of Charlemagne in Aachen (Urbs Regale) in 782. It had been founded by the king's ancestors as a place for the education of the royal children (mostly in manners and the ways of the court). However, Charlemagne wanted to include the liberal arts and, most importantly, the study of the religion. From 782 to 790, Alcuin taught Charlemagne himself, his sons Pepin and Louis, the young men sent to be educated at court, and the young clerics attached to the palace chapel. Bringing with him from York his assistants Pyttel, Sigewulf, and Joseph, Alcuin revolutionised the educational standards of the Palace School, introducing Charlemagne to the liberal arts and creating a personalised atmosphere of scholarship and learning, to the extent that the institution came to be known as the 'school of Master Albinus'. In this role as adviser, he tackled the emperor over his policy of forcing pagans to be baptised on pain of death, arguing, "Faith is a free act of the will, not a forced act. We must appeal to the conscience, not compel it by violence. You can force people to be baptised, but you cannot force them to believe." His arguments seem to have prevailed – Charlemagne abolished the death penalty for paganism in 797. Charlemagne was a master at gathering the best men of every land in his court. He himself became far more than just the king at the centre. It seems that he made many of these men his closest friends and counsellors. They referred to him as 'David', a reference to the Biblical king David. Alcuin soon found himself on intimate terms with Charlemagne and the other men at court, where pupils and masters were known by affectionate and jesting nicknames. Alcuin himself was known as 'Albinus' or 'Flaccus'. While at Aachen, Alcuin bestowed pet names upon his pupils – derived mainly from Virgil's Eclogues.   === Return to Northumbria and back to FranciaEdit === In 790 Alcuin returned from the court of Charlemagne to England, to which he had remained attached. He dwelt there for some time, but Charlemagne then invited him back to help in the fight against the Adoptionist heresy which was at that time making great progress in Toledo, the old capital of the Visigoths and still a major city for the Christians under Islamic rule in Spain. He is believed to have had contacts with Beatus of Liébana, from the Kingdom of Asturias, who fought against Adoptionism. At the Council of Frankfurt in 794, Alcuin upheld the orthodox doctrine against the views expressed by Felix of Urgel, an heresiarch according to the Catholic Encyclopaedia. Having failed during his stay in Northumbria to influence King Æthelred in the conduct of his reign, Alcuin never returned home. He was back at Charlemagne's court by at least mid-792, writing a series of letters to Æthelred, to Hygbald, Bishop of Lindisfarne, and to Æthelhard, Archbishop of Canterbury in the succeeding months, dealing with the Viking attack on Lindisfarne in July 793. These letters and Alcuin's poem on the subject, De clade Lindisfarnensis monasterii, provide the only significant contemporary account of these events. In his description of the Viking attack, he wrote: "Never before has such terror appeared in Britain. Behold the church of St Cuthbert, splattered with the blood of God's priests, robbed of its ornaments."   === Tours and deathEdit === In 796 Alcuin was in his sixties. He hoped to be free from court duties and was given the chance upon the death of Abbot Itherius of Saint Martin at Tours, when Charlemagne put Marmoutier Abbey into Alcuin's care, with the understanding that he should be available if the king ever needed his counsel. Alcuin died on 19 May 804, some ten years before the emperor, and was buried at St. Martin's Church under an epitaph that partly read:  Dust, worms, and ashes now ... Alcuin my name, wisdom I always loved, Pray, reader, for my soul.  He was later canonised as a saint, and remains recognised within the Roman Catholic, Anglican and Eastern Orthodox traditions. The majority of details on Alcuin's life come from his letters and poems. There are also autobiographical sections in Alcuin's poem on York and in the Vita Alcuini, a Life written for him at Ferrières in the 820s, possibly based in part on the memories of Sigwulf, one of Alcuin's pupils.   == Carolingian Renaissance figure and legacyEdit ==   === MathematicianEdit ===  The collection of mathematical and logical word problems entitled Propositiones ad acuendos juvenes ("Problems to Sharpen Youths") is sometimes attributed to Alcuin. In a 799 letter to Charlemagne the scholar claimed to have sent "certain figures of arithmetic for the joy of cleverness," which some scholars have identified with the Propositiones. The text contains about 53 mathematical word problems (with solutions), in no particular pedagogical order. Among the most famous of these problems are: four that involve river crossings, including the problem of three anxious brothers, each of whom has an unmarried sister whom he cannot leave alone with either of the other men lest she be defiled (Problem 17); the problem of the wolf, goat, and cabbage (Problem 18); and the problem of "the two adults and two children where the children weigh half as much as the adults" (Problem 19). Alcuin's sequence is the solution to one of the problems of that book.   === Literary influenceEdit === Alcuin made the abbey school into a model of excellence and many students flocked to it. He had many manuscripts copied using outstandingly beautiful calligraphy, the Carolingian minuscule based on round and legible uncial letters. He wrote many letters to his English friends, to Arno, bishop of Salzburg and above all to Charlemagne. These letters (of which 311 are extant) are filled mainly with pious meditations, but they form an important source of information as to the literary and social conditions of the time and are the most reliable authority for the history of humanism during the Carolingian age. Alcuin trained the numerous monks of the abbey in piety, and it was in the midst of these pursuits that he died. Alcuin is the most prominent figure of the Carolingian Renaissance, in which three main periods have been distinguished: in the first of these, up to the arrival of Alcuin at the court, the Italians occupy a central place; in the second, Alcuin and the Anglo-Saxons are dominant; in the third (from 804), the influence of Theodulf, the Visigoth is preponderant. Alcuin also developed manuals used in his educational work – a grammar and works on rhetoric and dialectics. These are written in the form of dialogues, and in two of them the interlocutors are Charlemagne and Alcuin. He wrote several theological treatises: a De fide Trinitatis, and commentaries on the Bible. Alcuin is credited with inventing the first known question mark, though it didn't resemble the modern symbol. Alcuin transmitted to the Franks the knowledge of Latin culture which had existed in Anglo-Saxon England. A number of his works still exist. Besides some graceful epistles in the style of Venantius Fortunatus, he wrote some long poems, and notably he is the author of a history (in verse) of the church at York, Versus de patribus, regibus et sanctis Eboracensis ecclesiae.   === Use of homo-erotic languageEdit === Passages in Alcuin's writings have been seen to exhibit homosocial desire, possibly even homoerotic imagery. David Clark suggests it is not possible to determine whether Alcuin's homosocial desires were the result of an outward expression of erotic feelings. Historian John Boswell cited this as a personal outpouring of Alcuin's internalized homosexual feelings. Others agree that Alcuin at times "comes perilously close to communicating openly his same sex desires", and this reflects the erotic subculture of the Carolingian monastic school, but also perhaps a 'queer space' where "erotic attachment and affections may be safely articulated”. Erotic and religious love are intertwined in Alcuin's writings, and he frequently "eroticizes his personal relationships to his beloved friends”. Alcuin's friendships also extended to the ladies of the court, especially the queen mother and the king's daughters, though his relationships with these women never reached the intense level of those of the men around him. However, the interpretation of homosexual desire has been disputed by Allen Frantzen who identifies Alcuin's language with that of medieval Christian amicitia or friendship. Karl Liersch, in his 1880 inaugural dissertation, cites several passages from poems by Theodulf of Orleans. In these poems Theodulf reports that Alcuin had a female muse named Delia in the king's court (she was probably Charlemagne's daughter). Delia is also the addresse of several poems by Alcuin. David Dales and Rowan Williams say "the use of language drawn from the Song of Songs transforms apparently erotic language into something within Christian friendship - 'an ordained affection'." Nevertheless, despite inconclusive evidence of Alcuin's personal passions, he was clear in his own writings that the men of Sodom had been punished with fire for "sinning against nature with men". Such sins, argued Alcuin, were more serious than lustful acts with women, for which the earth was cleansed and revivified by the water of the Flood, and merit to be "withered by flames unto eternal barrenness."   == LegacyEdit == In several churches of the Anglican Communion, Alcuin is celebrated on 20 May, the first available day after the day of his death (as Dunstan is celebrated on 19 May). Alcuin College, one of the colleges of the University of York, England, is named after him.   == QuotationsEdit ==  "O quam dulcis vita fuit dum sedebamus in quieti ... inter librorum copias." 'Oh how sweet life was when we sat quietly ... midst all these books.' "potius animam curare memento, quam carnem, quoniam haec manet, illa perit." 'Remember to care for the soul more than the body, since the former remains, the latter perishes.' "Nec audiendi qui solent dicere, Vox populi, vox Dei, quum tumultuositas vulgi semper insaniae proxima sit." 'And do not listen to those who keep saying, 'The voice of the people is the voice of God.' because the tumult of the crowd is always close to madness.'   == Selected worksEdit == For a complete census of Alcuin's works, see Marie-Hélène Jullien and Françoise Perelman, eds., Clavis scriptorum latinorum medii aevi: Auctores Galliae 735–987. Tomus II: Alcuinus. Turnhout: Brepols, 1999. Poetry Carmina, ed. Ernst Dümmler, MGH Poetae Latini aevi Carolini I. Berlin: Weidmann, 1881. 160–351. Godman, Peter, tr., Poetry of the Carolingian Renaissance. Norman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1985. 118–49. Stella, Francesco, tr., comm., La poesia carolingia, Firenze: Le Lettere, 1995, pp. 94–96, 152–161, 266–267, 302–307, 364–371, 399–404, 455–457, 474–477, 503–507. Isbell, Harold, tr.. The Last Poets of Imperial Rome. Baltimore: Penguin, 1971.  Poem on York, Versus de patribus, regibus et sanctis Eboracensis ecclesiae, ed. and tr. Peter Godman, De pontificibus et sanctis Ecclesiae Eboracensis, The Bishops, Kings, and Saints of York. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982. De clade Lindisfarnensis monasterii, "On the destruction of the monastery of Lindisfarne" (Carmen 9, ed. Dümmler, pp. 229–35.) Epistolae (Letters) Of Alcuin's letters, just over 310 have survived. Epistolae, ed. Ernst Dümmler, MGH Epistolae IV.2. Berlin: Weidmann, 1895. 1–493. Jaffé, Philipp, Ernst Dümmler, and W. Wattenbach, eds. Monumenta Alcuiniana. Berlin: Weidmann, 1873. 132–897. Chase, Colin, ed. Two Alcuin Letter-books. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975. Allott, Stephen, tr. Alcuin of York, c. AD 732 to 804. His life and letters. York: William Sessions, 1974. Sturgeon, Thomas G., tr. The Letters of Alcuin: Part One, the Aachen Period (762–796). Harvard University Ph.D. Thesis, 1953.  Didactic works Ars grammatica. PL 101: 854–902. De orthographia, ed. H. Keil, Grammatici Latini VII, 1880. 295–312; ed. Sandra Bruni, Alcuino de orthographia. Florence: SISMEL, 1997. De dialectica. PL 101: 950–76. Disputatio regalis et nobilissimi juvenis Pippini cum Albino scholastico "Dialogue of Pepin, the Most Noble and Royal Youth, with the Teacher Albinus", ed. L.W. Daly and W. Suchier, Altercatio Hadriani Augusti et Epicteti Philosophi. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1939. 134–46; ed. Wilhelm Wilmanns, "Disputatio regalis et nobilissimi juvenis Pippini cum Albino scholastico." Zeitschrift für deutsches Altertum 14 (1869): 530–55, 562. Disputatio de rhetorica et de virtutibus sapientissimi regis Carli et Albini magistri, ed. and tr. Wilbur Samuel Howell, The Rhetoric of Alcuin and Charlemagne. New York: Russell and Russell, 1965 (1941); ed. C. Halm, Rhetorici Latini Minores. Leipzig: Teubner, 1863. 523–50. De virtutibus et vitiis (moral treatise dedicated to Count Wido of Brittany, 799 x 800). PL 101: 613–639 (transcript available online). A new critical edition is being prepared for the Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Medievalis. De animae ratione (ad Eulaliam virginem) (written for Gundrada, Charlemagne's cousin). PL 101: 639–50. De Cursu et Saltu Lunae ac Bissexto, astronomical treatise. PL 101: 979–1002. (?) Propositiones ad acuendos iuvenes, ed. Menso Folkerts, "Die alteste mathematische Aufgabensammlung in lateinischer Sprache: Die Alkuin zugeschriebenen Propositiones ad acuendos iuvenes; Überlieferung, Inhalt, Kritische Edition," in idem, Essays on Early Medieval Mathematics: The Latin Tradition. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003. Theology Compendium in Canticum Canticorum: Alcuino, Commento al Cantico dei cantici - con i commenti anonimi Vox ecclesie e Vox antique ecclesie, ed. Rossana Guglielmetti, Firenze, SISMEL 2004 Quaestiones in Genesim. PL 100: 515–66. De Fide Sanctae Trinitatis et de Incarnatione Christi; Quaestiones de Sancta Trinitate ed. E. Knibbs & E. Ann Matter (Corpus Christianorum - Continuatio Mediaevalis 249: Brepols, 2012) Hagiography Vita II Vedastis episcopi Atrebatensis. Revision of the earlier Vita Vedastis by Jonas of Bobbio. Patrologia Latina 101: 663–82. Vita Richarii confessoris Centulensis. Revision of an earlier anonymous life. MGH Scriptores Rerum Merovingicarum 4: 381–401. Vita Willibrordi archiepiscopi Traiectensis, ed. W. Levison, Passiones vitaeque sanctorum aevi Merovingici. MGH Scriptores Rerum Merovingicarum 7: 81–141.   == See alsoEdit ==  Propositiones ad Acuendos Juvenes Carolingian art Carolingian Empire Category: Carolingian period Correctory   == NotesEdit ==   == Secondary sourcesEdit == Bullough, Donald (2003). Alcuin: Achievement and Reputation. =Leiden.    == Further readingEdit == Browne, G. F. (1908). Alcuin of York. London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.  Bullough, Donald (May 2010) [2004]. "Alcuin (c.740–804)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/298.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) Frederick Lorenz. The life of Alcuin (Thomas Hurst, 1837). Murphy, Richard E., Alcuin of York: De Virtutibus et Vitiis, Virtues and Vices. ISBN 978-0-9966967-0-8 Rolph Barlow Page. The Letters of Alcuin (New York: Forest Press, 1909). E. M. Wilmot-Buxton. Alcuin (P J Kennedy, 1922). Stephen Allot. Alcuin of York, his life and letters ISBN 0-900657-21-9 Andrew Fleming West. Alcuin and the Rise of the Christian Schools (C. Sscribner's Sons, 1912) ISBN 0-8371-1635-X Eleanor Shipley Duckett. Alcuin, Friend of Charlemagne, (1951) Eleanor Shipley Duckett. Carolingian Portraits, (1962) F. L. Ganshof. The Carolingians and the Frankish Monarchy ISBN 0-582-48227-5 Brian P. McGuire. Friendship, and Community: The Monastic Experience ISBN 0-87907-895-2 Thomas Stehling. Medieval Latin Love Poems of Male Love and Friendship, Peter Godman. Poetry of the Carolingian Renaissance ISBN 0-7156-1768-0 Stella, Francesco, "Alkuins Dichtung" in Alkuin von York und die geistige Grundlegung Europas , Sankt Gallen, Verlag am Klosterhof, 2010, pp. 107 – 128. Throop, Priscilla, trans. Alcuin: His Life; On Virtues and Vices; Dialogue with Pepin (Charlotte, VT: MedievalMS, 2011) Bullough, D. A, 'Alcuin - Achievement and Reputation (Brill, 2004) Dales, Douglas J, 'Alcuin - His Life and Legacy' (James Clarke & Co., Cambridge, UK, 2012) Dales, Douglas J, 'Alcuin - Theology and Thought' (James Clarke & Co., Cambridge, UK, 2013)  Texts on Wikisource: "Alcuin". Encyclopædia Britannica 1 (11th ed.). 1911.  "Alcuin". Catholic Encyclopedia 1. 1907.  "Alcuin". The New Student's Reference Work 1. 1914.  "Alcuin or Ealhwine". A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. Wikisource. 1910  Stephen, Leslie, ed. (1885). "Alcuin". Dictionary of National Biography 1. London: Smith, Elder & Co.    == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Alcuin", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Alcuin's book, Problems for the Quickening of the Minds of the Young Introduction to Alcuin's writings by Robert Levine and Whitney Bolton The Alcuin Society Anglo-Saxon York on History of York site Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Mediaevalis: new critical editions in preparation Corpus Grammaticorum Latinorum: complete texts and full bibliography THE LIFE OF ALCUIN BY DR. FREDERICK LORENZ in BTM Format Works by or about Alcuin at Internet Archive Works by Alcuin at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Alcuin, inventor of Christianity

This is a redirect from a page that has been moved (renamed). This page was kept as a redirect to avoid breaking links, both internal and external, that may have been made to the old page name. For more information follow the bold category link.

Alexander Bain (11 June 1818 – 18 September 1903) was a Scottish philosopher and educationalist in the British school of empiricism and a prominent and innovative figure in the fields of psychology, linguistics, logic, moral philosophy and education reform. He founded Mind, the first ever journal of psychology and analytical philosophy, and was the leading figure in establishing and applying the scientific method to psychology. Bain was the inaugural Regius Chair in Logic and Professor of Logic at the University of Aberdeen, where he also held Professorships in Moral Philosophy and English Literature and was twice elected Lord Rector.   == Early life and educationEdit == Alexander Bain was born in Aberdeen to George Bain, a weaver and veteran soldier, and Margaret Paul. At age eleven he left school to work as a weaver hence the description of him as Weevir, rex philosophorum. He also took to lectures at the Mechanics' Institutes of Aberdeen and the Aberdeen Public Library. In 1836 he entered Marischal College where he came under the influence of Professor of Mathematics John Cruickshank, Professor of Chemistry Thomas Clark and Professor of Natural Philosophy William Knight. Towards the end of his undergraduate degree he became a contributor to the Westminster Review with his first article entitled "Electrotype and Daguerreotype," published in September 1840. This was the beginning of his connection with John Stuart Mill, which led to a lifelong friendship. He was awarded the Blue Ribbon and also the Gray Mathematical Bursary. His college career and studies was distinguished especially in mental philosophy, mathematics and physics and he graduated with a Master of Arts with Highest Honours. In 1841, Bain substituted for Dr. Glennie the Professor of Moral Philosophy, who, due to ill-health, was unable to discharge his academic duties. He continued to do this three successive terms, during which he continued writing for the Westminster, and also helped John Stuart Mill with the revision of the manuscript of his System of Logic (1842). In 1843 he contributed the first review of the book to the London and Westminster.   == Academic careerEdit ==  In 1845 he was appointed Professor of Mathematics and Natural Philosophy at Anderson's University in Glasgow. A year later, preferring a wider field, he resigned the position and devoted himself to writing. In 1848 he moved to London to fill a post in the Board of Health under Sir Edwin Chadwick where he worked for social reform and became a prominent member of the intellectual circle which included George Grote and John Stuart Mill. In 1855 he published his first major work, The Senses and the Intellect, followed in 1859 by The Emotions and the Will. These treatises won him a position among independent thinkers. Bain was also Examiner in Logic and Moral Philosophy from 1857–1862 and 1864–1869 for the University of London and also an Instructor in moral science for the Indian Civil Service examinations. In 1860 he was appointed by the British Crown to the inaugural Regius Chair of Logic and the Regius Chair of English Literature at the University of Aberdeen, which was newly formed after the amalgamation of King's College, Aberdeen and Marischal College by the Scottish Universities Commission of 1858.   === LinguisticsEdit === Until 1858 neither logic nor English had received adequate attention in Aberdeen, and Bain devoted himself to supplying these deficiencies. He succeeded not only in raising the standard of education generally in the North of Scotland, but also in establishing a School of Philosophy at the University of Aberdeen, and in widely influencing the teaching of English grammar and composition in the United Kingdom. His efforts were first directed to the preparation of textbooks: Higher English Grammar and An English Grammar were both published in 1863, followed in 1866 by the Manual of Rhetoric, in 1872 by A First English Grammar, and in 1874 by the Companion to the Higher Grammar. These works were wide-ranging and their original views and methods met with wide acceptance.   === PhilosophyEdit === Bain's philosophical writings already published, especially The Senses and the Intellect to which was added in 1861 The Study of Character including an Estimate of Phrenology, were too large for effective use in the classroom. Accordingly in 1868, he published his Manual of Mental and Moral Science, mainly a condensed form of his treatises, with the doctrines re-stated, and in many instances freshly illustrated, and with many important additions. The year 1870 saw the publication of the Logic. This, too, was a work designed for the use of students; it was based on John Stuart Mill, but differed from him in many particulars, and was distinctive for its treatment of the doctrine of the conservation of energy in connection with causation and the detailed application of the principles of logic to the various sciences with a section on the classification of the all sciences. Next came two publications in the "International Scientific Series", namely, Mind and Body (1872), and Education as a Science (1879). All these works, from the Higher English Grammar downwards, were written by Bain during his twenty years as a Professor at the University of Aberdeen. He also started the philosophical journal, Mind; the first number appeared in January 1876, under the editorship of a former pupil, George Croom Robertson, of University College London. To this journal Bain contributed many important articles and discussions; and in fact he bore the whole expenses of it till Robertson, owing to ill-health, resigned the editorship in 1891 and George Stout took up the baton.   === PsychologyEdit === Although his influence as a logician and linguist in grammar and rhetoric was considerable, his reputation rests on his works in psychology. At one with the German physiologist and comparative anatomist Johannes Peter Müller in the conviction psychologus nemo nisi physiologus (one is not a psychologist who is not also a physiologist), he was the first in Great Britain during the 19th century to apply physiology in a thoroughgoing fashion to the elucidation of mental states. In discussing the will, he favoured physiological over metaphysical explanations, pointing to reflexes as evidence that a form of will, independent of consciousness, inheres in a person's limbs. He sought to chart physiological correlates of mental states but refused to make any materialistic assumptions. He was the originator of the theory of psychophysical parallelism which is used so widely as a working basis by modern psychologists. His idea of applying the scientific method of classification to psychical phenomena gave scientific character to his work, the value of which was enhanced by his methodical exposition and his command of illustration. In line with this, too, is his demand that psychology should be cleared of metaphysics; and to his lead is no doubt due in great measure the position that psychology has now acquired as a distinct positive science. Bain established psychology, as influenced by David Hume and Auguste Comte, as a more distinct discipline of science through application of the scientific method. Bain proposed that physiological and psychological processes were linked, and that traditional psychology could be explained in terms of this association. Moreover he proposed that all knowledge and all mental processes had to be based on actual physical sensations, and not on spontaneous thoughts and ideas, and attempted to identify the link between the mind and the body and to discover the correlations between mental and behavioural phenomena. William James calls his work the "last word" of the earlier stage of psychology, but he was in reality the pioneer of the new. Subsequent psycho-physical investigations "have all been in" the spirit of his work; and although he consistently advocated the introspective method in psychological investigation, he was among the first to appreciate the help that may be given to it by social psychology, comparative psychology and developmental psychology. He may justly claim the merit of having guided the awakened psychological interest of British thinkers of the second half of the 19th century into fruitful channels. Bain emphasised the importance of our active experiences of movement and effort, and though his theory of a central innervation sense is no longer held as he propounded it, its value as a suggestion to later psychologists is great. His thought that a belief is but a preparation for action is respected by both pragmatism and functionalism.   === Other worksEdit === Bain's autobiography, published in 1904, contains a full list of his works, and also the history of the last thirteen years of his life by Professor W. L. Davidson of the University of Aberdeen, who further contributed to Mind (April 1904) a review of Bain's services to philosophy. Further works include editions with notes of Paley's Moral Philosophy (1852); Education as a Science (1879); Dissertations on leading philosophical topics (1903, mainly reprints of papers in Mind); he collaborated with JS Mill and Grote in editing James Mill's Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (1869), and assisted in editing Grote's Aristotle and Minor Works; he also wrote a memoir prefixed to G Croom Robertson's Philosophical Remains (1894).   == Social ReformEdit == Bain took a keen interest in social justice and development and was frequently an active part in the political and social movements of the day; after his retirement from the Chair of Logic, he was twice elected Lord Rector of the University of Aberdeen each term of office extending over three years. He was a strenuous advocate of reform, especially in the teaching of sciences, and supported the claims of modern languages to a place in the curriculum. Moreover, he as an avid supporter for Student rights and in 1884 the Aberdeen University Debating Society took the first steps towards the introduction of a Students' Representative Council and later Aberdeen University Students' Association under his support. Bain was a member of the Committee of the Aberdeen Public Library throughout his life as well as the School Board of Aberdeen. Furthermore, Professor Bain gave lectures and wrote papers for the Mechanics' Institutes of Aberdeen and served as the Secretary of its Committee. His services to education and social reform in Scotland were recognised by the conferment of the honorary degree of Doctor of law by the University of Edinburgh in 1871. A marble bust of him stands in the Aberdeen Public Library and his portrait hangs in Marischal College.   == Later life and deathEdit == Bain retired from his Chair and Professorship from the University of Aberdeen and was succeeded by William Minto, one of his most brilliant pupils. Nevertheless his interest in thought, and his desire to complete the scheme of work mapped out in earlier years, remained as keen as ever. Accordingly, in 1882 appeared the Biography of James Mill, and accompanying it John Stuart Mill: a Criticism, with Personal Recollections. Next came (1884) a collection of articles and papers, most of which had appeared in magazines, under the title of Practical Essays. This was succeeded (1887, 1888) by a new edition of the Rhetoric, and along with it, a book On Teaching English, being an exhaustive application of the principles of rhetoric to the criticism of style, for the use of teachers; and in 1894 he published a revised edition of The Senses and the Intellect, which contain his last word on psychology. In 1894 also appeared his last contribution to Mind. His last years were spent in privacy at Aberdeen, where he died on 18 September 1903. He married twice but left no children. His last request was that "no stone should be placed upon his grave: his books, he said, would be his monument." The University of Aberdeen Philosophy Department established the Bain Medal in 1883. It is awarded annually to the best candidate who gains First Class Honours in Mental Philosophy. As Professor William L. Davidson wrote in Bain's obituary in Mind "In Dr. Bain's death, psychology has sustained a great loss; but so too has education and practical reform. It is rare to find a philosopher who combines philosophical with educational and practical interests, and who is also an active force in the community in which he dwells. Such a combination was here. Let us not fail to appreciate it."   == BibliographyEdit == "Early Life of James Mill", from Mind, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876). Review of Herbert Spencer's Principles of Sociology, from Mind, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876). "Mr. G. H. Lewes and the Postulates of Experience", from Mind, Vol. 1, No. 1 (January 1876). Education as a Science, New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1884 Practical Essays Dissertations on Leading Philosophical Topics Autobiography by Alexander Bain, LL.D., London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1904 Elements of chemistry and electricity: in two parts Astronomy James Mill, A Biography (1 ed.), London: Logmans, Green & Co., 1882, retrieved 11 December 2012  John Stuart Mill: A Criticism: With Personal Recollections, London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1882 The Art of Study Is There Such a Thing As Pure Malevolence? The Classical Controversy The University Ideal: Past and Present On Teaching English: With Detailed Examples and an Enquiry Into the Definition of Poetry English Composition and Rhetoric: Emotional qualities of style English Composition and Rhetoric: Intellectual elements of style English grammar as bearing upon composition First English Grammar A Higher English Grammar An English grammar English composition and rhetoric: A manual Logic: Induction Logic: Volume 1 Deduction Some Points in Ethics Fragments on ethical subjects The Moral Philosophy of Paley The emotions and the will 1859 The senses and the intellect Mind And Body: The Theories Of Their Relation Physiological Expression in Psychology Analysis of the phenomena of the human mind: Volume 1 How to study character; or, The true basis for the science of mind The emergence of neuroscience in the nineteenth century: Mind and body : the theories of their relation Pleasure and Pain On the study of character: including an estimate of phrenology Mental science: a compendium of psychology, and the history of philosophy, designed as a text-book for high-schools and colleges Moral science: a compendium of ethics Mental and moral science: A compendium of psychology and ethics, London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1868 Mental and Moral Science: Psychology and history of philosophy Mental and Moral Science: Theory of ethics and ehtical systems   == See alsoEdit == Association of Ideas Psychophysical parallelism Mind   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Bain, Alexander, English Composition and Rhetoric, 1871 (facsimile ed., 1996, Scholars' Facsimiles & Reprints, ISBN 978-0-8201-1497-2). Hattiangadi, Jagdish N. (1970). "Bain, Alexander". Dictionary of Scientific Biography 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 403–404. ISBN 0-684-10114-9.  B. R. Hergenhahn, An Introduction to the History of Psychology, Sixth Edition Kunitz, Stanley, and Howard Haycraft. "Bain, Alexander." British Authors of the Nineteenth Century. H. W. Wilson Company, New York, 1936.   == External linksEdit ==  "Bain, Alexander". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.  William L. Davidson, Professor Bain, an obituary from Mind (Jan. 1904) Moral Science: A Compendium of Ethics by Alexander Bain Works by Alexander Bain at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Alexander Bain at Internet Archive Works by Alexander Bain at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  " Bain, Alexander". A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. Wikisource. 1910  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Alexander Bain

Alexander Sergeyevich Esenin-Volpin (also written Ésénine-Volpine and Yessenin-Volpin in his French and English publications; Russian: Алекса́ндр Серге́евич Есе́нин-Во́льпин; born May 12, 1924) is a prominent Russian-American poet and mathematician. A notable dissident, political prisoner and a leader of the Soviet human rights movement, he spent a total of fourteen years incarcerated and repressed by the Soviet authorities in prisons, psikhushkas and exile.   == Life == Alexander Volpin was born on May 12, 1924 in the Soviet Union. His mother, Nadezhda Volpin, was a poet and translator from French and English. His father was Sergei Yesenin, a celebrated Russian poet, who never knew his son. Alexander and his mother moved from Leningrad to Moscow in 1933. Esenin-Volpin was free from conscription due to "psychiatric" reasons. His psychiatric imprisonments took place in 1949 for "anti-Soviet poetry", in 1959 for smuggling abroad samizdat, including his Свободный философский трактат (Free Philosophical Tractate), and again in 1968. Esenin-Volpin graduated from Moscow State University with a “candidate” dissertation in the spring of 1949. After graduation, Volpin was sent to the Ukrainian city of Chernovtsy to teach mathematics at the local state university. Less than a month after his arrival in Chernovtsy he was arrested by the MGB, sent on a plane back to Moscow, and incarcerated in the Lubyanka prison. He was charged with "systematically conducting anti-Soviet agitation, writing anti-Soviet poems, and reading them to acquaintances." Apprehensive about the prospect of prison and labor camp, Volpin faked a suicide attempt in order to initiate a psychiatric evaluation. Psychiatrists at Moscow's Serbsky Institute declared Volpin mentally incompetent, and in October 1949 he was transferred to the Leningrad Psychiatric Prison Hospital for an indefinite stay. A year later he was abruptly released from the prison hospital, and sentenced to five years exile in the Kazakh town of Karaganda as a "socially dangerous element." In Karagada, he found employment as a teacher of evening and correspondence courses in mathematics. After the death of Joseph Stalin, Volpin was released due to a general amnesty in March 1953. Soon he became a known mathematician specializing in the fields of ultrafinitism and intuitionism. In 1968, Esenin-Volpin was again hospitalized. After his 1968 psychiatric confinement, 99 Soviet mathematicians sent a letter to the Soviet authorities asking for his release. This fact became public and the Voice of America conducted a broadcast on the topic; Esenin-Volpin was released almost immediately thereafter. Vladimir Bukovsky was quoted as saying that Volpin's diagnosis was "pathological honesty". In 1969, Esenin-Volpin signed An Appeal to The UN Committee for Human Rights. Esenin-Volpin was the first dissident in the history of the Soviet Union who took on a "legalist" strategy of dissent. He proclaimed that it is possible and necessary to defend human rights by strictly observing the law, and in turn demand that the authorities observe the formally guaranteed rights. Fellow dissident and one of the founders of the Moscow Helsinki Group Lyudmila Alexeyeva remembers:  He would explain to anyone who cared to listen a simple but unfamiliar idea: all laws ought to be understood in exactly the way they are written and not as they are interpreted by the government and the government ought to fulfill those laws to the letter [...]. What would happen if citizens acted on the assumption that they have rights? If one person did it, he would become a martyr; if two people did it, they would be labeled an enemy organization; if thousands of people did it, the state would have to become less oppressive.  On December 5, 1965, the Soviet Constitution Day, Esenin-Volpin organized a legendary Glasnost Meeting ("митинг гласности"), a demonstration at the Pushkin Square in the center of Moscow. Western journalists were invited to provide press coverage. The leaflets written by Volpin and distributed by samizdat method, asserted that recent arrest of writers Andrei Sinyavsky and Yuli Daniel violated Article 3 of the Soviet constitution and Article 18 of RSFSR Criminal Code. The meeting was attended by about 200 people, many of whom turned out to be KGB operatives. The slogans read: "Требуем гласности суда над Синявским и Даниэлем" (We demand an open trial for Sinyavski and Daniel) and "Уважайте советскую конституцию" (Respect the Soviet constitution). The demonstrators were promptly arrested. In 1968 Esenin-Volpin circulated his famous "Памятка для тех, кому предстоят допросы" (Memo for those who expect to be interrogated) widely used by fellow dissidents. In 1970, Volpin joined the Committee on Human Rights in the USSR and worked with Yuri Orlov, Andrei Sakharov and other activists. In May 1972, he emigrated to the United States, but his Soviet citizenship was not revoked as was customary at the time. He worked at Boston University. In 1973 he was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto. In 2005, Esenin-Volpin participated in "They Chose Freedom", a four-part television documentary on the history of the Soviet dissident movement.   == Mathematical work ==  His early work was in general topology, where he introduced Esenin-Volpin's theorem. Most of his later work was on the foundations of mathematics, where he introduced ultrafinitism, an extreme form of constructive mathematics that casts doubt on the existence of not only infinite sets, but even of large integers such as 1012. He sketched a program for proving the consistency of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory using ultrafinitistic techniques in (Ésénine-Volpine 1961), (Yessenin-Volpin 1970) and (Yessenin-Volpin 1981).   == Mathematical publications == Ésénine-Volpine, A. S. (1961), "Le programme ultra-intuitionniste des fondements des mathématiques", Infinitistic Methods (Proc. Sympos. Foundations of Math., Warsaw, 1959), Oxford: Pergamon, pp. 201–223, MR 0147389  Reviewed by Kreisel, G.; Ehrenfeucht, A. (1967), "Le Programme Ultra-Intuitionniste des Fondements des Mathematiques by A. S. Ésénine-Volpine", The Journal of Symbolic Logic (Association for Symbolic Logic) 32 (4): 517, doi:10.2307/2270182, JSTOR 2270182  Yessenin-Volpin, A. S. (1970), "The ultra-intuitionistic criticism and the antitraditional program for foundations of mathematics", in Kino, A.; Myhill, J.; Vesley, R. E., Intuitionism and proof theory (Proc. Conf., Buffalo, N.Y., 1968), Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 3–45, MR 0295876  Reviewed by Geiser, James R. (1975), "The Ultra-Intuitionistic Criticism and the Antitraditional Program for Foundations of Mathematics. by A. S. Yessenin-Volpin", The Journal of Symbolic Logic (Association for Symbolic Logic) 40 (1): 95–97, doi:10.2307/2272294, JSTOR 2272294  Yessenin-Volpin, A. S. (1981), "About infinity, finiteness and finitization (in connection with the foundations of mathematics)", in Richman, Fred, Constructive mathematics (Las Cruces, N.M., 1980), Lecture Notes in Math. 873, Berlin-New York: Springer, pp. 274–313, doi:10.1007/BFb0090740, ISBN 3-540-10850-5, MR 0644507    == References ==   == External links == Great Russian Poet's Son Comes Home at MN Turzański, Marian (1992), "Strong sequences, binary families and Esenin-Volpin's theorem", Comment.Math.Univ.Carolinae 33 (3): 563–569, MR 1209298  Nathans, Benjamin (Winter 2007). "The Dictatorship of Reason: Aleksandr Vol’pin and the Idea of Rights under ‘Developed Socialism’". Slavic Review 66 (4): 630–663. JSTOR 20060376.  [1] Robert Horvath, The Legacy of Soviet Dissent: Dissidents, Democratisation and Radical Nationalism in Russia, Taylor & Francis, 2005, ISBN 0-415-33320-2; pp. 55, 85, 155 Russian language links Bio & Bibliography Bio & writings at Anthology of Samizdat Poetry "Интервью с философом Александром Есениным-Вольпиным и его ученицей Кристор Хенникс". Radio Liberty. 11 July 2007. Retrieved 19 April 2012.  "Александр Есенин-Вольпин". Radio Liberty. 18 February 2005. Retrieved 19 April 2012.  "Александр Есенин-Вольпин". Radio Liberty. 12 May 2004. Retrieved 19 April 2012.  "Памятка для не ожидающих допроса: Беседа с Александром Есениным-Вольпиным от 4 декабря 1998 года". Неприкосновенный запас № 1 (21). 2002. Retrieved 19 April 2012.

Alexander (Alekos) Sotirios Kechris (Greek: Αλέξανδρος Σωτήριος Κεχρής; born 1946, Greece) is a descriptive set theorist and ergodic theorist at Caltech. He has made major contributions to the theory of Borel equivalence relations and the theory of automorphism groups of uncountable structures. Kechris earned his Ph.D. in 1972 under the direction of Yiannis N. Moschovakis, with a dissertation titled Projective Ordinals and Countable Analytic Sets. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == Selected publications == A. S. Kechris, "Classical Descriptive Set Theory", Springer-Verlag, 1995. H. Becker, A. S. Kechris, "The descriptive set theory of Polish group actions" (London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series), University of Cambridge, 1996. A.S. Kechris, V.G. Pestov and S. Todorcevic, "Fraïssé limits, Ramsey theory and topological dynamics of automorphism groups", Geometric and Functional Analysis 15 (1) (2005), 106-189. A.S. Kechris, "Global Aspects of Ergodic Group Actions", Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, 160, American Mathematical Society, 2010.   == References ==   == External links == Kechris's web page at Caltech

Alfred Horn (February 17, 1918 – April 16, 2001) was an American mathematician notable for his work in lattice theory and universal algebra. His 1951 paper "On sentences which are true of direct unions of algebras" described Horn clauses and Horn sentences, which later would form the foundation of logic programming. Horn was born on Lower East Side, Manhattan. His parents were both deaf, and his father died when Horn was three years old. At this point, the children moved in with their grandparents on the mother's side. They would later move to Brooklyn where Horn spent most of his childhood, raised by his extended family. Horn attended the City College of New York, and later, New York University where he earned a Master's degree in mathematics. He went on to earn his Ph.D. at University of California, Berkeley in 1946. A year later, he started work at the University of California, where he stayed until his retirement in 1988. He died in 2001 in Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles after eight years of battling prostate cancer.   == ReferencesEdit == Alfred Horn, Palisadian Since 1954 and Noted UCLA Math Professor – obituary from UCLA Publications of Alfred Horn – a list compiled by Dimiter Skordev Alfred Horn – the information about him in the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Alfred North Whitehead, OM FRS (15 February 1861 – 30 December 1947) was an English mathematician and philosopher. He is best known as the defining figure of the philosophical school known as process philosophy, which today has found application to a wide variety of disciplines, including ecology, theology, education, physics, biology, economics, and psychology, among other areas. In his early career Whitehead wrote primarily on mathematics, logic, and physics. His most notable work in these fields is the three-volume Principia Mathematica (1910–13), which he co-wrote with former student Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica is considered one of the twentieth century's most important works in mathematical logic, and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library. Beginning in the late 1910s and early 1920s, Whitehead gradually turned his attention from mathematics to philosophy of science, and finally to metaphysics. He developed a comprehensive metaphysical system which radically departed from most of western philosophy. Whitehead argued that reality consists of processes rather than material objects, and that processes are best defined by their relations with other processes, thus rejecting the theory that reality is fundamentally constructed by bits of matter that exist independently of one another. Today Whitehead's philosophical works – particularly Process and Reality – are regarded as the foundational texts of process philosophy. Whitehead's process philosophy argues that "there is urgency in coming to see the world as a web of interrelated processes of which we are integral parts, so that all of our choices and actions have consequences for the world around us." For this reason, one of the most promising applications of Whitehead's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization and environmental ethics pioneered by John B. Cobb, Jr.   == LifeEdit ==  Alfred North Whitehead was born in Ramsgate, Kent, England, in 1861. His father, Alfred Whitehead, was a minister and schoolmaster of Chatham House Academy, a successful school for boys established by Thomas Whitehead, Alfred North's grandfather. Whitehead himself recalled both of them as being very successful schoolmasters, but that his grandfather was the more extraordinary man. Whitehead's mother was Maria Sarah Whitehead, formerly Maria Sarah Buckmaster. Whitehead was apparently not particularly close with his mother, as he never mentioned her in any of his writings, and there is evidence that Whitehead's wife, Evelyn, had a low opinion of her. Whitehead was educated at Sherborne School, Dorset, then considered one of the best public schools in the country. His childhood was described as over-protected, but when at school he excelled in sports and mathematics and was head prefect of his class. In 1880, Whitehead began attending Trinity College, Cambridge, and studied mathematics. He earned his BA from Trinity in 1884, and graduated as fourth wrangler. Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1884, Whitehead would teach and write on mathematics and physics at the college until 1910, spending the 1890s writing his Treatise on Universal Algebra (1898), and the 1900s collaborating with his former pupil, Bertrand Russell, on the first edition of Principia Mathematica. He was a Cambridge Apostle. In 1890, Whitehead married Evelyn Wade, an Irish woman raised in France; they had a daughter, Jessie Whitehead, and two sons, Thomas North Whitehead and Eric Whitehead. Eric Whitehead died in action while serving in the Royal Flying Corps during World War I at the age of 19.  In 1910, Whitehead resigned his Senior Lectureship in Mathematics at Trinity and moved to London without first lining up another job. After being unemployed for a year, Whitehead accepted a position as Lecturer in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics at University College London, but was passed over a year later for the Goldsmid Chair of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics, a position for which he had hoped to be seriously considered. In 1914 Whitehead accepted a position as Professor of Applied Mathematics at the newly chartered Imperial College London, where his old friend Andrew Forsyth had recently been appointed Chief Professor of Mathematics. In 1918 Whitehead's academic responsibilities began to seriously expand as he accepted a number of high administrative positions within the University of London system, of which Imperial College London was a member at the time. He was elected Dean of the Faculty of Science at the University of London in late 1918 (a post he held for four years), a member of the University of London's Senate in 1919, and chairman of the Senate's Academic (leadership) Council in 1920, a post which he held until he departed for America in 1924. Whitehead was able to exert his newfound influence to successfully lobby for a new history of science department, help establish a Bachelor of Science degree (previously only Bachelor of Arts degrees had been offered), and make the school more accessible to less wealthy students. Toward the end of his time in England, Whitehead turned his attention to philosophy. Though he had no advanced training in philosophy, his philosophical work soon became highly regarded. After publishing The Concept of Nature in 1920, he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923. In 1924, Henry Osborn Taylor invited the 63-year-old Whitehead to join the faculty at Harvard University as a professor of philosophy. During his time at Harvard, Whitehead produced his most important philosophical contributions. In 1925, he wrote Science and the Modern World, which was immediately hailed as an alternative to the Cartesian dualism that plagued popular science. A few years later, he published his seminal work Process and Reality, which has been compared (both in importance and difficulty) to Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. The Whiteheads spent the rest of their lives in the United States. Alfred North retired from Harvard in 1937 and remained in Cambridge, Massachusetts until his death on December 30, 1947. The two volume biography of Whitehead by Victor Lowe is the most definitive presentation of the life of Whitehead. However, many details of Whitehead's life remain obscure because he left no Nachlass; his family carried out his instructions that all of his papers be destroyed after his death. Additionally, Whitehead was known for his "almost fanatical belief in the right to privacy", and for writing very few personal letters of the kind that would help to gain insight on his life. This led to Lowe himself remarking on the first page of Whitehead's biography, "No professional biographer in his right mind would touch him." Currently, there is also no critical edition of Whitehead's writings, though the Whitehead Research Project of the Center for Process Studies is currently working on one such edition.   == Mathematics and logicEdit == In addition to numerous articles on mathematics, Whitehead wrote three major books on the subject: A Treatise on Universal Algebra (1898), Principia Mathematica (co-written with Bertrand Russell and published in three volumes between 1910 and 1913), and An Introduction to Mathematics (1911). The former two books were aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians, while the latter book was intended for a larger audience, covering the history of mathematics and its philosophical foundations. Principia Mathematica in particular is regarded as one of the most important works in mathematical logic of the 20th century. In addition to his legacy as a co-writer of Principia Mathematica, Whitehead's theory of "extensive abstraction" is considered foundational for the branch of ontology and computer science known as "mereotopology", a theory describing spatial relations among wholes, parts, parts of parts, and the boundaries between parts.   === A Treatise on Universal AlgebraEdit === In A Treatise on Universal Algebra (1898) the term "universal algebra" had essentially the same meaning that it has today: the study of algebraic structures themselves, rather than examples ("models") of algebraic structures. Whitehead credits William Rowan Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan as originators of the subject matter, and James Joseph Sylvester with coining the term itself. At the time structures such as Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions drew attention to the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the associatively multiplicative class. In a review Alexander Macfarlane wrote: "The main idea of the work is not unification of the several methods, nor generalization of ordinary algebra so as to include them, but rather the comparative study of their several structures." In a separate review, G. B. Mathews wrote, "It possesses a unity of design which is really remarkable, considering the variety of its themes." A Treatise on Universal Algebra sought to examine Hermann Grassmann's theory of extension ("Ausdehnungslehre"), Boole's algebra of logic, and Hamilton's quaternions (this last number system was to be taken up in Volume II, which was never finished due to Whitehead's work on Principia Mathematica). Whitehead wrote in the preface:  "Such algebras have an intrinsic value for separate detailed study; also they are worthy of comparative study, for the sake of the light thereby thrown on the general theory of symbolic reasoning, and on algebraic symbolism in particular ... The idea of a generalized conception of space has been made prominent, in the belief that the properties and operations involved in it can be made to form a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras."  Whitehead, however, had no results of a general nature. His hope of "form[ing] a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras" presumably would have been developed in Volume II, had Whitehead completed it. Further work on the subject was minimal until the early 1930s, when Garrett Birkhoff and Øystein Ore began publishing on universal algebras.   === Principia MathematicaEdit ===  Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) is Whitehead's most famous mathematical work. Co-written with former student Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica is considered one of the twentieth century's most important works in mathematics, and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English-language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library. Principia Mathematica‍ '​s purpose was to describe a set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic from which all mathematical truths could in principle be proven. Whitehead and Russell were working on such a foundational level of mathematics and logic that it took them until page 86 of Volume II to prove that 1+1=2, a proof humorously accompanied by the comment, "The above proposition is occasionally useful." Whitehead and Russell had thought originally that Principia Mathematica would take a year to complete; it ended up taking them ten years. To add insult to injury, when it came time for publication, the three-volume work was so massive (more than 2,000 pages) and its audience so narrow (professional mathematicians) that it was initially published at a loss of 600 pounds, 300 of which was paid by Cambridge University Press, 200 by the Royal Society of London, and 50 apiece by Whitehead and Russell themselves. Despite the initial loss, today there is likely no major academic library in the world which does not hold a copy of Principia Mathematica. The ultimate substantive legacy of Principia Mathematica is mixed. It is generally accepted that Kurt Gödel's incompleteness theorem of 1931 definitively demonstrated that for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics, there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them, and hence that Principia Mathematica could never achieve its aims. However, Gödel could not have come to this conclusion without Whitehead and Russell's book. In this way, Principia Mathematica's legacy might be described as its key role in disproving the possibility of achieving its own stated goals. But beyond this somewhat ironic legacy, the book popularized modern mathematical logic and drew important connections between logic, epistemology, and metaphysics.   === An Introduction to MathematicsEdit === Unlike Whitehead's previous two books on mathematics, An Introduction to Mathematics (1911) was not aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians, but was intended for a larger audience. The book covered the nature of mathematics, its unity and internal structure, and its applicability to nature. Whitehead wrote in the opening chapter:  "The object of the following Chapters is not to teach mathematics, but to enable students from the very beginning of their course to know what the science is about, and why it is necessarily the foundation of exact thought as applied to natural phenomena."  The book can be seen as an attempt to understand the growth in unity and interconnection of mathematics as a whole, as well as an examination of the mutual influence of mathematics and philosophy, language, and physics. Although the book is little-read, in some ways it prefigures certain points of Whitehead's later work in philosophy and metaphysics.   == Views on educationEdit == Whitehead showed a deep concern for educational reform at all levels. In addition to his numerous individually written works on the subject, Whitehead was appointed by Britain's Prime Minister as part of a 20-person committee to investigate the educational systems and practices of the UK in 1921 and recommend reform. Whitehead's most complete work on education is the 1929 book The Aims of Education and Other Essays, which collected numerous essays and addresses by Whitehead on the subject published between 1912 and 1927. The essay from which Aims of Education derived its name was delivered as an address in 1916 when Whitehead was president of the London Branch of the Mathematical Association. In it, he cautioned against the teaching of what he called "inert ideas" – ideas that are disconnected scraps of information, with no application to real life or culture. He opined that "education with inert ideas is not only useless: it is, above all things, harmful." Rather than teach small parts of a large number of subjects, Whitehead advocated teaching a relatively few important concepts that the student could organically link to many different areas of knowledge, discovering their application in actual life. For Whitehead, education should be the exact opposite of the multidisciplinary, value-free school model – it should be transdisciplinary, and laden with values and general principles that provide students with a bedrock of wisdom and help them to make connections between areas of knowledge that are usually regarded as separate. In order to make this sort of teaching a reality, however, Whitehead pointed to the need to minimize the importance of (or radically alter) standard examinations for school entrance. Whitehead writes:  "Every school is bound on pain of extinction to train its boys for a small set of definite examinations. No headmaster has a free hand to develop his general education or his specialist studies in accordance with the opportunities of his school, which are created by its staff, its environment, its class of boys, and its endowments. I suggest that no system of external tests which aims primarily at examining individual scholars can result in anything but educational waste."  Whitehead argued that curriculum should be developed specifically for its own students by its own staff, or else risk total stagnation, interrupted only by occasional movements from one group of inert ideas to another. Above all else in his educational writings, Whitehead emphasized the importance of imagination and the free play of ideas. In his essay "Universities and Their Function", Whitehead writes provocatively on imagination:  "Imagination is not to be divorced from the facts: it is a way of illuminating the facts. It works by eliciting the general principles which apply to the facts, as they exist, and then by an intellectual survey of alternative possibilities which are consistent with those principles. It enables men to construct an intellectual vision of a new world."  Whitehead's philosophy of education might adequately be summarized in his statement that "knowledge does not keep any better than fish." In other words, bits of disconnected knowledge are meaningless; all knowledge must find some imaginative application to the students' own lives, or else it becomes so much useless trivia, and the students themselves become good at parroting facts but not thinking for themselves.   == Philosophy and metaphysicsEdit ==  Whitehead did not begin his career as a philosopher. In fact, he never had any formal training in philosophy beyond his undergraduate education. Early in his life he showed great interest in and respect for philosophy and metaphysics, but it is evident that he considered himself a rank amateur. In one letter to his friend and former student Bertrand Russell, after discussing whether science aimed to be explanatory or merely descriptive, he wrote: "This further question lands us in the ocean of metaphysic, onto which my profound ignorance of that science forbids me to enter." Ironically, in later life Whitehead would become one of the 20th century's foremost metaphysicians. However, interest in metaphysics – the philosophical investigation of the nature of the universe and existence – had become unfashionable by the time Whitehead began writing in earnest about it in the 1920s. The ever-more impressive accomplishments of empirical science had led to a general consensus in academia that the development of comprehensive metaphysical systems was a waste of time because they were not subject to empirical testing. Whitehead was unimpressed by this objection. In the notes of one his students for a 1927 class, Whitehead was quoted as saying: "Every scientific man in order to preserve his reputation has to say he dislikes metaphysics. What he means is he dislikes having his metaphysics criticized." In Whitehead's view, scientists and philosophers make metaphysical assumptions about how the universe works all the time, but such assumptions are not easily seen precisely because they remain unexamined and unquestioned. While Whitehead acknowledged that "philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical first principles," he argued that people need to continually re-imagine their basic assumptions about how the universe works if philosophy and science are to make any real progress, even if that progress remains permanently asymptotic. For this reason Whitehead regarded metaphysical investigations as essential to both good science and good philosophy. Perhaps foremost among what Whitehead considered faulty metaphysical assumptions was the Cartesian idea that reality is fundamentally constructed of bits of matter that exist totally independently of one another, which he rejected in favor of an event-based or "process" ontology in which events are primary and are fundamentally interrelated and dependent on one another. He also argued that the most basic elements of reality can all be regarded as experiential, indeed that everything is constituted by its experience. He used the term "experience" very broadly, so that even inanimate processes such as electron collisions are said to manifest some degree of experience. In this, he went against Descartes' separation of two different kinds of real existence, either exclusively material or else exclusively mental. Whitehead referred to his metaphysical system as "philosophy of organism", but it would become known more widely as "process philosophy." Whitehead's philosophy was highly original, and soon garnered interest in philosophical circles. After publishing The Concept of Nature in 1920, he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923, and Henri Bergson was quoted as saying that Whitehead was "the best philosopher writing in English." So impressive and different was Whitehead's philosophy that in 1924 he was invited to join the faculty at Harvard University as a professor of philosophy at 63 years of age.  This is not to say that Whitehead's thought was widely accepted or even well-understood. His philosophical work is generally considered to be among the most difficult to understand in all of the western canon. Even professional philosophers struggled to follow Whitehead's writings. One famous story illustrating the level of difficulty of Whitehead's philosophy centers around the delivery of Whitehead's Gifford lectures in 1927–28 – following Arthur Eddington's lectures of the year previous – which Whitehead would later publish as Process and Reality:  Eddington was a marvellous popular lecturer who had enthralled an audience of 600 for his entire course. The same audience turned up to Whitehead's first lecture but it was completely unintelligible, not merely to the world at large but to the elect. My father remarked to me afterwards that if he had not known Whitehead well he would have suspected that it was an imposter making it up as he went along ... The audience at subsequent lectures was only about half a dozen in all.  Indeed, it may not be inappropriate to speculate that some fair portion of the respect generally shown to Whitehead by his philosophical peers at the time arose from their sheer bafflement. Distinguished University of Chicago Divinity School theologian Shailer Mathews once remarked of Whitehead's 1926 book Religion in the Making: "It is infuriating, and I must say embarrassing as well, to read page after page of relatively familiar words without understanding a single sentence." However, Mathews' frustration with Whitehead's books did not negatively affect his interest. In fact, there were numerous philosophers and theologians at Chicago's Divinity School that perceived the importance of what Whitehead was doing without fully grasping all of the details and implications. In 1927 they invited one of America's only Whitehead experts – Henry Nelson Wieman – to Chicago to give a lecture explaining Whitehead's thought. Wieman's lecture was so brilliant that he was promptly hired to the faculty and taught there for twenty years, and for at least thirty years afterward Chicago's Divinity School was closely associated with Whitehead's thought. Shortly after Whitehead's book Process and Reality appeared in 1929, Wieman famously wrote in his 1930 review:  "Not many people will read Whitehead's recent book in this generation; not many will read it in any generation. But its influence will radiate through concentric circles of popularization until the common man will think and work in the light of it, not knowing whence the light came. After a few decades of discussion and analysis one will be able to understand it more readily than can now be done."  Wieman's words proved prophetic. Though Process and Reality has been called "arguably the most impressive single metaphysical text of the twentieth century," it has been little-read and little-understood, partly because it demands – as Isabelle Stengers puts it – "that its readers accept the adventure of the questions that will separate them from every consensus." Whitehead questioned western philosophy's most dearly held assumptions about how the universe works, but in doing so he managed to anticipate a number of 21st century scientific and philosophical problems and provide novel solutions.   === Whitehead's conception of realityEdit === Whitehead was convinced that the scientific notion of matter was misleading as a way of describing the ultimate nature of things. In his 1925 book Science and the Modern World, he wrote that  "There persists ... [a] fixed scientific cosmology which presupposes the ultimate fact of an irreducible brute matter, or material, spread through space in a flux of configurations. In itself such a material is senseless, valueless, purposeless. It just does what it does do, following a fixed routine imposed by external relations which do not spring from the nature of its being. It is this assumption that I call 'scientific materialism.' Also it is an assumption which I shall challenge as being entirely unsuited to the scientific situation at which we have now arrived."  In Whitehead's view, there are a number of problems with this notion of "irreducible brute matter." First, it obscures and minimizes the importance of change. By thinking of any material thing (like a rock, or a person) as being fundamentally the same thing throughout time, with any changes to it being secondary to its "nature", scientific materialism hides the fact that nothing ever stays the same. For Whitehead, change is fundamental and inescapable; he emphasizes that "all things flow." In Whitehead's view, then, concepts such as "quality", "matter", and "form" are problematic. These "classical" concepts fail to adequately account for change, and overlook the active and experiential nature of the most basic elements of the world. They are useful abstractions, but are not the world's basic building blocks. What is ordinarily conceived of as a single person, for instance, is philosophically described as a continuum of overlapping events. After all, people change all the time, if only because they have aged by another second and had some further experience. These occasions of experience are logically distinct, but are progressively connected in what Whitehead calls a "society" of events. By assuming that enduring objects are the most real and fundamental things in the universe, materialists have mistaken the abstract for the concrete (what Whitehead calls the "fallacy of misplaced concreteness"). To put it another way, a thing or person is often seen as having a "defining essence" or a "core identity" that is unchanging, and describes what the thing or person really is. In this way of thinking, things and people are seen as fundamentally the same through time, with any changes being qualitative and secondary to their core identity (e.g. "Mark's hair has turned gray as he has gotten older, but he is still the same person"). But in Whitehead's cosmology, the only fundamentally existent things are discrete "occasions of experience" that overlap one another in time and space, and jointly make up the enduring person or thing. On the other hand, what ordinary thinking often regards as "the essence of a thing" or "the identity/core of a person" is an abstract generalization of what is regarded as that person or thing's most important or salient features across time. Identities do not define people, people define identities. Everything changes from moment to moment, and to think of anything as having an "enduring essence" misses the fact that "all things flow", though it is often a useful way of speaking. Whitehead pointed to the limitations of language as one of the main culprits in maintaining a materialistic way of thinking, and acknowledged that it may be difficult to ever wholly move past such ideas in everyday speech. After all, each moment of each person's life can hardly be given a different proper name, and it is easy and convenient to think of people and objects as remaining fundamentally the same things, rather than constantly keeping in mind that each thing is a different thing from what it was a moment ago. Yet the limitations of everyday living and everyday speech should not prevent people from realizing that "material substances" or "essences" are a convenient generalized description of a continuum of particular, concrete processes. No one questions that a ten-year-old person is quite different by the time he or she turns thirty years old, and in many ways is not the same person at all; Whitehead points out that it is not philosophically or ontologically sound to think that a person is the same from one second to the next.  A second problem with materialism is that it obscures the importance of relations. It sees every object as distinct and discrete from all other objects. Each object is simply an inert clump of matter that is only externally related to other things. The idea of matter as primary makes people think of objects as being fundamentally separate in time and space, and not necessarily related to anything. But in Whitehead's view, relations take a primary role, perhaps even more important than the relata themselves. A student taking notes in one of Whitehead's fall 1924 classes wrote that:  "Reality applies to connections, and only relatively to the things connected. (A) is real for (B), and (B) is real for (A), but [they are] not absolutely real independent of each other."  In fact, Whitehead describes any entity as in some sense nothing more and nothing less than the sum of its relations to other entities – its synthesis of and reaction to the world around it. A real thing is just that which forces the rest of the universe to in some way conform to it; that is to say, if theoretically a thing made strictly no difference to any other entity (i.e. it was not related to any other entity), it could not be said to really exist. Relations are not secondary to what a thing is, they are what the thing is. It must be emphasized, however, that an entity is not merely a sum of its relations, but also a valuation of them and reaction to them. For Whitehead, creativity is the absolute principle of existence, and every entity (whether it is a human being, a tree, or an electron) has some degree of novelty in how it responds to other entities, and is not fully determined by causal or mechanistic laws. Of course, most entities do not have consciousness. As a human being's actions cannot always be predicted, the same can be said of where a tree's roots will grow, or how an electron will move, or whether it will rain tomorrow. Moreover, inability to predict an electron's movement (for instance) is not due to faulty understanding or inadequate technology; rather, the fundamental creativity/freedom of all entities means that there will always remain phenomena that are unpredictable. The other side of creativity/freedom as the absolute principle is that every entity is constrained by the social structure of existence (i.e., its relations) – each actual entity must conform to the settled conditions of the world around it. Freedom always exists within limits. But an entity's uniqueness and individuality arise from its own self-determination as to just how it will take account of the world within the limits that have been set for it. In summary, Whitehead rejects the idea of separate and unchanging bits of matter as the most basic building blocks of reality, in favor of the idea of reality as interrelated events in process. He conceives of reality as composed of processes of dynamic "becoming" rather than static "being", emphasizing that all physical things change and evolve, and that changeless "essences" such as matter are mere abstractions from the interrelated events that are the final real things that make up the world.   === Theory of perceptionEdit === Since Whitehead's metaphysics described a universe in which all entities experience, he needed a new way of describing perception that was not limited to living, self-conscious beings. The term he coined was "prehension", which comes from the Latin prehensio, meaning "to seize." The term is meant to indicate a kind of perception that can be conscious or unconscious, applying to people as well as electrons. It is also intended to make clear Whitehead's rejection of the theory of representative perception, in which the mind only has private ideas about other entities. For Whitehead, the term "prehension" indicates that the perceiver actually incorporates aspects of the perceived thing into itself. In this way, entities are constituted by their perceptions and relations, rather than being independent of them. Further, Whitehead regards perception as occurring in two modes, causal efficacy (or "physical prehension") and presentational immediacy (or "conceptual prehension"). Whitehead describes causal efficacy as "the experience dominating the primitive living organisms, which have a sense for the fate from which they have emerged, and the fate towards which they go." It is, in other words, the sense of causal relations between entities, a feeling of being influenced and affected by the surrounding environment, unmediated by the senses. Presentational immediacy, on the other hand, is what is usually referred to as "pure sense perception", unmediated by any causal or symbolic interpretation, even unconscious interpretation. In other words, it is pure appearance, which may or may not be delusive (e.g. mistaking an image in a mirror for "the real thing"). In higher organisms (like people), these two modes of perception combine into what Whitehead terms "symbolic reference", which links appearance with causation in a process that is so automatic that both people and animals have difficulty refraining from it. By way of illustration, Whitehead uses the example of a person's encounter with a chair. An ordinary person looks up, sees a colored shape, and immediately infers that it is a chair. However, an artist, Whitehead supposes, "might not have jumped to the notion of a chair", but instead "might have stopped at the mere contemplation of a beautiful color and a beautiful shape." This is not the normal human reaction; most people place objects in categories by habit and instinct, without even thinking about it. Moreover, animals do the same thing. Using the same example, Whitehead points out that a dog "would have acted immediately on the hypothesis of a chair and would have jumped onto it by way of using it as such." In this way symbolic reference is a fusion of pure sense perceptions on the one hand and causal relations on the other, and that it is in fact the causal relationships that dominate the more basic mentality (as the dog illustrates), while it is the sense perceptions which indicate a higher grade mentality (as the artist illustrates).   === Evolution and valueEdit === Whitehead believed that when asking questions about the basic facts of existence, questions about value and purpose can never be fully escaped. This is borne out in his thoughts on abiogenesis, or the hypothetical natural process by which life arises from simple organic compounds. Whitehead makes the startling observation that "life is comparatively deficient in survival value." If humans can only exist for about a hundred years, and rocks for eight hundred million, then one is forced to ask why complex organisms ever evolved in the first place; as Whitehead humorously notes, "they certainly did not appear because they were better at that game than the rocks around them." He then observes that the mark of higher forms of life is that they are actively engaged in modifying their environment, an activity which he theorizes is directed toward the three-fold goal of living, living well, and living better. In other words, Whitehead sees life as directed toward the purpose of increasing its own satisfaction. Without such a goal, he sees the rise of life as totally unintelligible. For Whitehead, there is no such thing as wholly inert matter. Instead, all things have some measure of freedom or creativity, however small, which allows them to be at least partly self-directed. Process philosopher David Ray Griffin coined the term "panexperientialism" (the idea that all entities experience) to describe Whitehead's view, and to distinguish it from panpsychism (the idea that all matter has consciousness).   === GodEdit ===  Whitehead's idea of God differs from traditional monotheistic notions. Perhaps his most famous and pointed criticism of the Christian conception of God is that "the Church gave unto God the attributes which belonged exclusively to Caesar." Here Whitehead is criticizing Christianity for defining God as primarily a divine king who imposes his will on the world, and whose most important attribute is power. As opposed to the most widely accepted forms of Christianity, Whitehead emphasized an idea of God that he called "the brief Galilean vision of humility":  "It does not emphasize the ruling Caesar, or the ruthless moralist, or the unmoved mover. It dwells upon the tender elements in the world, which slowly and in quietness operates by love; and it finds purpose in the present immediacy of a kingdom not of this world. Love neither rules, nor is it unmoved; also it is a little oblivious as to morals. It does not look to the future; for it finds its own reward in the immediate present."  It should be emphasized, however, that for Whitehead God is not necessarily tied to religion. Rather than springing primarily from religious faith, Whitehead saw God as necessary for his metaphysical system. His system required that an order exist among possibilities, an order that allowed for novelty in the world and provided an aim to all entities. Whitehead posited that these ordered potentials exist in what he called the primordial nature of God. However, Whitehead was also interested in religious experience. This led him to reflect more intensively on what he saw as the second nature of God, the consequent nature. Whitehead's conception of God as a "dipolar" entity has called for fresh theological thinking. The primordial nature he described as "the unlimited conceptual realization of the absolute wealth of potentiality," i.e., the unlimited possibility of the universe. This primordial nature is eternal and unchanging, providing entities in the universe with possibilities for realization. Whitehead also calls this primordial aspect "the lure for feeling, the eternal urge of desire," pulling the entities in the universe toward as-yet unrealized possibilities. God's consequent nature, on the other hand, is anything but unchanging – it is God's reception of the world's activity. As Whitehead puts it, "[God] saves the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life. It is the judgment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved." In other words, God saves and cherishes all experiences forever, and those experiences go on to change the way God interacts with the world. In this way, God is really changed by what happens in the world and the wider universe, lending the actions of finite creatures an eternal significance. Whitehead thus sees God and the world as fulfilling one another. He sees entities in the world as fluent and changing things that yearn for a permanence which only God can provide by taking them into God's self, thereafter changing God and affecting the rest of the universe throughout time. On the other hand, he sees God as permanent but as deficient in actuality and change: alone, God is merely eternally unrealized possibilities, and requires the world to actualize them. God gives creatures permanence, while the creatures give God actuality and change. Here it is worthwhile to quote Whitehead at length:  "In this way God is completed by the individual, fluent satisfactions of finite fact, and the temporal occasions are completed by their everlasting union with their transformed selves, purged into conformation with the eternal order which is the final absolute 'wisdom.' The final summary can only be expressed in terms of a group of antitheses, whose apparent self-contradictions depend on neglect of the diverse categories of existence. In each antithesis there is a shift of meaning which converts the opposition into a contrast. "It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent, as that the World is permanent and God is fluent. "It is as true to say that God is one and the World many, as that the World is one and God many. "It is as true to say that, in comparison with the World, God is actual eminently, as that, in comparison with God, the World is actual eminently. "It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God, as that God is immanent in the World. "It is as true to say that God transcends the World, as that the World transcends God. "It is as true to say that God creates the World, as that the World creates God ... "What is done in the world is transformed into a reality in heaven, and the reality in heaven passes back into the world ... In this sense, God is the great companion – the fellow-sufferer who understands." The above is some of Whitehead's most evocative writing about God, and was powerful enough to inspire the movement known as process theology, a vibrant theological school of thought that continues to thrive today.   === ReligionEdit === For Whitehead the core of religion was individual. While he acknowledged that individuals cannot ever be fully separated from their society, he argued that life is an internal fact for its own sake before it is an external fact relating to others. His most famous remark on religion is that "religion is what the individual does with his own solitariness ... and if you are never solitary, you are never religious." Whitehead saw religion as a system of general truths that transformed a person's character. He took special care to note that while religion is often a good influence, it is not necessarily good – an idea which he called a "dangerous delusion" (e.g., a religion might encourage the violent extermination of a rival religion's adherents). However, while Whitehead saw religion as beginning in solitariness, he also saw religion as necessarily expanding beyond the individual. In keeping with his process metaphysics in which relations are primary, he wrote that religion necessitates the realization of "the value of the objective world which is a community derivative from the interrelations of its component individuals." In other words, the universe is a community which makes itself whole through the relatedness of each individual entity to all the others – meaning and value do not exist for the individual alone, but only in the context of the universal community. Whitehead writes further that each entity "can find no such value till it has merged its individual claim with that of the objective universe. Religion is world-loyalty. The spirit at once surrenders itself to this universal claim and appropriates it for itself." In this way the individual and universal/social aspects of religion are mutually dependent. Whitehead also described religion more technically as "an ultimate craving to infuse into the insistent particularity of emotion that non-temporal generality which primarily belongs to conceptual thought alone." In other words, religion takes deeply felt emotions and contextualizes them within a system of general truths about the world, helping people to identify their wider meaning and significance. For Whitehead, religion served as a kind of bridge between philosophy and the emotions and purposes of a particular society. It is the task of religion to make philosophy applicable to the everyday lives of ordinary people.   == Influence and legacyEdit == Isabelle Stengers wrote that "Whiteheadians are recruited among both philosophers and theologians, and the palette has been enriched by practitioners from the most diverse horizons, from ecology to feminism, practices that unite political struggle and spirituality with the sciences of education." Indeed, in recent decades attention to Whitehead's work has become more widespread, with interest extending to intellectuals in Europe and China, and coming from such diverse fields as ecology, physics, biology, education, economics, and psychology. One of the first theologians to attempt to interact with Whitehead's thought was the future Archbishop of Canterbury, William Temple. In Temple's Gifford Lectures of 1932-1934 (subsequently published as "Nature, Man and God"), Whitehead is one of a number of philosophers of the emergent evolution approach Temple interacts with. However, it was not until the 1970s and 1980s that Whitehead's thought drew much attention outside of a small group of philosophers and theologians, primarily Americans, and even today he is not considered especially influential outside of relatively specialized circles. Early followers of Whitehead were found primarily at the University of Chicago's Divinity School, where Henry Nelson Wieman initiated an interest in Whitehead's work that would last for about thirty years. Professors such as Wieman, Charles Hartshorne, Bernard Loomer, Bernard Meland, and Daniel Day Williams made Whitehead's philosophy arguably the most important intellectual thread running through the Divinity School. They taught generations of Whitehead scholars, the most notable of which is John B. Cobb, Jr. Although interest in Whitehead has since faded at Chicago's Divinity School, Cobb effectively grabbed the torch and planted it firmly in Claremont, California, where he began teaching at Claremont School of Theology in 1958 and founded the Center for Process Studies with David Ray Griffin in 1973. Largely due to Cobb's influence, today Claremont remains strongly identified with Whitehead's process thought. But while Claremont remains the most concentrated hub of Whiteheadian activity, the place where Whitehead's thought currently seems to be growing the most quickly is in China. In order to address the challenges of modernization and industrialization, China has begun to blend traditions of Taoism, Buddhism, and Confucianism with Whitehead's "constructive post-modern" philosophy in order to create an "ecological civilization." To date, the Chinese government has encouraged the building of twenty-three university-based centers for the study of Whitehead's philosophy, and books by process philosophers John Cobb and David Ray Griffin are becoming required reading for Chinese graduate students. Cobb has attributed China's interest in process philosophy partly to Whitehead's stress on the mutual interdependence of humanity and nature, as well as his emphasis on an educational system that includes the teaching of values rather than simply bare facts. Overall, however, Whitehead's influence is very difficult to characterize. In English-speaking countries, his primary works are little-studied outside of Claremont and a select number of liberal graduate-level theology and philosophy programs. Outside of these circles his influence is relatively small and diffuse, and has tended to come chiefly through the work of his students and admirers rather than Whitehead himself. For instance, Whitehead was a teacher and long-time friend and collaborator of Bertrand Russell, and he also taught and supervised the dissertation of Willard Van Orman Quine, both of whom are important figures in analytic philosophy – the dominant strain of philosophy in English-speaking countries in the 20th century. Whitehead has also had high-profile admirers in the continental tradition, such as French post-structuralist philosopher Gilles Deleuze, who once dryly remarked of Whitehead that "he stands provisionally as the last great Anglo-American philosopher before Wittgenstein's disciples spread their misty confusion, sufficiency, and terror." French sociologist and anthropologist Bruno Latour even went so far as to call Whitehead "the greatest philosopher of the 20th century." Deleuze's and Latour's opinions, however, are minority ones, as Whitehead has not been recognized as particularly influential within the most dominant philosophical schools. It is impossible to say exactly why Whitehead's influence has not been more widespread, but it may be partly due to his metaphysical ideas seeming somewhat counter-intuitive (such as his assertion that matter is an abstraction), or his inclusion of theistic elements in his philosophy, or the perception of metaphysics itself as passé, or simply the sheer difficulty and density of his prose.   === Process philosophy and theologyEdit ===  Historically Whitehead's work has been most influential in the field of American progressive theology. The most important early proponent of Whitehead's thought in a theological context was Charles Hartshorne, who spent a semester at Harvard as Whitehead's teaching assistant in 1925, and is widely credited with developing Whitehead's process philosophy into a full-blown process theology. Other notable process theologians include John B. Cobb, Jr., David Ray Griffin, Marjorie Hewitt Suchocki, C. Robert Mesle, Roland Faber, and Catherine Keller. Process theology typically stresses God's relational nature. Rather than seeing God as impassible (unchanging), process theologians view God as "the fellow sufferer who understands", and as the being who is supremely affected by temporal events. Hartshorne points out that people would not praise a human ruler who was unaffected by either the joys or sorrows of his followers – so why would this be a praise-worthy quality in God? Instead, as the being who is most affected by the world, God is the being who can most appropriately respond to the world. However, process theology has been formulated in a wide variety of ways. C. Robert Mesle, for instance, advocates a "process naturalism", i.e. a process theology without God. In fact, process theology is difficult to define because process theologians are so diverse and transdisciplinary in their views and interests. John B. Cobb, Jr. is a process theologian who has also written books on biology and economics. Roland Faber and Catherine Keller integrate Whitehead with poststructuralist, postcolonialist, and feminist theory. Charles Birch was both a theologian and a geneticist. Franklin I. Gamwell writes on theology and political theory. Process philosophy is even more difficult to pin down than process theology. In practice, the two fields cannot be neatly separated. The 32-volume State University of New York series in constructive postmodern thought edited by process philosopher and theologian David Ray Griffin displays the range of areas in which different process philosophers work, including physics, ecology, medicine, public policy, nonviolence, politics, and psychology. One philosophical school which has historically had a close relationship with process philosophy is American pragmatism. Whitehead himself thought highly of William James and John Dewey, and acknowledged his indebtedness to them in the preface to Process and Reality. Charles Hartshorne (along with Paul Weiss) edited the collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, one of the founders of pragmatism. Noted neopragmatist Richard Rorty was in turn a student of Hartshorne. Today, Nicholas Rescher is one example of a philosopher who advocates both process philosophy and pragmatism. In addition, while they might not properly be called process philosophers, Whitehead has been influential in the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze, Milič Čapek, Isabelle Stengers, Bruno Latour, Susanne Langer, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.   === ScienceEdit ===  In recent years, Whiteheadian thought has become a stimulating influence in scientific research. Timothy E. Eastman and Hank Keeton's Physics and Whitehead (2004) and Michael Epperson's Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead (2004) are recent examples of Whiteheadian approaches to physics, while Brian G. Henning, Adam Scarfe, and Dorion Sagan's Beyond Mechanism (2013) and Rupert Sheldrake's Science Set Free (2012) are recent examples of Whiteheadian approaches to biology. In physics, Whitehead's thought has had some influence. He articulated a view that can perhaps be regarded as dual to Einstein's general relativity. It has been severely criticized but perhaps the matter is still unsettled. Yutaka Tanaka, who suggests that the gravitational constant disagrees with experimental findings, proposes that Einstein's work does not actually refute Whitehead's formulation. Also, although Whitehead himself gave only secondary consideration to quantum theory, his metaphysics of processes has proved attractive to some physicists in that field. Henry Stapp and David Bohm are among those whose work has been influenced by Whitehead. Other scientists for whom Whitehead's work has been influential include physical chemist Ilya Prigogine, biologist Conrad Hal Waddington, and geneticists Charles Birch and Sewall Wright.   === Ecology, economy, and sustainabilityEdit ===  One of the most promising applications of Whitehead's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization, sustainability, and environmental ethics. "Because Whitehead's holistic metaphysics of value lends itself so readily to an ecological point of view, many see his work as a promising alternative to the traditional mechanistic worldview, providing a detailed metaphysical picture of a world constituted by a web of interdependent relations." This work has been pioneered by John B. Cobb, Jr., whose book Is It Too Late? A Theology of Ecology (1971) was the first single-authored book in environmental ethics. Cobb also co-authored a book with economist Herman Daly entitled For the Common Good: Redirecting the Economy toward Community, the Environment, and a Sustainable Future (1989), which applied Whitehead's thought to economics, and received the Grawemeyer Award for Ideas Improving World Order. Cobb followed this with a second book, Sustaining the Common Good: A Christian Perspective on the Global Economy (1994), which aimed to challenge "economists' zealous faith in the great god of growth."   === EducationEdit === Whitehead is widely known for his influence in education theory. His philosophy inspired the formation of the Association for Process Philosophy of Education (APPE), which published eleven volumes of a journal titled Process Papers on process philosophy and education from 1996 to 2008. Whitehead's theories on education also led to the formation of new modes of learning and new models of teaching. One such model is the ANISA model developed by Daniel C. Jordan, which sought to address a lack of understanding of the nature of people in current education systems. As Jordan and Raymond P. Shepard put it: "Because it has not defined the nature of man, education is in the untenable position of having to devote its energies to the development of curricula without any coherent ideas about the nature of the creature for whom they are intended." Another model is the FEELS model developed by Xie Bangxiu and deployed successfully in China. "FEELS" stands for five things in curriculum and education: Flexible-goals, Engaged-learner, Embodied-knowledge, Learning-through-interactions, and Supportive-teacher. It is used for understanding and evaluating educational curriculum under the assumption that the purpose of education is to "help a person become whole." This work is in part the product of cooperation between Chinese government organizations and the Institute for the Postmodern Development of China. Whitehead's philosophy of education has also found institutional support in Canada, where the University of Saskatchewan created a Process Philosophy Research Unit and sponsored several conferences on process philosophy and education. Dr. Howard Woodhouse at the University of Saskatchewan remains a strong proponent of Whiteheadian education. Two recent books which further develop Whitehead's philosophy of education include: Modes of Learning: Whitehead's Metaphysics and the Stages of Education (2012) by George Allan; and The Adventure of Education: Process Philosophers on Learning, Teaching, and Research (2009) by Adam Scarfe.   === Business administrationEdit === Whitehead has had some influence on philosophy of business administration and organizational theory. This has led in part to a focus on identifying and investigating the effect of temporal events (as opposed to static things) within organizations through an “organization studies” discourse that accommodates a variety of 'weak' and 'strong' process perspectives from a number of philosophers. One of the leading figures having an explicitly Whiteheadian and panexperientialist stance towards management is Mark Dibben, who works in what he calls "applied process thought" to articulate a philosophy of management and business administration as part of a wider examination of the social sciences through the lens of process metaphysics. For Dibben, this allows "a comprehensive exploration of life as perpetually active experiencing, as opposed to occasional – and thoroughly passive – happening." Dibben has published two books on applied process thought, Applied Process Thought I: Initial Explorations in Theory and Research (2008), and Applied Process Thought II: Following a Trail Ablaze (2009), as well as other papers in this vein in the fields of philosophy of management and business ethics. Margaret Stout and Carrie M. Staton have also written recently on the mutual influence of Whitehead and Mary Parker Follett, a pioneer in the fields of organizational theory and organizational behavior. Stout and Staton see both Whitehead and Follett as sharing an ontology that "understands becoming as a relational process; difference as being related, yet unique; and the purpose of becoming as harmonizing difference." This connection is further analyzed by Stout and Jeannine M. Love in Integrative Process: Follettian Thinking from Ontology to Administration    == See alsoEdit == Relationalism   == Primary worksEdit == Books written by Whitehead, listed by date of publication. A Treatise on Universal Algebra. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1898. ISBN 1-4297-0032-7. Available online at http://projecteuclid.org/euclid.chmm/1263316509. The Axioms of Descriptive Geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1907. Available online at http://quod.lib.umich.edu/u/umhistmath/ABN2643.0001.001. with Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, Volume I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1910. Available online at http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/b/bib/bibperm?q1=AAT3201.0001.001. Vol. 1 to *56 is available as a CUP paperback. An Introduction to Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1911. Available online at http://quod.lib.umich.edu/u/umhistmath/AAW5995.0001.001. Vol. 56 of the Great Books of the Western World series. with Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, Volume II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1912. Available online at http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/b/bib/bibperm?q1=AAT3201.0002.001. with Bertrand Russell. Principia Mathematica, Volume III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1913. Available online at http://www.hti.umich.edu/cgi/b/bib/bibperm?q1=AAT3201.0003.001. The Organization of Thought Educational and Scientific. London: Williams & Norgate, 1917. Available online at https://archive.org/details/organisationofth00whit. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1919. Available online at https://archive.org/details/enquiryconcernpr00whitrich. The Concept of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920. Based on the November 1919 Tarner Lectures delivered at Trinity College. Available online at https://archive.org/details/cu31924012068593. The Principle of Relativity with Applications to Physical Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922. Available online at https://archive.org/details/theprincipleofre00whituoft. Science and the Modern World. New York: Macmillan Company, 1925. Vol. 55 of the Great Books of the Western World series. Religion in the Making. New York: Macmillan Company, 1926. Based on the 1926 Lowell Lectures. Symbolism, Its Meaning and Effect. New York: Macmillan Co., 1927. Based on the 1927 Barbour-Page Lectures delivered at the University of Virginia. Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. New York: Macmillan Company, 1929. Based on the 1927–28 Gifford Lectures delivered at the University of Edinburgh. The 1978 Free Press "corrected edition" edited by David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne corrects many errors in both the British and American editions, and also provides a comprehensive index. The Aims of Education and Other Essays. New York: Macmillan Company, 1929. The Function of Reason. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1929. Based on the March 1929 Louis Clark Vanuxem Foundation Lectures delivered at Princeton University. Adventures of Ideas. New York: Macmillan Company, 1933. Also published by Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1933. Nature and Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1934. Modes of Thought. New York: MacMillan Company, 1938. "Mathematics and the Good." In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 666–681. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. "Immortality." In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 682–700. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. Essays in Science and Philosophy. London: Philosophical Library, 1947. with Allison Heartz Johnson, ed. The Wit and Wisdom of Whitehead. Boston: Beacon Press, 1947.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == For the most comprehensive list of resources related to Whitehead, see the thematic bibliography of the Center for Process Studies. Casati, Roberto, and Achille C. Varzi. Parts and Places: The Structures of Spatial Representation. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1999. Ford, Lewis. Emergence of Whitehead's Metaphysics, 1925–1929. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1985. Hartshorne, Charles. Whitehead's Philosophy: Selected Essays, 1935–1970. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, 1972. Henning, Brian G. The Ethics of Creativity: Beauty, Morality, and Nature in a Processive Cosmos. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2005. Holtz, Harald and Ernest Wolf-Gazo, eds. Whitehead und der Prozeßbegriff / Whitehead and The Idea of Process. Proceedings of The First International Whitehead-Symposion. Verlag Karl Alber, Freiburg i. B. / München, 1984. ISBN 3-495-47517-6 Jones, Judith A. Intensity: An Essay in Whiteheadian Ontology. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1998. Kraus, Elizabeth M. The Metaphysics of Experience. New York: Fordham University Press, 1979. McDaniel, Jay. What is Process Thought?: Seven Answers to Seven Questions. Claremont: P&F Press, 2008. McHenry, Leemon. The Event Universe: The Revisionary Metaphysics of Alfred North Whitehead. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2015. Nobo, Jorge L. Whitehead's Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1986. Price, Lucien. Dialogues of Alfred North Whitehead. New York: Mentor Books, 1956. Quine, Willard Van Orman. "Whitehead and the rise of modern logic." In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead, edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 125–163. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. Rapp, Friedrich and Reiner Wiehl, eds. Whiteheads Metaphysik der Kreativität. Internationales Whitehead-Symposium Bad Homburg 1983. Verlag Karl Alber, Freiburg i. B. / München, 1986. ISBN 3-495-47612-1 Rescher, Nicholas. Process Metaphysics. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1995. Rescher, Nicholas. Process Philosophy: A Survey of Basic Issues. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2001. Schilpp, Paul Arthur, ed. The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead. Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 1941. Part of the Library of Living Philosophers series. Siebers, Johan. The Method of Speculative Philosophy: An Essay on the Foundations of Whitehead's Metaphysics. Kassel: Kassel University Press GmbH, 2002. ISBN 3-933146-79-8 Smith, Olav Bryant. Myths of the Self: Narrative Identity and Postmodern Metaphysics. Lanham: Lexington Books, 2004. ISBN 0-7391-0843-3 – Contains a section called "Alfred North Whitehead: Toward a More Fundamental Ontology" that is an overview of Whitehead's metaphysics. Weber, Michel. Whitehead's Pancreativism — The Basics. Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag, 2006. Weber, Michel. Whitehead’s Pancreativism — Jamesian Applications, Frankfurt / Paris: Ontos Verlag, 2011. Weber, Michel and Will Desmond (eds.). Handbook of Whiteheadian Process Thought, Frankfurt / Lancaster: Ontos Verlag, 2008. Alan Van Wyk and Michel Weber (eds.). Creativity and Its Discontents. The Response to Whitehead's Process and Reality, Frankfurt / Lancaster: Ontos Verlag, 2009. Will, Clifford. Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.   == External linksEdit == Summary of Whitehead's Philosophy A Brief Introduction to Whitehead's Metaphysics Center for Process Studies in Claremont, California. A faculty research center of Claremont Lincoln University, in association with Claremont School of Theology and Claremont Graduate University. The Center organizes conferences and events and publishes materials pertaining to Whitehead and process thought. It also maintains extensive Whitehead-related bibliographies. Society for the Study of Process Philosophies, a scholarly society that holds periodic meetings in conjunction with each of the divisional meetings of the American Philosophical Association, as well as at the annual meeting of the Society for the Advancement of American Philosophy. "Alfred North Whitehead" in the MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, by John J. O'Connor and Edmund F. Robertson. "Alfred North Whitehead: New World Philosopher" at the Harvard Square Library. Jesus, Jazz, and Buddhism: Process Thinking for a More Hospitable World "What is Process Thought?" an introductory video series to process thought by Jay McDaniel. Centre de philosophie pratique « Chromatiques whiteheadiennes » "Whitehead's Principle of Relativity" by John Lighton Synge on arXiv.org Works by Alfred North Whitehead at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Alfred North Whitehead at Internet Archive Works by Alfred North Whitehead at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)

Alfred Tarski (/ˈtɑrski/; January 14, 1901 – October 26, 1983) was a Polish logician, mathematician and philosopher. Educated at the University of Warsaw and a member of the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic and the Warsaw school of mathematics and philosophy, he emigrated to the USA in 1939 where he became a naturalized citizen in 1945, and taught and carried out research in mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley from 1942 until his death. A prolific author best known for his work on model theory, metamathematics, and algebraic logic, he also contributed to abstract algebra, topology, geometry, measure theory, mathematical logic, set theory, and analytic philosophy. His biographers Anita and Solomon Feferman state that, "Along with his contemporary, Kurt Gödel, he changed the face of logic in the twentieth century, especially through his work on the concept of truth and the theory of models."   == LifeEdit == Alfred Tarski was born Alfred Teitelbaum (Polish spelling: "Tajtelbaum"), to parents who were Polish Jews in comfortable circumstances. He first manifested his mathematical abilities while in secondary school, at Warsaw's Szkoła Mazowiecka. Nevertheless, he entered the University of Warsaw in 1918 intending to study biology. After Poland regained independence in 1918, Warsaw University came under the leadership of Jan Łukasiewicz, Stanisław Leśniewski and Wacław Sierpiński and quickly became a world-leading research institution in logic, foundational mathematics, and the philosophy of mathematics. Leśniewski recognized Tarski's potential as a mathematician and encouraged him to abandon biology. Henceforth Tarski attended courses taught by Łukasiewicz, Sierpiński, Stefan Mazurkiewicz and Tadeusz Kotarbiński, and became the only person ever to complete a doctorate under Leśniewski's supervision. Tarski and Leśniewski soon grew cool to each other. However, in later life, Tarski reserved his warmest praise for Kotarbiński, as was mutual. In 1923, Alfred Teitelbaum and his brother Wacław changed their surname to "Tarski." (Years later, Alfred met another Alfred Tarski in northern California.) The Tarski brothers also converted to Roman Catholicism, Poland's dominant religion. Alfred did so even though he was an avowed atheist. Tarski was a Polish nationalist who saw himself as a Pole and wished to be fully accepted as such — later, in America, he spoke Polish at home. After becoming the youngest person ever to complete a doctorate at Warsaw University, Tarski taught logic at the Polish Pedagogical Institute, mathematics and logic at the University, and served as Łukasiewicz's assistant. Because these positions were poorly paid, Tarski also taught mathematics at a Warsaw secondary school; before World War II, it was not uncommon for European intellectuals of research caliber to teach high school. Hence between 1923 and his departure for the United States in 1939, Tarski not only wrote several textbooks and many papers, a number of them ground-breaking, but also did so while supporting himself primarily by teaching high-school mathematics. In 1929 Tarski married fellow teacher Maria Witkowska, a Pole of Catholic background. She had worked as a courier for the army in the Polish-Soviet War. They had two children; a son Jan who became a physicist, and a daughter Ina who married the mathematician Andrzej Ehrenfeucht. Tarski applied for a chair of philosophy at Lwów University, but on Bertrand Russell's recommendation it was awarded to Leon Chwistek. In 1930, Tarski visited the University of Vienna, lectured to Karl Menger's colloquium, and met Kurt Gödel. Thanks to a fellowship, he was able to return to Vienna during the first half of 1935 to work with Menger's research group. From Vienna he traveled to Paris to present his ideas on truth at the first meeting of the Unity of Science movement, an outgrowth of the Vienna Circle. In 1937, Tarski applied for a chair at Poznań University but the chair was abolished. Tarski's ties to the Unity of Science movement likely saved his life, because they resulted in his being invited to address the Unity of Science Congress held in September 1939 at Harvard University. Thus he left Poland in August 1939, on the last ship to sail from Poland for the United States before the German and Soviet invasion of Poland and the outbreak of World War II. Tarski left reluctantly, because Leśniewski had died a few months before, creating a vacancy which Tarski hoped to fill. Oblivious to the Nazi threat, he left his wife and children in Warsaw. He did not see them again until 1946. During the war, nearly all his extended family died at the hands of the German occupying authorities. Once in the United States, Tarski held a number of temporary teaching and research positions: Harvard University (1939), City College of New York (1940), and thanks to a Guggenheim Fellowship, the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (1942), where he again met Gödel. In 1942, Tarski joined the Mathematics Department at the University of California, Berkeley, where he spent the rest of his career. Tarski became an American citizen in 1945. Although emeritus from 1968, he taught until 1973 and supervised Ph.D. candidates until his death. At Berkeley, Tarski acquired a reputation as an awesome and demanding teacher, a fact noted by many observers:  His seminars at Berkeley quickly became famous in the world of mathematical logic. His students, many of whom became distinguished mathematicians, noted the awesome energy with which he would coax and cajole their best work out of them, always demanding the highest standards of clarity and precision.  Tarski was extroverted, quick-witted, strong-willed, energetic, and sharp-tongued. He preferred his research to be collaborative — sometimes working all night with a colleague — and was very fastidious about priority.  A charismatic leader and teacher, known for his brilliantly precise yet suspenseful expository style, Tarski had intimidatingly high standards for students, but at the same time he could be very encouraging, and particularly so to women — in contrast to the general trend. Some students were frightened away, but a circle of disciples remained, many of whom became world-renowned leaders in the field.  Tarski supervised twenty-four Ph.D. dissertations including (in chronological order) those of Andrzej Mostowski, Bjarni Jónsson, Julia Robinson, Robert Vaught, Solomon Feferman, Richard Montague, James Donald Monk, Haim Gaifman, Donald Pigozzi and Roger Maddux, as well as Chen Chung Chang and Jerome Keisler, authors of Model Theory (1973), a classic text in the field. He also strongly influenced the dissertations of Alfred Lindenbaum, Dana Scott, and Steven Givant. Five of Tarski's students were women, a remarkable fact given that men represented an overwhelming majority of graduate students at the time. Tarski lectured at University College, London (1950, 1966), the Institut Henri Poincaré in Paris (1955), the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science in Berkeley (1958–60), the University of California at Los Angeles (1967), and the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile (1974–75). Among many distinctions garnered over the course of his career, Tarski was elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences, the British Academy and the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1958, received honorary degrees from the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile in 1975, from Marseilles' Paul Cézanne University in 1977 and from the University of Calgary, as well as the Berkeley Citation in 1981. Tarski presided over the Association for Symbolic Logic, 1944–46, and the International Union for the History and Philosophy of Science, 1956–57. He was also an honorary editor of Algebra Universalis.   == MathematicianEdit == Tarski's mathematical interests were exceptionally broad. His collected papers run to about 2,500 pages, most of them on mathematics, not logic. For a concise survey of Tarski's mathematical and logical accomplishments by his former student Solomon Feferman, see "Interludes I–VI" in Feferman and Feferman. Tarski's first paper, published when he was 19 years old, was on set theory, a subject to which he returned throughout his life. In 1924, he and Stefan Banach proved that, if one accepts the Axiom of Choice, a ball can be cut into a finite number of pieces, and then reassembled into a ball of larger size, or alternatively it can be reassembled into two balls whose sizes each equal that of the original one. This result is now called the Banach–Tarski paradox. In A decision method for elementary algebra and geometry, Tarski showed, by the method of quantifier elimination, that the first-order theory of the real numbers under addition and multiplication is decidable. (While this result appeared only in 1948, it dates back to 1930 and was mentioned in Tarski (1931).) This is a very curious result, because Alonzo Church proved in 1936 that Peano arithmetic (the theory of natural numbers) is not decidable. Peano arithmetic is also incomplete by Gödel's incompleteness theorem. In his 1953 Undecidable theories, Tarski et al. showed that many mathematical systems, including lattice theory, abstract projective geometry, and closure algebras, are all undecidable. The theory of Abelian groups is decidable, but that of non-Abelian groups is not. In the 1920s and 30s, Tarski often taught high school geometry. Using some ideas of Mario Pieri, in 1926 Tarski devised an original axiomatization for plane Euclidean geometry, one considerably more concise than Hilbert's. Tarski's axioms form a first-order theory devoid of set theory, whose individuals are points, and having only two primitive relations. In 1930, he proved this theory decidable because it can be mapped into another theory he had already proved decidable, namely his first-order theory of the real numbers. In 1929 he showed that much of Euclidean solid geometry could be recast as a first-order theory whose individuals are spheres (a primitive notion), a single primitive binary relation "is contained in", and two axioms that, among other things, imply that containment partially orders the spheres. Relaxing the requirement that all individuals be spheres yields a formalization of mereology far easier to exposit than Lesniewski's variant. Near the end of his life, Tarski wrote a very long letter, published as Tarski and Givant (1999), summarizing his work on geometry. Cardinal Algebras studied algebras whose models include the arithmetic of cardinal numbers. Ordinal Algebras sets out an algebra for the additive theory of order types. Cardinal, but not ordinal, addition commutes. In 1941, Tarski published an important paper on binary relations, which began the work on relation algebra and its metamathematics that occupied Tarski and his students for much of the balance of his life. While that exploration (and the closely related work of Roger Lyndon) uncovered some important limitations of relation algebra, Tarski also showed (Tarski and Givant 1987) that relation algebra can express most axiomatic set theory and Peano arithmetic. For an introduction to relation algebra, see Maddux (2006). In the late 1940s, Tarski and his students devised cylindric algebras, which are to first-order logic what the two-element Boolean algebra is to classical sentential logic. This work culminated in the two monographs by Tarski, Henkin, and Monk (1971, 1985).   == LogicianEdit == Tarski's student, Vaught, has ranked Tarski as one of the four greatest logicians of all time — along with Aristotle, Gottlob Frege, and Kurt Gödel. However, Tarski often expressed great admiration for Charles Sanders Peirce, particularly for his pioneering work in the logic of relations. Tarski produced axioms for logical consequence, and worked on deductive systems, the algebra of logic, and the theory of definability. His semantic methods, which culminated in the model theory he and a number of his Berkeley students developed in the 1950s and 60s, radically transformed Hilbert's proof-theoretic metamathematics.  In [Tarski's] view, metamathematics became similar to any mathematical discipline. Not only its concepts and results can be mathematized, but they actually can be integrated into mathematics. ... Tarski destroyed the borderline between metamathematics and mathematics. He objected to restricting the role of metamathematics to the foundations of mathematics.  Tarski's 1936 article "On the concept of logical consequence" argued that the conclusion of an argument will follow logically from its premises if and only if every model of the premises is a model of the conclusion. In 1937, he published a paper presenting clearly his views on the nature and purpose of the deductive method, and the role of logic in scientific studies. His high school and undergraduate teaching on logic and axiomatics culminated in a classic short text, published first in Polish, then in German translation, and finally in a 1941 English translation as Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of Deductive Sciences. Tarski's 1969 "Truth and proof" considered both Gödel's incompleteness theorems and Tarski's undefinability theorem, and mulled over their consequences for the axiomatic method in mathematics.   == Truth in formalized languagesEdit == In 1933, Tarski published a very long paper in Polish, titled "Pojęcie prawdy w językach nauk dedukcyjnych", setting out a mathematical definition of truth for formal languages. The 1935 German translation was titled "Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen", "The concept of truth in formalized languages", sometimes shortened to "Wahrheitsbegriff". An English translation appeared in the 1956 first edition of the volume Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. This collection of papers from 1923 to 1938 is an event in 20th-century analytic philosophy, a contribution to symbolic logic, semantics, and the philosophy of language. For a brief discussion of its content, see Convention T (and also T-schema). Some recent philosophical debate examines the extent to which Tarski's theory of truth for formalized languages can be seen as a correspondence theory of truth. The debate centers on how to read Tarski's condition of material adequacy for a truth definition. That condition requires that the truth theory have the following as theorems for all sentences p of the language for which truth is being defined: "p" is true if and only if p. (where p is the proposition expressed by "p") The debate amounts to whether to read sentences of this form, such as "Snow is white" is true if and only if snow is white as expressing merely a deflationary theory of truth or as embodying truth as a more substantial property (see Kirkham 1992). It is important to realize that Tarski's theory of truth is for formalized languages, so examples in natural language are not illustrations of the use of Tarski's theory of truth.   == Logical consequenceEdit == In 1936, Tarski published Polish and German versions of a lecture he had given the preceding year at the International Congress of Scientific Philosophy in Paris. A new English translation of this paper, Tarski (2002), highlights the many differences between the German and Polish versions of the paper, and corrects a number of mistranslations in Tarski (1983). This publication set out the modern model-theoretic definition of (semantic) logical consequence, or at least the basis for it. Whether Tarski's notion was entirely the modern one turns on whether he intended to admit models with varying domains (and in particular, models with domains of different cardinalities). This question is a matter of some debate in the current philosophical literature. John Etchemendy stimulated much of the recent discussion about Tarski's treatment of varying domains. Tarski ends by pointing out that his definition of logical consequence depends upon a division of terms into the logical and the extra-logical and he expresses some skepticism that any such objective division will be forthcoming. "What are Logical Notions?" can thus be viewed as continuing "On the Concept of Logical Consequence".   == What are logical notions?Edit == Another theory of Tarski's attracting attention in the recent philosophical literature is that outlined in his "What are Logical Notions?" (Tarski 1986). This is the published version of a talk that he gave originally in 1966 in London and later in 1973 in Buffalo; it was edited without his direct involvement by John Corcoran. It became the most cited paper in the journal History and Philosophy of Logic. In the talk, Tarski proposed a demarcation of the logical operations (which he calls "notions") from the non-logical. The suggested criteria were derived from the Erlangen programme of the German 19th century Mathematician, Felix Klein. Mautner, in 1946, and possibly an article by the Portuguese mathematician Sebastiao e Silva, anticipated Tarski in applying the Erlangen Program to logic. That program classified the various types of geometry (Euclidean geometry, affine geometry, topology, etc.) by the type of one-one transformation of space onto itself that left the objects of that geometrical theory invariant. (A one-to-one transformation is a functional map of the space onto itself so that every point of the space is associated with or mapped to one other point of the space. So, "rotate 30 degrees" and "magnify by a factor of 2" are intuitive descriptions of simple uniform one-one transformations.) Continuous transformations give rise to the objects of topology, similarity transformations to those of Euclidean geometry, and so on. As the range of permissible transformations becomes broader, the range of objects one is able to distinguish as preserved by the application of the transformations becomes narrower. Similarity transformations are fairly narrow (they preserve the relative distance between points) and thus allow us to distinguish relatively many things (e.g., equilateral triangles from non-equilateral triangles). Continuous transformations (which can intuitively be thought of as transformations which allow non-uniform stretching, compression, bending, and twisting, but no ripping or glueing) allow us to distinguish a polygon from an annulus (ring with a hole in the centre), but do not allow us to distinguish two polygons from each other. Tarski's proposal was to demarcate the logical notions by considering all possible one-to-one transformations (automorphisms) of a domain onto itself. By domain is meant the universe of discourse of a model for the semantic theory of a logic. If one identifies the truth value True with the domain set and the truth-value False with the empty set, then the following operations are counted as logical under the proposal: Truth-functions: All truth-functions are admitted by the proposal. This includes, but is not limited to, all n-ary truth-functions for finite n. (It also admits of truth-functions with any infinite number of places.) Individuals: No individuals, provided the domain has at least two members. Predicates: the one-place total and null predicates, the former having all members of the domain in its extension and the latter having no members of the domain in its extension two-place total and null predicates, the former having the set of all ordered pairs of domain members as its extension and the latter with the empty set as extension the two-place identity predicate, with the set of all order-pairs <a,a> in its extension, where a is a member of the domain the two-place diversity predicate, with the set of all order pairs <a,b> where a and b are distinct members of the domain n-ary predicates in general: all predicates definable from the identity predicate together with conjunction, disjunction and negation (up to any ordinality, finite or infinite)  Quantifiers: Tarski explicitly discusses only monadic quantifiers and points out that all such numerical quantifiers are admitted under his proposal. These include the standard universal and existential quantifiers as well as numerical quantifiers such as "Exactly four", "Finitely many", "Uncountably many", and "Between four and 9 million", for example. While Tarski does not enter into the issue, it is also clear that polyadic quantifiers are admitted under the proposal. These are quantifiers like, given two predicates Fx and Gy, "More(x, y)", which says "More things have F than have G." Set-Theoretic relations: Relations such as inclusion, intersection and union applied to subsets of the domain are logical in the present sense. Set membership: Tarski ended his lecture with a discussion of whether the set membership relation counted as logical in his sense. (Given the reduction of (most of) mathematics to set theory, this was, in effect, the question of whether most or all of mathematics is a part of logic.) He pointed out that set membership is logical if set theory is developed along the lines of type theory, but is extralogical if set theory is set out axiomatically, as in the canonical Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Logical notions of higher order: While Tarski confined his discussion to operations of first-order logic, there is nothing about his proposal that necessarily restricts it to first-order logic. (Tarski likely restricted his attention to first-order notions as the talk was given to a non-technical audience.) So, higher-order quantifiers and predicates are admitted as well. In some ways the present proposal is the obverse of that of Lindenbaum and Tarski (1936), who proved that all the logical operations of Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica are invariant under one-to-one transformations of the domain onto itself. The present proposal is also employed in Tarski and Givant (1987). Solomon Feferman and Vann McGee further discussed Tarski's proposal in work published after his death. Feferman (1999) raises problems for the proposal and suggests a cure: replacing Tarski's preservation by automorphisms with preservation by arbitrary homomorphisms. In essence, this suggestion circumvents the difficulty Tarski's proposal has in dealing with sameness of logical operation across distinct domains of a given cardinality and across domains of distinct cardinalities. Feferman's proposal results in a radical restriction of logical terms as compared to Tarski's original proposal. In particular, it ends up counting as logical only those operators of standard first-order logic without identity. McGee (1996) provides a precise account of what operations are logical in the sense of Tarski's proposal in terms of expressibility in a language that extends first-order logic by allowing arbitrarily long conjunctions and disjunctions, and quantification over arbitrarily many variables. "Arbitrarily" includes a countable infinity.   == WorksEdit == Anthologies and collections 1986. The Collected Papers of Alfred Tarski, 4 vols. Givant, S. R., and McKenzie, R. N., eds. Birkhäuser. Givant, Steven, 1986. "Bibliography of Alfred Tarski", Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 913-41. 1983 (1956). Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938 by Alfred Tarski, Corcoran, J., ed. Hackett. 1st edition edited and translated by J. H. Woodger, Oxford Uni. Press. This collection contains translations from Polish of some of Tarski's most important papers of his early career, including The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages and On the Concept of Logical Consequence discussed above. Original publications of Tarski 1930 Une contribution a la theorie de la mesure. Fund Math 15 (1930), 42-50. 1930. (with Jan Łukasiewicz). "Untersuchungen uber den Aussagenkalkul" ["Investigations into the Sentential Calculus"], Comptes Rendus des seances de la Societe des Sciences et des Lettres de Varsovie, Vol, 23 (1930) Cl. III, pp. 31–32 in Tarski (1983): 38-59. 1931. "Sur les ensembles définissables de nombres réels I", Fundamenta Mathematica 17: 210-239 in Tarski (1983): 110-142. 1936. "Grundlegung der wissenschaftlichen Semantik", Actes du Congrès international de philosophie scientifique, Sorbonne, Paris 1935, vol. III, Language et pseudo-problèmes, Paris, Hermann, 1936, pp. 1–8 in Tarski (1983): 401-408. 1936. "Über den Begriff der logischen Folgerung", Actes du Congrès international de philosophie scientifique, Sorbonne, Paris 1935, vol. VII, Logique, Paris: Hermann, pp. 1–11 in Tarski (1983): 409-420. 1936 (with Adolf Lindenbaum). "On the Limitations of Deductive Theories" in Tarski (1983): 384-92. 1994 (1941). Introduction to Logic and to the Methodology of Deductive Sciences. Dover. 1941. "On the calculus of relations", Journal of Symbolic Logic 6: 73-89. 1944. "The Semantical Concept of Truth and the Foundations of Semantics," Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 4: 341-75. 1948. A decision method for elementary algebra and geometry. Santa Monica CA: RAND Corp. 1949. Cardinal Algebras. Oxford Univ. Press. 1953 (with Mostowski and Raphael Robinson). Undecidable theories. North Holland. 1956. Ordinal algebras. North-Holland. 1965. "A simplified formalization of predicate logic with identity", Archiv für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 7: 61-79 1969. "Truth and Proof", Scientific American 220: 63-77. 1971 (with Leon Henkin and Donald Monk). Cylindric Algebras: Part I. North-Holland. 1985 (with Leon Henkin and Donald Monk). Cylindric Algebras: Part II. North-Holland. 1986. "What are Logical Notions?", Corcoran, J., ed., History and Philosophy of Logic 7: 143-54. 1987 (with Steven Givant). A Formalization of Set Theory Without Variables. Vol.41 of American Mathematical Society colloquium publications. Providence RI: American Mathematical Society. ISBN 978-0821810415. Review 1999 (with Steven Givant). "Tarski's system of geometry", Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5: 175-214. 2002. "On the Concept of Following Logically" (Magda Stroińska and David Hitchcock, trans.) History and Philosophy of Logic 23: 155-96.   == See alsoEdit ==  List of things named after Alfred Tarski   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Biographical references Feferman, Anita Burdman (1999). "Alfred Tarski". American National Biography 21. Oxford University Press. pp. 330–332. ISBN 978-0-19-512800-0.  Feferman, Anita Burdman; Feferman, Solomon (2004). Alfred Tarski: Life and Logic. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80240-6. OCLC 54691904.  Givant, Steven, 1991. "A portrait of Alfred Tarski", Mathematical Intelligencer 13: 16-32. Patterson, Douglas. Alfred Tarski: Philosophy of Language and Logic (Palgrave Macmillan; 2012) 262 pages; biography focused on his work from the late-1920s to the mid-1930s, with particular attention to influences from his teachers Stanislaw Lesniewski and Tadeusz Kotarbinski. Logic literature The December 1986 issue of the Journal of Symbolic Logic surveys Tarski's work on model theory (Robert Vaught), algebra (Jonsson), undecidable theories (McNulty), algebraic logic (Donald Monk), and geometry (Szczerba). The March 1988 issue of the same journal surveys his work on axiomatic set theory (Azriel Levy), real closed fields (Lou Van Den Dries), decidable theory (Doner and Wilfrid Hodges), metamathematics (Blok and Pigozzi), truth and logical consequence (John Etchemendy), and general philosophy (Patrick Suppes). Blok, W. J.; Pigozzi, Don, "Alfred Tarski's Work on General Metamathematics", The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 53, No. 1 (Mar., 1988), pp. 36–50  Chang, C.C., and Keisler, H.J., 1973. Model Theory. North-Holland, Amsterdam. American Elsevier, New York. Corcoran, John, and Sagüillo, José Miguel, 2011. "The Absence of Multiple Universes of Discourse in the 1936 Tarski Consequence-Definition Paper", History and Philosophy of Logic 32: 359–80. [1] Corcoran, John, and Weber, Leonardo, 2015. "Tarski’s convention T: condition beta", South American Journal of Logic. 1, 3–32. Etchemendy, John, 1999. The Concept of Logical Consequence. Stanford CA: CSLI Publications. ISBN 1-57586-194-1 Feferman, Solomon, 1999. "Logic, Logics, and Logicism," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 40: 31-54. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Uni. Press. Kirkham, Richard, 1992. Theories of Truth. MIT Press. Maddux, Roger D., 2006. Relation Algebras, vol. 150 in "Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics", Elsevier Science. Mautner, F. I., 1946. "An Extension of Klein's Erlanger Program: Logic as Invariant-Theory", American Journal of Mathematics 68: 345-84. McGee, Van, 1996. "Logical Operations", Journal of Philosophical Logic 25: 567-80. Popper, Karl R., 1972, Rev. Ed. 1979, "Philosophical Comments on Tarski's Theory of Truth", with Addendum, Objective Knowledge, Oxford: 319-340. Sinaceur, H., 2001. "Alfred Tarski: Semantic shift, heuristic shift in metamathematics", Synthese 126: 49-65. Smith, James T., 2010. "Definitions and Nondefinability in Geometry", American Mathematical Monthly 117:475–89. Wolenski, Jan, 1989. Logic and Philosophy in the Lvov–Warsaw School. Reidel/Kluwer.   == External linksEdit ==  Media related to Alfred Tarski at Wikimedia Commons Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Tarski's Truth Definitions by Wilfred Hodges. Alfred Tarski by Mario Gómez-Torrente. Propositional Consequence Relations and Algebraic Logic by Ramon Jansana. Includes a fairly detailed discussion of Tarski's work on these topics.  Tarski's Semantic Theory on the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Alonzo Church (June 14, 1903 – August 11, 1995) was an American mathematician and logician who made major contributions to mathematical logic and the foundations of theoretical computer science. He is best known for the lambda calculus, Church–Turing thesis, proving the undecidability of the Entscheidungsproblem, Frege–Church ontology, and the Church–Rosser theorem.   == LifeEdit == Alonzo Church was born on June 14, 1903, in Washington, D.C., where his father, Samuel Robbins Church, was the judge of the Municipal Court for the District of Columbia. The family later moved to Virginia after his father lost this position because of failing eyesight. With help from his uncle, also named Alonzo Church, he was able to attend the Ridgefield School for Boys in Ridgefield, Connecticut. After graduating from Ridgefield in 1920, Church attended Princeton University where he was an exceptional student, publishing his first paper, on Lorentz transformations, and graduating in 1924 with a degree in mathematics. He stayed at Princeton, earning a Ph.D. in mathematics in three years under Oswald Veblen. He married Mary Julia Kuczinski in 1925 and the couple had three children, Alonzo Church, Jr. (1929), Mary Ann (1933) and Mildred (1938). After receiving his Ph.D. he taught briefly as an instructor at the University of Chicago and then received a two-year National Research Fellowship. This allowed him to attend Harvard University in 1927–1928 and then both University of Göttingen and University of Amsterdam the following year. He taught philosophy and mathematics at Princeton, 1929–1967, and at the University of California, Los Angeles, 1967–1990. He received honorary Doctor of Science degrees from Case Western Reserve University in 1969, Princeton University in 1985, and the University at Buffalo, The State University of New York in 1990 in connection with an international symposium in his honor organized by John Corcoran. A deeply religious person, he was a lifelong member of the Presbyterian church. He died in 1995 and was buried in Princeton Cemetery.   == Mathematical workEdit == Church is known for the following accomplishments: His proof that the Entscheidungsproblem, which asks for a decision procedure to determine the truth of arbitrary propositions in a mathematical theory, is undecidable for the theory of Peano arithmetic. This is known as Church's theorem. His articulation of what has come to be known as the Church–Turing thesis. He was the founding editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic, editing its reviews section until 1979. His creation of the lambda calculus. The lambda calculus emerged in his 1936 paper showing the unsolvability of the Entscheidungsproblem. This result preceded Alan Turing's work on the halting problem, which also demonstrated the existence of a problem unsolvable by mechanical means. Church and Turing then showed that the lambda calculus and the Turing machine used in Turing's halting problem were equivalent in capabilities, and subsequently demonstrated a variety of alternative "mechanical processes for computation." This resulted in the Church–Turing thesis. The lambda calculus influenced the design of the LISP programming language and functional programming languages in general. The Church encoding is named in his honor.   == StudentsEdit == Many of Church's doctoral students have led distinguished careers, including C. Anthony Anderson, Peter B. Andrews, George A. Barnard, David Berlinski, William W. Boone, Martin Davis, Alfred L. Foster, Leon Henkin, John G. Kemeny, Stephen C. Kleene, Simon B. Kochen, Maurice L'Abbé, Isaac Malitz, Gary R. Mar, Michael O. Rabin, Nicholas Rescher, Hartley Rogers, Jr., J. Barkley Rosser, Dana Scott, Raymond Smullyan, and Alan Turing. A more complete list of Church's students is available via Mathematics Genealogy Project.   == BooksEdit == Alonzo Church, Introduction to Mathematical Logic (ISBN 978-0-691-02906-1) Alonzo Church, The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion (ISBN 978-0-691-08394-0) Alonzo Church, A Bibliography of Symbolic Logic, 1666–1935 (ISBN 978-0-8218-0084-3) C. Anthony Anderson and Michael Zelëny, editors, Logic, Meaning and Computation: Essays in Memory of Alonzo Church (ISBN 978-1-4020-0141-3)   == See alsoEdit ==  Church–Turing–Deutsch principle Higher-order logic Universal set   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Enderton, Herbert B., Alonzo Church: Life and Work. Introduction to the Collected Works of Alonzo Church, MIT Press, not yet published. Enderton, Herbert B., In memoriam: Alonzo Church, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 1, no. 4 (Dec. 1995), pp. 486–488. Wade, Nicholas, Alonzo Church, 92, Theorist of the Limits of Mathematics (obituary), The New York Times, September 5, 1995, p. B6. Hodges, Wilfred, Obituary: Alonzo Church, The Independent (London), September 14, 1995. Alonzo Church interviewed by William Aspray on 17 May 1984. The Princeton Mathematics Community in the 1930s: An Oral-History Project, transcript number 5. Rota, Gian-Carlo, Fine Hall in its golden age: Remembrances of Princeton in the early fifties. In A Century of Mathematics in America, Part II, edited by Peter Duren, AMS History of Mathematics, vol 2, American Mathematical Society, 1989, pp. 223–226. Also available here.   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Alonzo Church", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Alonzo Church at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Princeton University Library, Manuscripts Division, The Alonzo Church Papers, 1924–1995: finding aid. A bibliography of Church's reviews for The Journal of Symbolic Logic, with a link to each

'Andrea Bonomi (Rome, 1940-) is an Italian philosopher and logician. Born in Rome in 1940, he studied with Enzo Paci. After an initial interest in phenomenology (Existence and structure: Essay on Merleau-Ponty, 1967), he decided to dedicate himself wholeheartedly to the study of analytic philosophy, particularly the philosophy of language. He was probably among the first, groundbreaking Italian philosophers to make serious contributions to this field. His major contributions have been concentrated in the area of formal semantics, especially in the field of the logic of epistemic, modal and temporal sentences. In particular, in Mental Events (1983), he proposed an original solution to the problem of the intentionality of propositional attitude attributions, based on the idea of perspectivity: the systematic ambiguity of interpretation which characterizes propositional attitude sentences is explained by way of the contrast between the point of view of the attributor and the point of view of the person who entertains the attitude attributed. Also of notable importance is his semantic analysis of fictitious contexts of language use (Universes of Discourse, 1979; The spirit of narration, 1994). The figure of Bonomi has had a decisive role in the development of analytic philosophy in Italy, both through his popular introductions and editions of the works of the classics in that tradition (The Logical Structure of Language, 1973) as well as through his teaching: many Italian philosophers of language went through their period of formation at his school.   == Selected bibliography ==   === Books === Sintassi e Semantica nella Grammatica Trasformazionale (with G. Usberti), Il Saggiatore, Milano. 1971. La Struttura Logica Del Linguaggio, Bompiani, Milano. 1973. Le Vie Del Riferimento, Bompiani, Milano. 1975 Universi Di Discorso, Feltrinelli, Milano. 1979 Eventi Mentali, Il Saggiatore, Milano. 1983. Le Immagini Dei Nomi, Garzanti, Milano. 1987. Lo Spirito Della Narrazione, Bompiani, Milano 1994 Tempo e Linguaggio. Introduzione Alla Semantica Del Tempo e Dell'Aspetto Verbale(with A. Zucchi), Bruno Mondadori, Milano 2001   === Articles === Articles in Italian: "Linguistica e Logica", in Intorno alla linguistica, a cura di C. Segre, Feltrinelli, Milano 1983 "Determinismo e Semantiche per le Logiche Temporali", in Atti del Convegno Nazionale di Logica, 1-5 ottobre 1979", Bibliopolis, Napoli. 1980 "Sul Cogito Cartesiano: Natura Inferenziale e Criteri di Giustificabilità", in Problemi fondazionali nella teoria del significato, a cura di G. Usberti, Olschki Editore, Firenze 1991 Articles in English: “The Problem of Language in Husserl”. TELOS 06 (Fall 1970). New York: Telos Press "On the Concept of Logical Form in Fregre, in H. Parret (ed.), History of Linguistic Thought and Contemporary Linguistics W. de Gruyter, Berlin-NewYork 1976 (pp.719–732) "Existence, Presupposition and Anaphoric Space,in Journal of Philosophical Logic, 6, 1977 (pp. 239–267) "A Problem About Intentionality", Topoi, 5, 1986 (pp. 91–100) "Relevant Situations", Synthese, 73, 1987 (pp. 623–636) "Persistent Truths", Intellectica, 1/2, 1992, (pp. 79–103) "Only:Association With Focus in Event Semantics" (with P. Casalegno), Natural Language Semantics 2, 1993 (pp. 1–45) "Tense, Reference and Temporal Anaphora", in Lingua e Stile, 30, 3, 1995 (pp. 483–500) "Transparency and Specificity in Intentional Contexts", in P. Leonardi and M. Santambrogio (eds.), On Quine, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995 (pp. 164–185) "Aspect and Quantification", in P. M. Bertinetto, V. Bianchi, H. Higginbotham, M. Squartini (eds), Temporal Reference, Aspect and Actionality, vol. I, Rosenberg & Sellier, Torino 1995 (pp. 93–110) "Aspect, Quantification and When-Clauses in Italian", Linguistics and Philosophy, 20, 1997 (pp. 469–514) "The Progressive and the Structure of Events", in Journal of Semantics, 14, 1997 (pp. 173–205) "Indices and Contexts of Discourse, in Lingua e Stile, 33.3, 1998 (pp. 471–485) "Book Review: P. Ludlow, Semantic, Tense and Time, Linguistics and Philosophy, 25, 2002, (pp. 81–95) "A Pragmatic Framework for Truth in Fiction (with S. Zucchi), Dialectica, 57, 2003, (pp. 103–120)   == External links == Collection of on-line texts by Andrea Bonomì

Andrzej Mostowski (1 November 1913 – 22 August 1975) was a Polish mathematician. He is perhaps best remembered for the Mostowski collapse lemma. Born in Lemberg, Austria-Hungary, Mostowski entered University of Warsaw in 1931. He was influenced by Kuratowski, Lindenbaum and Tarski. His Ph.D. came in 1939, officially directed by Kuratowski but in practice directed by Tarski who was a young lecturer at that time. He became an accountant after the German invasion of Poland but continued working in the Underground Warsaw University. After the Warsaw uprising of 1944 the Nazis tried to put him in a concentration camp. With the help of some Polish nurses he escaped to a hospital, choosing to take bread with him rather than his notebook containing his research. Some of this research he reconstructed after the War, however much of it remained lost. This work was largely on recursion theory and undecidability. From 1946 until his death in Vancouver, Canada, he worked at the University of Warsaw. Much of work during that time was on first order logic and model theory. His son Tadeusz is also a mathematician working on differential geometry. With Krzysztof Kurdyka and Adam Parusinski, Tadeusz Mostowski solved René Thom's gradient conjecture in 2000.   == See also == List of Polish People Mostowski model   == References ==   == Bibliography ==   === Books by Mostowski === Andrzej Mostowski, Sentences Undecidable in Formalized Arithmetic: An Exposition of the Theory of Kurt Godel, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1952, ISBN 978-0313231513 Andrezj Mostowski, Constructible Sets with Applications, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969.   === Papers by Mostowski === Andrzej Mostowski, "Über die Unabhängigkeit des Wohlordnungssatzes von Ordnungsprinzip." Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 32, No.1, ss. 201-252, (1939). Andrzej Mostowski, "On definable sets of positive integers", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 34, No. 1, ss. 81-112, (1947). Andrzej Mostowski, "Un théorème sur les nombres cos 2πk/n", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 1, No. 3, ss. 195-196, (1948). Casimir Kuratowski, Andrzej Mostowski, "Sur un problème de la théorie des groupes et son rapport à la topologie", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 2, No. 3-4, ss. 212-215, (1951). Andrzej Mostowski, "Groups connected with Boolean algebras. (Partial solution of the problem P92)", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 2, No. 3-4, ss. 216-219, (1951). Andrzej Mostowski, "On direct products of theories", Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 17, No. 1, ss. 1-31, (1952). Andrzej Mostowski, "Models of axiomatic systems", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 39, No. 1, ss. 133-158, (1952). Andrzej Mostowski, "On a system of axioms which has no recursively enumerable arithmetic model", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 40, No. 1, ss. 56-61, (1953). Andrzej Mostowski, "A formula with no recursively enumerable model", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 42, No. 1, ss. 125-140, (1955). Andrzej Mostowski, "Examples of sets definable by means of two and three quantifiers", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 42, No. 2, ss. 259-270, (1955). Andrzej Mostowski, "Contributions to the theory of definable sets and functions", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 42, No. 2, ss. 271-275, (1955). Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, Andrzej Mostowski, "Models of Axiomatic Theories Admitting Automorphisms", Fundamenta Mathematicae, Vol. 43, No. 1, ss. 50-68 (1956). Andrzej Mostowski, "L'oeuvre scientifique de Jan Łukasiewicz dans le domaine de la logique mathématique", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 44, No. 1, ss. 1-11, (1957). Andrzej Mostowski, "On a generalization of quantifiers", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 44, No. 1, ss. 12-36, (1957). Andrzej Mostowski, "On computable sequences", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 44, No. 1, ss. 37-51, (1957). Andrzej Grzegorczyk, Andrzej Mostowski and Czesław Ryll-Nardzewski, "The classical and ω-complete arithmetic", Journal of Symbolic Logic Vol. 23, No. 2, ss. 188-206, (1958). Andrzej Mostowski, "On a problem of W. Kinna and K. Wagner", Colloquium Mathematicae Vol. 6, No. 1, ss. 207-208, (1958). Andrzej Mostowski, "A generalization of the incompleteness theorem", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 49, No. 2, ss. 205-232, (1961). Andrzej Mostowski, "Axiomatizability of some many valued predicate calculi", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 50, No. 2, ss. 165-190, (1961). Yoshindo Suzuki, Andrzej Mostowski, "On ω-models which are not β-models", Fundamenta Mathematicae Vol. 65, No. 1, ss. 83-93, (1969).   == References ==   == External links == Andrzej Mostowski at the Mathematics Genealogy Project O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Andrzej Mostowski", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Anne Sjerp Troelstra (born 10 August 1939) is Emeritus professor of pure mathematics and foundations of mathematics at the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC) of the University of Amsterdam. He is a constructivist logician, who has been influential in the development of intuitionistic logic. With Georg Kreisel, he was a developer of the theory of choice sequences. He also wrote one of the first texts on linear logic, and with H. Schwichtenberg he co-wrote an important book on proof theory.   == Notes == ^ Daimiposten – Oktober 2001 ^ MARTIN LÖB (1921–2006) ^ Marion, Mathieu (1998), Wittgenstein, Finitism, and the Foundations of Mathematics, New York: Oxford University Press, p. 205, ISBN 0-19-823516-X . ^ Jervell, Herman Ruge (1996), "Review: Lectures on Linear Logic by A. S. Troelstra", Journal of Symbolic Logic 61 (1): 336–338, doi:10.2307/2275616 . ^ Dyckhoff, Roy (1998), "Review: Basic Proof Theory by A. S. Troelstra; H. Schwichtenberg", Journal of Symbolic Logic 63 (4): 1605–1606, doi:10.2307/2586674 .   == External links == Homepage of A. S. Troelstra Anne Sjerp Troelstra at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Arend Heyting (Dutch: [ˈɦɛi̯tɪŋ]; 9 May 1898 – 9 July 1980) was a Dutch mathematician and logician. He was a student of Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer at the University of Amsterdam, and did much to put intuitionistic logic on a footing where it could become part of mathematical logic. Heyting gave the first formal development of intuitionistic logic in order to codify Brouwer's way of doing mathematics. The inclusion of Brouwer's name in the Brouwer–Heyting–Kolmogorov interpretation is largely honorific, as Brouwer was opposed in principle to the formalisation of certain intuitionistic principles (and went as far as calling Heyting's work a "sterile exercise"). In 1942 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Heyting was born in Amsterdam, Netherlands, and died in Lugano, Switzerland.   == Selected publications == Heyting, A. (1930) Die formalen Regeln der intuitionistischen Logik. (German) 3 parts, In: Sitzungsberichte der preußischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. phys.-math. Klasse, 1930, 42–65, 57-71, 158-169. Heyting, A. (1941) Untersuchungen der intuitionistische Algebra. (German) Verh. Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Afd. Natuurk. Sect. 1. 18. no. 2, 36 pp. Heyting, A. (1956) Intuitionism. An introduction. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1959) Axioms for intuitionistic plane affine geometry. The axiomatic method. With special reference to geometry and physics. Proceedings of an International Symposium held at the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley, Dec. 26, 1957–Jan 4, 1958 (edited by L. Henkin, P. Suppes and A. Tarski) pp. 160–173 Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1962) After thirty years. 1962 Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Proc. 1960 Internat. Congr.) pp. 194–197 Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif. Heyting, A. (1963) Axiomatic projective geometry. Bibliotheca Mathematica, Vol. V. Interscience Publishers John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; P. Noordhoff N.V., Groningen; North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1966) Intuitionism: An introduction. Second revised edition North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam. Heyting, A. (1973) Address to Professor A. Robinson. At the occasion of the Brouwer memorial lecture given by Prof. A.Robinson on the 26th April 1973. Nieuw Arch. Wisk. (3) 21, pp. 134–137. Heyting, A. (1974) Mathematische Grundlagenforschung, Intuitionismus, Beweistheorie. (German) Reprint. Springer-Verlag, Berlin–New York. Heyting, A. (1980) Axiomatic projective geometry. Second edition. Bibliotheca Mathematica [Mathematics Library], V. Wolters-Noordhoff Scientific Publications, Ltd., Groningen; North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam–New York.   == See also == Heyting algebra Heyting arithmetic   == References == ^ Walter P. van Stigt (1990). Brouwer's Intuitionism. Amsterdam: North Holland. ^ "Arend Heyting (1898 - 1980)". Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved 28 July 2015.    == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Arend Heyting", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Arend Heyting at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Aristotle (/ˈærɪˌstɒtəl/; Greek: Ἀριστοτέλης [aristotélɛːs], Aristotélēs; 384 – 322 BC) was a Greek philosopher and scientist born in the Macedonian city of Stagira, Chalkidice, on the northern periphery of Classical Greece. His father, Nicomachus, died when Aristotle was a child, whereafter Proxenus of Atarneus became his guardian. At eighteen, he joined Plato's Academy in Athens and remained there until the age of thirty-seven (c. 347 BC). His writings cover many subjects – including physics, biology, zoology, metaphysics, logic, ethics, aesthetics, poetry, theater, music, rhetoric, linguistics, politics and government – and constitute the first comprehensive system of Western philosophy. Shortly after Plato died, Aristotle left Athens and, at the request of Philip of Macedon, tutored Alexander the Great starting from 343 BC. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, "Aristotle was the first genuine scientist in history ... [and] every scientist is in his debt." Teaching Alexander the Great gave Aristotle many opportunities and an abundance of supplies. He established a library in the Lyceum which aided in the production of many of his hundreds of books. The fact that Aristotle was a pupil of Plato contributed to his former views of Platonism, but, following Plato's death, Aristotle immersed himself in empirical studies and shifted from Platonism to empiricism. He believed all peoples' concepts and all of their knowledge was ultimately based on perception. Aristotle's views on natural sciences represent the groundwork underlying many of his works. Aristotle's views on physical science profoundly shaped medieval scholarship. Their influence extended into the Renaissance and were not replaced systematically until the Enlightenment and theories such as classical mechanics. Some of Aristotle's zoological observations, such as on the hectocotyl (reproductive) arm of the octopus, were not confirmed or refuted until the 19th century. His works contain the earliest known formal study of logic, which was incorporated in the late 19th century into modern formal logic. In metaphysics, Aristotelianism profoundly influenced Judeo-Islamic philosophical and theological thought during the Middle Ages and continues to influence Christian theology, especially the scholastic tradition of the Catholic Church. Aristotle was well known among medieval Muslim intellectuals and revered as "The First Teacher" (Arabic: المعلم الأول‎). His ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with the modern advent of virtue ethics. All aspects of Aristotle's philosophy continue to be the object of active academic study today. Though Aristotle wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues – Cicero described his literary style as "a river of gold" – it is thought that only around a third of his original output has survived.   == LifeEdit ==  Aristotle, whose name means "the best purpose", was born in 384 BC in Stagira, Chalcidice, about 55 km (34 miles) east of modern-day Thessaloniki. His father Nicomachus was the personal physician to King Amyntas of Macedon. Although there is little information on Aristotle's childhood, he probably spent some time within the Macedonian palace, making his first connections with the Macedonian monarchy. At about the age of eighteen, Aristotle moved to Athens to continue his education at Plato's Academy. He remained there for nearly twenty years before leaving Athens in 348/47 BC. The traditional story about his departure records that he was disappointed with the Academy's direction after control passed to Plato's nephew Speusippus, although it is possible that he feared anti-Macedonian sentiments and left before Plato died.  Aristotle then accompanied Xenocrates to the court of his friend Hermias of Atarneus in Asia Minor. There, he traveled with Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos, where together they researched the botany and zoology of the island. Aristotle married Pythias, either Hermias's adoptive daughter or niece. She bore him a daughter, whom they also named Pythias. Soon after Hermias' death, Aristotle was invited by Philip II of Macedon to become the tutor to his son Alexander in 343 BC. Aristotle was appointed as the head of the royal academy of Macedon. During that time he gave lessons not only to Alexander, but also to two other future kings: Ptolemy and Cassander. Aristotle encouraged Alexander toward eastern conquest and his attitude towards Persia was unabashedly ethnocentric. In one famous example, he counsels Alexander to be "a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants". By 335 BC, Artistotle had returned to Athens, establishing his own school there known as the Lyceum. Aristotle conducted courses at the school for the next twelve years. While in Athens, his wife Pythias died and Aristotle became involved with Herpyllis of Stagira, who bore him a son whom he named after his father, Nicomachus. According to the Suda, he also had an eromenos, Palaephatus of Abydus. This period in Athens, between 335 and 323 BC, is when Aristotle is believed to have composed many of his works. He wrote many dialogues of which only fragments have survived. Those works that have survived are in treatise form and were not, for the most part, intended for widespread publication; they are generally thought to be lecture aids for his students. His most important treatises include Physics, Metaphysics, Nicomachean Ethics, Politics, De Anima (On the Soul) and Poetics. Aristotle not only studied almost every subject possible at the time, but made significant contributions to most of them. In physical science, Aristotle studied anatomy, astronomy, embryology, geography, geology, meteorology, physics and zoology. In philosophy, he wrote on aesthetics, ethics, government, metaphysics, politics, economics, psychology, rhetoric and theology. He also studied education, foreign customs, literature and poetry. His combined works constitute a virtual encyclopedia of Greek knowledge. Near the end of his life, Alexander and Aristotle became estranged over Alexander's relationship with Persia and Persians. A widespread tradition in antiquity suspected Aristotle of playing a role in Alexander's death, but there is little evidence. Following Alexander's death, anti-Macedonian sentiment in Athens was rekindled. In 322 BC, Eurymedon the Hierophant denounced Aristotle for not holding the gods in honor, prompting him to flee to his mother's family estate in Chalcis, explaining: "I will not allow the Athenians to sin twice against philosophy" – a reference to Athens's prior trial and execution of Socrates. He died in Euboea of natural causes later that same year, having named his student Antipater as his chief executor and leaving a will in which he asked to be buried next to his wife. Charles Walston argues that the tomb of Aristotle is located on the sacred way between Chalcis and Eretria and to have contained two styluses, a pen, a signet-ring and some terra-cottas as well as what is supposed to be the earthly remains of Aristotle in the form of some skull fragments. In general, the details of the life of Aristotle are not well-established. The biographies of Aristotle written in ancient times are often speculative and historians only agree on a few salient points.   == ThoughtEdit ==   === LogicEdit ===  With the Prior Analytics, Aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic, and his conception of it was the dominant form of Western logic until 19th century advances in mathematical logic. Kant stated in the Critique of Pure Reason that Aristotle's theory of logic completely accounted for the core of deductive inference.   ==== HistoryEdit ==== Aristotle "says that 'on the subject of reasoning' he 'had nothing else on an earlier date to speak of'". However, Plato reports that syntax was devised before him, by Prodicus of Ceos, who was concerned by the correct use of words. Logic seems to have emerged from dialectics; the earlier philosophers made frequent use of concepts like reductio ad absurdum in their discussions, but never truly understood the logical implications. Even Plato had difficulties with logic; although he had a reasonable conception of a deductive system, he could never actually construct one, thus he relied instead on his dialectic. Plato believed that deduction would simply follow from premises, hence he focused on maintaining solid premises so that the conclusion would logically follow. Consequently, Plato realized that a method for obtaining conclusions would be most beneficial. He never succeeded in devising such a method, but his best attempt was published in his book Sophist, where he introduced his division method.   ==== Analytics and the OrganonEdit ====  What we today call Aristotelian logic, Aristotle himself would have labeled "analytics". The term "logic" he reserved to mean dialectics. Most of Aristotle's work is probably not in its original form, because it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers. The logical works of Aristotle were compiled into six books in about the early 1st century CE: Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics On Sophistical Refutations The order of the books (or the teachings from which they are composed) is not certain, but this list was derived from analysis of Aristotle's writings. It goes from the basics, the analysis of simple terms in the Categories, the analysis of propositions and their elementary relations in On Interpretation, to the study of more complex forms, namely, syllogisms (in the Analytics) and dialectics (in the Topics and Sophistical Refutations). The first three treatises form the core of the logical theory stricto sensu: the grammar of the language of logic and the correct rules of reasoning. There is one volume of Aristotle's concerning logic not found in the Organon, namely the fourth book of Metaphysics.   === Aristotle's epistemologyEdit ===  Like his teacher Plato, Aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal. Aristotle's ontology, however, finds the universal in particular things, which he calls the essence of things, while in Plato's ontology, the universal exists apart from particular things, and is related to them as their prototype or exemplar. For Aristotle, therefore, epistemology is based on the study of particular phenomena and rises to the knowledge of essences, while for Plato epistemology begins with knowledge of universal Forms (or ideas) and descends to knowledge of particular imitations of these. For Aristotle, "form" still refers to the unconditional basis of phenomena but is "instantiated" in a particular substance (see Universals and particulars, below). In a certain sense, Aristotle's method is both inductive and deductive, while Plato's is essentially deductive from a priori principles. In Aristotle's terminology, "natural philosophy" is a branch of philosophy examining the phenomena of the natural world, and includes fields that would be regarded today as physics, biology and other natural sciences. In modern times, the scope of philosophy has become limited to more generic or abstract inquiries, such as ethics and metaphysics, in which logic plays a major role. Today's philosophy tends to exclude empirical study of the natural world by means of the scientific method. In contrast, Aristotle's philosophical endeavors encompassed virtually all facets of intellectual inquiry. In the larger sense of the word, Aristotle makes philosophy coextensive with reasoning, which he also would describe as "science". Note, however, that his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that covered by the term "scientific method". For Aristotle, "all science (dianoia) is either practical, poetical or theoretical" (Metaphysics 1025b25). By practical science, he means ethics and politics; by poetical science, he means the study of poetry and the other fine arts; by theoretical science, he means physics, mathematics and metaphysics. If logic (or "analytics") is regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy, the divisions of Aristotelian philosophy would consist of: (1) Logic; (2) Theoretical Philosophy, including Metaphysics, Physics and Mathematics; (3) Practical Philosophy and (4) Poetical Philosophy. In the period between his two stays in Athens, between his times at the Academy and the Lyceum, Aristotle conducted most of the scientific thinking and research for which he is renowned today. In fact, most of Aristotle's life was devoted to the study of the objects of natural science. Aristotle's metaphysics contains observations on the nature of numbers but he made no original contributions to mathematics. He did, however, perform original research in the natural sciences, e.g., botany, zoology, physics, astronomy, chemistry, meteorology, and several other sciences. Aristotle's writings on science are largely qualitative, as opposed to quantitative. Beginning in the 16th century, scientists began applying mathematics to the physical sciences, and Aristotle's work in this area was deemed hopelessly inadequate. His failings were largely due to the absence of concepts like mass, velocity, force and temperature. He had a conception of speed and temperature, but no quantitative understanding of them, which was partly due to the absence of basic experimental devices, like clocks and thermometers. His writings provide an account of many scientific observations, a mixture of precocious accuracy and curious errors. For example, in his History of Animals he claimed that human males have more teeth than females. In a similar vein, John Philoponus, and later Galileo, showed by simple experiments that Aristotle's theory that a heavier object falls faster than a lighter object is incorrect. On the other hand, Aristotle refuted Democritus's claim that the Milky Way was made up of "those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun's rays," pointing out (correctly, even if such reasoning was bound to be dismissed for a long time) that, given "current astronomical demonstrations" that "the size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars from the earth many times greater than that of the sun, then ... the sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them." In places, Aristotle goes too far in deriving 'laws of the universe' from simple observation and over-stretched reason. Today's scientific method assumes that such thinking without sufficient facts is ineffective, and that discerning the validity of one's hypothesis requires far more rigorous experimentation than that which Aristotle used to support his laws. Aristotle also had some scientific blind spots. He posited a geocentric cosmology that we may discern in selections of the Metaphysics, which was widely accepted up until the 16th century. From the 3rd century to the 16th century, the dominant view held that the Earth was the rotational center of the universe. Because he was perhaps the philosopher most respected by European thinkers during and after the Renaissance, these thinkers often took Aristotle's erroneous positions as given, which held back science in this epoch. However, Aristotle's scientific shortcomings should not mislead one into forgetting his great advances in the many scientific fields. For instance, he founded logic as a formal science and created foundations to biology that were not superseded for two millennia. Moreover, he introduced the fundamental notion that nature is composed of things that change and that studying such changes can provide useful knowledge of underlying constants.   === GeologyEdit === As quoted from Charles Lyell's Principles of Geology:  He [Aristotle] refers to many examples of changes now constantly going on, and insists emphatically on the great results which they must produce in the lapse of ages. He instances particular cases of lakes that had dried up, and deserts that had at length become watered by rivers and fertilized. He points to the growth of the Nilotic delta since the time of Homer, to the shallowing of the Palus Maeotis within sixty years from his own time ... He alludes ... to the upheaving of one of the Eolian islands, previous to a volcanic eruption. The changes of the earth, he says, are so slow in comparison to the duration of our lives, that they are overlooked; and the migrations of people after great catastrophes, and their removal to other regions, cause the event to be forgotten. He says [12th chapter of his Meteorics] 'the distribution of land and sea in particular regions does not endure throughout all time, but it becomes sea in those parts where it was land, and again it becomes land where it was sea, and there is reason for thinking that these changes take place according to a certain system, and within a certain period.' The concluding observation is as follows: 'As time never fails, and the universe is eternal, neither the Tanais, nor the Nile, can have flowed for ever. The places where they rise were once dry, and there is a limit to their operations, but there is none to time. So also of all other rivers; they spring up and they perish; and the sea also continually deserts some lands and invades others The same tracts, therefore, of the earth are not some always sea, and others always continents, but every thing changes in the course of time.'   === PhysicsEdit ===   ==== Five elementsEdit ====  Aristotle proposed a fifth element, aether, in addition to the four proposed earlier by Empedocles. Earth, which is cold and dry; this corresponds to the modern idea of a solid. Water, which is cold and wet; this corresponds to the modern idea of a liquid. Air, which is hot and wet; this corresponds to the modern idea of a gas. Fire, which is hot and dry; this corresponds to the modern ideas of plasma and heat. Aether, which is the divine substance that makes up the heavenly spheres and heavenly bodies (stars and planets). Each of the four earthly elements has its natural place. All that is earthly tends toward the center of the universe, i.e., the center of the Earth. Water tends toward a sphere surrounding the center. Air tends toward a sphere surrounding the water sphere. Fire tends toward the lunar sphere (in which the Moon orbits). When elements are moved out of their natural place, they naturally move back towards it. This is "natural motion"—motion requiring no extrinsic cause. So, for example, in water, earthy bodies sink while air bubbles rise up; in air, rain falls and flame rises. Outside all the other spheres, the heavenly, fifth element, manifested in the stars and planets, moves in the perfection of circles.   ==== MotionEdit ====  Aristotle defined motion as the actuality of a potentiality as such. Aquinas suggested that the passage be understood literally; that motion can indeed be understood as the active fulfillment of a potential, as a transition toward a potentially possible state. Because actuality and potentiality are normally opposites in Aristotle, other commentators either suggest that the wording which has come down to us is erroneous, or that the addition of the "as such" to the definition is critical to understanding it.   ==== Causality, the four causesEdit ====  Aristotle suggested that the reason for anything coming about can be attributed to four different types of simultaneously active causal factors: Material cause describes the material out of which something is composed. Thus the material cause of a table is wood, and the material cause of a car is rubber and steel. It is not about action. It does not mean one domino knocks over another domino. The formal cause is its form, i.e., the arrangement of that matter. It tells us what a thing is, that any thing is determined by the definition, form, pattern, essence, whole, synthesis or archetype. It embraces the account of causes in terms of fundamental principles or general laws, as the whole (i.e., macrostructure) is the cause of its parts, a relationship known as the whole-part causation. Plainly put, the formal cause is the idea existing in the first place as exemplar in the mind of the sculptor, and in the second place as intrinsic, determining cause, embodied in the matter. Formal cause could only refer to the essential quality of causation. A simple example of the formal cause is the mental image or idea that allows an artist, architect, or engineer to create his drawings. The efficient cause is "the primary source", or that from which the change under consideration proceeds. It identifies 'what makes of what is made and what causes change of what is changed' and so suggests all sorts of agents, nonliving or living, acting as the sources of change or movement or rest. Representing the current understanding of causality as the relation of cause and effect, this covers the modern definitions of "cause" as either the agent or agency or particular events or states of affairs. So, take the two dominoes, this time of equal weighting, the first is knocked over causing the second also to fall over. The final cause is its purpose, or that for the sake of which a thing exists or is done, including both purposeful and instrumental actions and activities. The final cause or teleos is the purpose or function that something is supposed to serve. This covers modern ideas of motivating causes, such as volition, need, desire, ethics, or spiritual beliefs. Additionally, things can be causes of one another, causing each other reciprocally, as hard work causes fitness and vice versa, although not in the same way or function, the one is as the beginning of change, the other as the goal. (Thus Aristotle first suggested a reciprocal or circular causality as a relation of mutual dependence or influence of cause upon effect). Moreover, Aristotle indicated that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects; its presence and absence may result in different outcomes. Simply it is the goal or purpose that brings about an event. Our two dominoes require someone or something to intentionally knock over the first domino, because it cannot fall of its own accord. Aristotle marked two modes of causation: proper (prior) causation and accidental (chance) causation. All causes, proper and incidental, can be spoken as potential or as actual, particular or generic. The same language refers to the effects of causes, so that generic effects assigned to generic causes, particular effects to particular causes, operating causes to actual effects. Essentially, causality does not suggest a temporal relation between the cause and the effect.   ==== OpticsEdit ==== Aristotle held more accurate theories on some optical concepts than other philosophers of his day. The second oldest written evidence of a camera obscura (after Mozi c. 400 BC) can be found in Aristotle's documentation of such a device in 350 BC in Problemata. Aristotle's apparatus contained a dark chamber that had a single small hole, or aperture, to allow for sunlight to enter. Aristotle used the device to make observations of the sun and noted that no matter what shape the hole was, the sun would still be correctly displayed as a round object. In modern cameras, this is analogous to the diaphragm. Aristotle also made the observation that when the distance between the aperture and the surface with the image increased, the image was magnified.   ==== Chance and spontaneityEdit ==== According to Aristotle, spontaneity and chance are causes of some things, distinguishable from other types of cause. Chance as an incidental cause lies in the realm of accidental things. It is "from what is spontaneous" (but note that what is spontaneous does not come from chance). For a better understanding of Aristotle's conception of "chance" it might be better to think of "coincidence": Something takes place by chance if a person sets out with the intent of having one thing take place, but with the result of another thing (not intended) taking place. For example: A person seeks donations. That person may find another person willing to donate a substantial sum. However, if the person seeking the donations met the person donating, not for the purpose of collecting donations, but for some other purpose, Aristotle would call the collecting of the donation by that particular donator a result of chance. It must be unusual that something happens by chance. In other words, if something happens all or most of the time, we cannot say that it is by chance. There is also more specific kind of chance, which Aristotle names "luck", that can only apply to human beings, because it is in the sphere of moral actions. According to Aristotle, luck must involve choice (and thus deliberation), and only humans are capable of deliberation and choice. "What is not capable of action cannot do anything by chance".   === MetaphysicsEdit ===  Aristotle defines metaphysics as "the knowledge of immaterial being," or of "being in the highest degree of abstraction." He refers to metaphysics as "first philosophy", as well as "the theologic science."   ==== Substance, potentiality and actualityEdit ====  Aristotle examines the concepts of substance and essence (ousia) in his Metaphysics (Book VII), and he concludes that a particular substance is a combination of both matter and form. In book VIII, he distinguishes the matter of the substance as the substratum, or the stuff of which it is composed. For example, the matter of a house is the bricks, stones, timbers etc., or whatever constitutes the potential house, while the form of the substance is the actual house, namely 'covering for bodies and chattels' or any other differentia (see also predicables) that let us define something as a house. The formula that gives the components is the account of the matter, and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form. With regard to the change (kinesis) and its causes now, as he defines in his Physics and On Generation and Corruption 319b–320a, he distinguishes the coming to be from: growth and diminution, which is change in quantity; locomotion, which is change in space; and alteration, which is change in quality. The coming to be is a change where nothing persists of which the resultant is a property. In that particular change he introduces the concept of potentiality (dynamis) and actuality (entelecheia) in association with the matter and the form. Referring to potentiality, this is what a thing is capable of doing, or being acted upon, if the conditions are right and it is not prevented by something else. For example, the seed of a plant in the soil is potentially (dynamei) plant, and if is not prevented by something, it will become a plant. Potentially beings can either 'act' (poiein) or 'be acted upon' (paschein), which can be either innate or learned. For example, the eyes possess the potentiality of sight (innate – being acted upon), while the capability of playing the flute can be possessed by learning (exercise – acting). Actuality is the fulfillment of the end of the potentiality. Because the end (telos) is the principle of every change, and for the sake of the end exists potentiality, therefore actuality is the end. Referring then to our previous example, we could say that an actuality is when a plant does one of the activities that plants do.  "For that for the sake of which a thing is, is its principle, and the becoming is for the sake of the end; and the actuality is the end, and it is for the sake of this that the potentiality is acquired. For animals do not see in order that they may have sight, but they have sight that they may see."  In summary, the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities, which is also a final cause or end. Then Aristotle proceeds and concludes that the actuality is prior to potentiality in formula, in time and in substantiality. With this definition of the particular substance (i.e., matter and form), Aristotle tries to solve the problem of the unity of the beings, for example, "what is it that makes a man one"? Since, according to Plato there are two Ideas: animal and biped, how then is man a unity? However, according to Aristotle, the potential being (matter) and the actual one (form) are one and the same thing.   ==== Universals and particularsEdit ====  Aristotle's predecessor, Plato, argued that all things have a universal form, which could be either a property, or a relation to other things. When we look at an apple, for example, we see an apple, and we can also analyze a form of an apple. In this distinction, there is a particular apple and a universal form of an apple. Moreover, we can place an apple next to a book, so that we can speak of both the book and apple as being next to each other. Plato argued that there are some universal forms that are not a part of particular things. For example, it is possible that there is no particular good in existence, but "good" is still a proper universal form. Bertrand Russell is a 20th-century philosopher who agreed with Plato on the existence of "uninstantiated universals". Aristotle disagreed with Plato on this point, arguing that all universals are instantiated. Aristotle argued that there are no universals that are unattached to existing things. According to Aristotle, if a universal exists, either as a particular or a relation, then there must have been, must be currently, or must be in the future, something on which the universal can be predicated. Consequently, according to Aristotle, if it is not the case that some universal can be predicated to an object that exists at some period of time, then it does not exist. In addition, Aristotle disagreed with Plato about the location of universals. As Plato spoke of the world of the forms, a location where all universal forms subsist, Aristotle maintained that universals exist within each thing on which each universal is predicated. So, according to Aristotle, the form of apple exists within each apple, rather than in the world of the forms.   === Biology and medicineEdit === In Aristotelian science, especially in biology, things he saw himself have stood the test of time better than his retelling of the reports of others, which contain error and superstition. He dissected animals but not humans; his ideas on how the human body works have been almost entirely superseded.   ==== Empirical research programEdit ====  Aristotle is the earliest natural historian whose work has survived in some detail. Aristotle certainly did research on the natural history of Lesbos, and the surrounding seas and neighbouring areas. The works that reflect this research, such as History of Animals, Generation of Animals, and Parts of Animals, contain some observations and interpretations, along with sundry myths and mistakes. The most striking passages are about the sea-life visible from observation on Lesbos and available from the catches of fishermen. His observations on catfish, electric fish (Torpedo) and angler-fish are detailed, as is his writing on cephalopods, namely, Octopus, Sepia (cuttlefish) and the paper nautilus (Argonauta argo). His description of the hectocotyl arm, used in sexual reproduction, was widely disbelieved until its rediscovery in the 19th century. He separated the aquatic mammals from fish, and knew that sharks and rays were part of the group he called Selachē (selachians). Another good example of his methods comes from the Generation of Animals in which Aristotle describes breaking open fertilized chicken eggs at intervals to observe when visible organs were generated. He gave accurate descriptions of ruminants' four-chambered fore-stomachs, and of the ovoviviparous embryological development of the hound shark Mustelus mustelus.   ==== Classification of living thingsEdit ==== Aristotle distinguished about 500 species of birds, mammals and fishes. His classification of living things contains some elements which still existed in the 19th century. What the modern zoologist would call vertebrates and invertebrates, Aristotle called 'animals with blood' and 'animals without blood' (he did not know that complex invertebrates do make use of hemoglobin, but of a different kind from vertebrates). Animals with blood were divided into live-bearing (mammals), and egg-bearing (birds and fish). Invertebrates ('animals without blood') are insects, crustacea (divided into non-shelled – cephalopods – and shelled) and testacea (molluscs). In some respects, this incomplete classification is better than that of Linnaeus, who crowded the invertebrata together into two groups, Insecta and Vermes (worms). For Charles Singer, "Nothing is more remarkable than [Aristotle's] efforts to [exhibit] the relationships of living things as a scala naturae" Aristotle's History of Animals classified organisms in relation to a hierarchical "Ladder of Life" (scala naturae or Great Chain of Being), placing them according to complexity of structure and function so that higher organisms showed greater vitality and ability to move. Aristotle believed that intellectual purposes, i.e., final causes, guided all natural processes. Such a teleological view gave Aristotle cause to justify his observed data as an expression of formal design. Noting that "no animal has, at the same time, both tusks and horns," and "a single-hooved animal with two horns I have never seen," Aristotle suggested that Nature, giving no animal both horns and tusks, was staving off vanity, and giving creatures faculties only to such a degree as they are necessary. Noting that ruminants had multiple stomachs and weak teeth, he supposed the first was to compensate for the latter, with Nature trying to preserve a type of balance. In a similar fashion, Aristotle believed that creatures were arranged in a graded scale of perfection rising from plants on up to man, the scala naturae. His system had eleven grades, arranged according "to the degree to which they are infected with potentiality", expressed in their form at birth. The highest animals laid warm and wet creatures alive, the lowest bore theirs cold, dry, and in thick eggs. Aristotle also held that the level of a creature's perfection was reflected in its form, but not preordained by that form. Ideas like this, and his ideas about souls, are not regarded as science at all in modern times. He placed emphasis on the type(s) of soul an organism possessed, asserting that plants possess a vegetative soul, responsible for reproduction and growth, animals a vegetative and a sensitive soul, responsible for mobility and sensation, and humans a vegetative, a sensitive, and a rational soul, capable of thought and reflection. Aristotle, in contrast to earlier philosophers, but in accordance with the Egyptians, placed the rational soul in the heart, rather than the brain. Notable is Aristotle's division of sensation and thought, which generally went against previous philosophers, with the exception of Alcmaeon.   ==== Successor: TheophrastusEdit ====  Aristotle's successor at the Lyceum, Theophrastus, wrote a series of books on botany—the History of Plants—which survived as the most important contribution of antiquity to botany, even into the Middle Ages. Many of Theophrastus' names survive into modern times, such as carpos for fruit, and pericarpion for seed vessel. Rather than focus on formal causes, as Aristotle did, Theophrastus suggested a mechanistic scheme, drawing analogies between natural and artificial processes, and relying on Aristotle's concept of the efficient cause. Theophrastus also recognized the role of sex in the reproduction of some higher plants, though this last discovery was lost in later ages.   ==== Influence on Hellenistic medicineEdit ====  After Theophrastus, the Lyceum failed to produce any original work. Though interest in Aristotle's ideas survived, they were generally taken unquestioningly. It is not until the age of Alexandria under the Ptolemies that advances in biology can be again found. The first medical teacher at Alexandria, Herophilus of Chalcedon, corrected Aristotle, placing intelligence in the brain, and connected the nervous system to motion and sensation. Herophilus also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse while the former do not. Though a few ancient atomists such as Lucretius challenged the teleological viewpoint of Aristotelian ideas about life, teleology (and after the rise of Christianity, natural theology) would remain central to biological thought essentially until the 18th and 19th centuries. Ernst Mayr claimed that there was "nothing of any real consequence in biology after Lucretius and Galen until the Renaissance." Aristotle's ideas of natural history and medicine survived, but they were generally taken unquestioningly.   === PsychologyEdit === Aristotle's psychology, given in his treatise On the Soul (peri psyche, often known by its Latin title De Anima), posits three kinds of soul ("psyches"): the vegetative soul, the sensitive soul, and the rational soul. Humans have a rational soul. This kind of soul is capable of the same powers as the other kinds: Like the vegetative soul it can grow and nourish itself; like the sensitive soul it can experience sensations and move locally. The unique part of the human, rational soul is its ability to receive forms of other things and compare them. For Aristotle, the soul (psyche) was a simpler concept than it is for us today. By soul he simply meant the form of a living being. Because all beings are composites of form and matter, the form of living beings is that which endows them with what is specific to living beings, e.g. the ability to initiate movement (or in the case of plants, growth and chemical transformations, which Aristotle considers types of movement).   ==== MemoryEdit ==== According to Aristotle, memory is the ability to hold a perceived experience in your mind and to have the ability to distinguish between the internal "appearance" and an occurrence in the past. In other words, a memory is a mental picture (phantasm) in which Aristotle defines in De Anima, as an appearance which is imprinted on the part of the body that forms a memory. Aristotle believed an "imprint" becomes impressed on a semi-fluid bodily organ that undergoes several changes in order to make a memory. A memory occurs when a stimuli is too complex that the nervous system (semi-fluid bodily organ) cannot receive all the impressions at once. These changes are the same as those involved in the operations of sensation, common sense, and thinking . The mental picture imprinted on the bodily organ is the final product of the entire process of sense perception. It does not matter if the experience was seen or heard, every experience ends up as a mental image in memory  Aristotle uses the word "memory" for two basic abilities. First, the actual retaining of the experience in the mnemonic "imprint" that can develop from sensation. Second, the intellectual anxiety that comes with the "imprint" due to being impressed at a particular time and processing specific contents. These abilities can be explained as memory is neither sensation nor thinking because is arises only after a lapse of time. Therefore, memory is of the past,  prediction is of the future, and sensation is of the present. The retrieval of our "imprints" cannot be performed suddenly. A transitional channel is needed and located in our past experiences, both for our previous experience and present experience. Aristotle proposed that slow-witted people have good memory because the fluids in their brain do not wash away their memory organ used to imprint experiences and so the "imprint" can easily continue. However, they cannot be too slow or the hardened surface of the organ will not receive new "imprints". He believed the young and the old do not properly develop an "imprint". Young people undergo rapid changes as they develop, while the elderly's organs are beginning to decay, thus stunting new "imprints". Likewise, people who are too quick-witted are similar to the young and the image cannot be fixed because of the rapid changes of their organ. Because intellectual functions are not involved in memory, memories belong to some animals too, but only those in which have perception of time.   ===== RecollectionEdit ===== Because Aristotle believes people receive all kinds of sense perceptions and people perceive them as images or "imprints", people are continually weaving together new "imprints" of things they experience. In order to search for these "imprints", people search the memory itself. Within the memory, if one experience is offered instead of a specific memory, that person will reject this experience until they find what they are looking for. Recollection occurs when one experience naturally follows another. If the chain of "images" is needed, one memory will stimulate the other. If the chain of "images" is not needed, but expected, then it will only stimulate the other memory in most instances. When people recall experiences, they stimulate certain previous experiences until they have stimulated the one that was needed. Recollection is the self-directed activity of retrieving the information stored in a memory "imprint" after some time has passed. Retrieval of stored information is dependent on the scope of mnemonic capabilities of a being (human or animal) and the abilities the human or animal possesses . Only humans will remember "imprints" of intellectual activity, such as numbers and words. Animals that have perception of time will be able to retrieve memories of their past observations. Remembering involves only perception of the things remembered and of the time passed. Recollection of an "imprint" is when the present experiences a person remembers are similar with elements corresponding in character and arrangement of past sensory experiences. When an "imprint" is recalled, it may bring forth a large group of related "imprints". Aristotle believed the chain of thought, which ends in recollection of certain "imprints", was connected systematically in three sorts of relationships: similarity, contrast, and contiguity. These three laws make up his Laws of Association. Aristotle believed that past experiences are hidden within our mind. A force operates to awaken the hidden material to bring up the actual experience. According to Aristotle, association is the power innate in a mental state, which operates upon the unexpressed remains of former experiences, allowing them to rise and be recalled.   ==== DreamsEdit ====   ===== SleepEdit ===== Before understanding Aristotle's take on dreams, first his idea of sleep must be examined. Aristotle gives an account of his explanation of sleep in On Sleep and Wakefulness. Sleep takes place as a result of overuse of the senses or of digestion, so it is vital to the body, including the senses, so it can be revitalized. While a person is asleep, the critical activities, which include thinking, sensing, recalling and remembering, do not function as they do during wakefulness. Since a person cannot sense during sleep they can also not have a desire, which is the result of a sensation. However, the senses are able to work during sleep, albeit differently than when a person is awake because during sleep a person can still have sensory experiences. Also, all of the senses are not inactive during sleep, only the ones that are weary.   ===== Theory of dreamsEdit ===== Dreams do not involve actually sensing a stimulus because, as discussed, the senses do not work as they normally do during sleep. In dreams, sensation is still involved, but in an altered manner than when awake. Aristotle explains the phenomenon that occurs when a person stares at a moving stimulus such as the waves in a body of water. When they look away from that stimulus, the next thing they look at appears to be moving in a wave like motion. When a person perceives a stimulus and the stimulus is no longer the focus of their attention, it leaves an impression. When the body is awake and the senses are functioning properly, a person constantly encounters new stimuli to sense and so the impressions left from previously perceived stimuli become irrelevant. However, during sleep the impressions stimuli made throughout the day become noticed because there are not new sensory experiences to distract from these impressions that were made. So, dreams result from these lasting impressions. Since impressions are all that are left and not the exact stimuli, dreams will not resemble the actual experience that occurred when awake. During sleep, a person is in an altered state of mind. Aristotle compares a sleeping person to a person who is overtaken by strong feelings toward a stimulus. For example, a person who has a strong infatuation with someone may begin to think they see that person everywhere because they are so overtaken by their feelings. When a person is asleep, their senses are not acting as they do when they are awake and this results in them thinking like a person who is influenced by strong feelings. Since a person sleeping is in this suggestible state, they become easily deceived by what appears in their dreams. When asleep, a person is unable to make judgments as they do when they are awake Due to the senses not functioning normally during sleep, they are unable to help a person judge what is happening in their dream. This in turn leads the person to believe the dream is real. Dreams may be absurd in nature but the senses are not able to discern whether they are real or not. So, the dreamer is left to accept the dream because they lack the choice to judge it. One component of Aristotle's theory of dreams introduces ideas that are contradictory to previously held beliefs. He claimed that dreams are not foretelling and that they are not sent by a divine being. Aristotle reasoned that instances in which dreams do resemble future events are happenstances not divinations. These ideas were contradictory to what had been believed about dreams, but at the time in which he introduced these ideas more thinkers were beginning to give naturalistic as opposed to supernatural explanations to phenomena. Aristotle also includes in his theory of dreams what constitutes a dream and what does not. He claimed that a dream is first established by the fact that the person is asleep when they experience it. If a person had an image appear for a moment after waking up or if they see something in the dark it is not considered a dream because they were awake when it occurred. Secondly, any sensory experience that actually occurs while a person is asleep and is perceived by the person while asleep does not qualify as part of a dream. For example, if, while a person is sleeping, a door shuts and in their dream they hear a door is shut, Aristotle argues that this sensory experience is not part of the dream. The actual sensory experience is perceived by the senses, the fact that it occurred while the person was asleep does not make it part of the dream. Lastly, the images of dreams must be a result of lasting impressions of sensory experiences had when awake.   === Practical philosophyEdit ===   ==== EthicsEdit ====  Aristotle considered ethics to be a practical rather than theoretical study, i.e., one aimed at becoming good and doing good rather than knowing for its own sake. He wrote several treatises on ethics, including most notably, the Nicomachean Ethics. Aristotle taught that virtue has to do with the proper function (ergon) of a thing. An eye is only a good eye in so much as it can see, because the proper function of an eye is sight. Aristotle reasoned that humans must have a function specific to humans, and that this function must be an activity of the psuchē (normally translated as soul) in accordance with reason (logos). Aristotle identified such an optimum activity of the soul as the aim of all human deliberate action, eudaimonia, generally translated as "happiness" or sometimes "well being". To have the potential of ever being happy in this way necessarily requires a good character (ēthikē aretē), often translated as moral (or ethical) virtue (or excellence). Aristotle taught that to achieve a virtuous and potentially happy character requires a first stage of having the fortune to be habituated not deliberately, but by teachers, and experience, leading to a later stage in which one consciously chooses to do the best things. When the best people come to live life this way their practical wisdom (phronesis) and their intellect (nous) can develop with each other towards the highest possible human virtue, the wisdom of an accomplished theoretical or speculative thinker, or in other words, a philosopher.   ==== PoliticsEdit ====  In addition to his works on ethics, which address the individual, Aristotle addressed the city in his work titled Politics. Aristotle considered the city to be a natural community. Moreover, he considered the city to be prior in importance to the family which in turn is prior to the individual, "for the whole must of necessity be prior to the part". He also famously stated that "man is by nature a political animal" and also arguing that humanity's defining factor among others in the animal kingdom is its rationality. Aristotle conceived of politics as being like an organism rather than like a machine, and as a collection of parts none of which can exist without the others. Aristotle's conception of the city is organic, and he is considered one of the first to conceive of the city in this manner. The common modern understanding of a political community as a modern state is quite different from Aristotle's understanding. Although he was aware of the existence and potential of larger empires, the natural community according to Aristotle was the city (polis) which functions as a political "community" or "partnership" (koinōnia). The aim of the city is not just to avoid injustice or for economic stability, but rather to allow at least some citizens the possibility to live a good life, and to perform beautiful acts: "The political partnership must be regarded, therefore, as being for the sake of noble actions, not for the sake of living together." This is distinguished from modern approaches, beginning with social contract theory, according to which individuals leave the state of nature because of "fear of violent death" or its "inconveniences." Excerpt from a speech by the character 'Aristotle' in the book Protrepticus (Hutchinson and Johnson, 2015 p. 22) For we all agree that the most excellent man should rule, i.e., the supreme by nature, and that the law rules and alone is authoritative; but the law is a kind of intelligence, i.e. a discourse based on intelligence. And again, what standard do we have, what criterion of good things, that is more precise than the intelligent man? For all that this man will choose, if the choice is based on his knowledge, are good things and their contraries are bad. And since everybody chooses most of all what conforms to their own proper dispositions (a just man choosing to live justly, a man with bravery to live bravely, likewise a self-controlled man to live with self-control), it is clear that the intelligent man will choose most of all to be intelligent; for this is the function of that capacity. Hence it's evident that, according to the most authoritative judgment, intelligence is supreme among goods.   ==== Rhetoric and poeticsEdit ====  Aristotle considered epic poetry, tragedy, comedy, dithyrambic poetry and music to be imitative, each varying in imitation by medium, object, and manner. For example, music imitates with the media of rhythm and harmony, whereas dance imitates with rhythm alone, and poetry with language. The forms also differ in their object of imitation. Comedy, for instance, is a dramatic imitation of men worse than average; whereas tragedy imitates men slightly better than average. Lastly, the forms differ in their manner of imitation – through narrative or character, through change or no change, and through drama or no drama. Aristotle believed that imitation is natural to mankind and constitutes one of mankind's advantages over animals. While it is believed that Aristotle's Poetics comprised two books – one on comedy and one on tragedy – only the portion that focuses on tragedy has survived. Aristotle taught that tragedy is composed of six elements: plot-structure, character, style, thought, spectacle, and lyric poetry. The characters in a tragedy are merely a means of driving the story; and the plot, not the characters, is the chief focus of tragedy. Tragedy is the imitation of action arousing pity and fear, and is meant to effect the catharsis of those same emotions. Aristotle concludes Poetics with a discussion on which, if either, is superior: epic or tragic mimesis. He suggests that because tragedy possesses all the attributes of an epic, possibly possesses additional attributes such as spectacle and music, is more unified, and achieves the aim of its mimesis in shorter scope, it can be considered superior to epic. Aristotle was a keen systematic collector of riddles, folklore, and proverbs; he and his school had a special interest in the riddles of the Delphic Oracle and studied the fables of Aesop.   === Views on womenEdit ===  Aristotle's analysis of procreation describes an active, ensouling masculine element bringing life to an inert, passive female element. On this ground, feminist metaphysics have accused Aristotle of misogyny and sexism. However, Aristotle gave equal weight to women's happiness as he did to men's, and commented in his Rhetoric that the things that lead to happiness need to be in women as well as men.   == Loss and preservation of his worksEdit ==  Modern scholarship reveals that Aristotle's "lost" works stray considerably in characterization from the surviving Aristotelian corpus. Whereas the lost works appear to have been originally written with an intent for subsequent publication, the surviving works do not appear to have been so. Rather the surviving works mostly resemble lecture notes unintended for publication. The authenticity of a portion of the surviving works as originally Aristotelian is also today held suspect, with some books duplicating or summarizing each other, the authorship of one book questioned and another book considered to be unlikely Aristotle's at all. Some of the individual works within the corpus, including the Constitution of Athens, are regarded by most scholars as products of Aristotle's "school," perhaps compiled under his direction or supervision. Others, such as On Colors, may have been produced by Aristotle's successors at the Lyceum, e.g., Theophrastus and Straton. Still others acquired Aristotle's name through similarities in doctrine or content, such as the De Plantis, possibly by Nicolaus of Damascus. Other works in the corpus include medieval palmistries and astrological and magical texts whose connections to Aristotle are purely fanciful and self-promotional. According to a distinction that originates with Aristotle himself, his writings are divisible into two groups: the "exoteric" and the "esoteric". Most scholars have understood this as a distinction between works Aristotle intended for the public (exoteric), and the more technical works intended for use within the Lyceum course / school (esoteric). Modern scholars commonly assume these latter to be Aristotle's own (unpolished) lecture notes (or in some cases possible notes by his students). However, one classic scholar offers an alternative interpretation. The 5th century neoplatonist Ammonius Hermiae writes that Aristotle's writing style is deliberately obscurantist so that "good people may for that reason stretch their mind even more, whereas empty minds that are lost through carelessness will be put to flight by the obscurity when they encounter sentences like these." Another common assumption is that none of the exoteric works is extant – that all of Aristotle's extant writings are of the esoteric kind. Current knowledge of what exactly the exoteric writings were like is scant and dubious, though many of them may have been in dialogue form. (Fragments of some of Aristotle's dialogues have survived.) Perhaps it is to these that Cicero refers when he characterized Aristotle's writing style as "a river of gold"; it is hard for many modern readers to accept that one could seriously so admire the style of those works currently available to us. However, some modern scholars have warned that we cannot know for certain that Cicero's praise was reserved specifically for the exoteric works; a few modern scholars have actually admired the concise writing style found in Aristotle's extant works. One major question in the history of Aristotle's works, then, is how were the exoteric writings all lost, and how did the ones we now possess come to us The story of the original manuscripts of the esoteric treatises is described by Strabo in his Geography and Plutarch in his Parallel Lives. The manuscripts were left from Aristotle to his successor Theophrastus, who in turn willed them to Neleus of Scepsis. Neleus supposedly took the writings from Athens to Scepsis, where his heirs let them languish in a cellar until the 1st century BC, when Apellicon of Teos discovered and purchased the manuscripts, bringing them back to Athens. According to the story, Apellicon tried to repair some of the damage that was done during the manuscripts' stay in the basement, introducing a number of errors into the text. When Lucius Cornelius Sulla occupied Athens in 86 BC, he carried off the library of Apellicon to Rome, where they were first published in 60 BC by the grammarian Tyrannion of Amisus and then by the philosopher Andronicus of Rhodes. Carnes Lord attributes the popular belief in this story to the fact that it provides "the most plausible explanation for the rapid eclipse of the Peripatetic school after the middle of the third century, and for the absence of widespread knowledge of the specialized treatises of Aristotle throughout the Hellenistic period, as well as for the sudden reappearance of a flourishing Aristotelianism during the first century B.C." Lord voices a number of reservations concerning this story, however. First, the condition of the texts is far too good for them to have suffered considerable damage followed by Apellicon's inexpert attempt at repair. Second, there is "incontrovertible evidence," Lord says, that the treatises were in circulation during the time in which Strabo and Plutarch suggest they were confined within the cellar in Scepsis. Third, the definitive edition of Aristotle's texts seems to have been made in Athens some fifty years before Andronicus supposedly compiled his. And fourth, ancient library catalogues predating Andronicus' intervention list an Aristotelian corpus quite similar to the one we currently possess. Lord sees a number of post-Aristotelian interpolations in the Politics, for example, but is generally confident that the work has come down to us relatively intact. On the one hand, the surviving texts of Aristotle do not derive from finished literary texts, but rather from working drafts used within Aristotle's school, as opposed, on the other hand, to the dialogues and other "exoteric" texts which Aristotle published more widely during his lifetime. The consensus is that Andronicus of Rhodes collected the esoteric works of Aristotle's school which existed in the form of smaller, separate works, distinguished them from those of Theophrastus and other Peripatetics, edited them, and finally compiled them into the more cohesive, larger works as they are known today.   == LegacyEdit ==  More than 2300 years after his death, Aristotle remains one of the most influential people who ever lived. He contributed to almost every field of human knowledge then in existence, and he was the founder of many new fields. According to the philosopher Bryan Magee, "it is doubtful whether any human being has ever known as much as he did". Among countless other achievements, Aristotle was the founder of formal logic, pioneered the study of zoology, and left every future scientist and philosopher in his debt through his contributions to the scientific method. Despite these achievements, the influence of Aristotle's errors is considered by some to have held back science considerably. Bertrand Russell notes that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine". Russell also refers to Aristotle's ethics as "repulsive", and calls his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy". Russell notes that these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembers how large of an advance he made upon all of his predecessors.   === Later Greek philosophersEdit === The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school. Aristotle's notable students included Aristoxenus, Dicaearchus, Demetrius of Phalerum, Eudemos of Rhodes, Harpalus, Hephaestion, Meno, Mnason of Phocis, Nicomachus, and Theophrastus. Aristotle's influence over Alexander the Great is seen in the latter's bringing with him on his expedition a host of zoologists, botanists, and researchers. He had also learned a great deal about Persian customs and traditions from his teacher. Although his respect for Aristotle was diminished as his travels made it clear that much of Aristotle's geography was clearly wrong, when the old philosopher released his works to the public, Alexander complained "Thou hast not done well to publish thy acroamatic doctrines; for in what shall I surpass other men if those doctrines wherein I have been trained are to be all men's common property?"   === Influence on Byzantine scholarsEdit === Greek Christian scribes played a crucial role in the preservation of Aristotle by copying all the extant Greek language manuscripts of the corpus. The first Greek Christians to comment extensively on Aristotle were John Philoponus, Elias, and David in the sixth century, and Stephen of Alexandria in the early seventh century. John Philoponus stands out for having attempted a fundamental critique of Aristotle's views on the eternity of the world, movement, and other elements of Aristotelian thought. After a hiatus of several centuries, formal commentary by Eustratius and Michael of Ephesus reappears in the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries, apparently sponsored by Anna Comnena.   === Influence on Islamic theologiansEdit === Aristotle was one of the most revered Western thinkers in early Islamic theology. Most of the still extant works of Aristotle, as well as a number of the original Greek commentaries, were translated into Arabic and studied by Muslim philosophers, scientists and scholars. Averroes, Avicenna and Alpharabius, who wrote on Aristotle in great depth, also influenced Thomas Aquinas and other Western Christian scholastic philosophers. Alkindus considered Aristotle as the outstanding and unique representative of philosophy and Averroes spoke of Aristotle as the "exemplar" for all future philosophers. Medieval Muslim scholars regularly described Aristotle as the "First Teacher". The title "teacher" was first given to Aristotle by Muslim scholars, and was later used by Western philosophers (as in the famous poem of Dante) who were influenced by the tradition of Islamic philosophy. In accordance with the Greek theorists, the Muslims considered Aristotle to be a dogmatic philosopher, the author of a closed system, and believed that Aristotle shared with Plato essential tenets of thought. Some went so far as to credit Aristotle himself with neo-Platonic metaphysical ideas.   === Influence on Western Christian theologiansEdit === With the loss of the study of ancient Greek in the early medieval Latin West, Aristotle was practically unknown there from c. AD 600 to c. 1100 except through the Latin translation of the Organon made by Boethius. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, interest in Aristotle revived and Latin Christians had translations made, both from Arabic translations, such as those by Gerard of Cremona, and from the original Greek, such as those by James of Venice and William of Moerbeke. After Thomas Aquinas wrote his theology, working from Moerbeke's translations, the demand for Aristotle's writings grew and the Greek manuscripts returned to the West, stimulating a revival of Aristotelianism in Europe that continued into the Renaissance. Aristotle is referred to as "The Philosopher" by Scholastic thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas. See Summa Theologica, Part I, Question 3, etc. These thinkers blended Aristotelian philosophy with Christianity, bringing the thought of Ancient Greece into the Middle Ages. It required a repudiation of some Aristotelian principles for the sciences and the arts to free themselves for the discovery of modern scientific laws and empirical methods. The medieval English poet Chaucer describes his student as being happy by having                       at his beddes heed Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed, Of aristotle and his philosophie, The Italian poet Dante says of Aristotle in the first circles of hell, I saw the Master there of those who know, Amid the philosophic family, By all admired, and by all reverenced; There Plato too I saw, and Socrates, Who stood beside him closer than the rest.   === Post-Enlightenment thinkersEdit === The German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche has been said to have taken nearly all of his political philosophy from Aristotle. However debatable this is, Aristotle rigid separated action from production, and argued for the deserved subservience of some people ("natural slaves"), and the natural superiority (virtue, arete) of others. It is Martin Heidegger, not Nietzsche, who elaborated a new interpretation of Aristotle, intended to warrant his deconstruction of scholastic and philosophical tradition. Ayn Rand accredited Aristotle as "the greatest philosopher in history" and cited him as a major influence on her thinking. More recently, Alasdair MacIntyre has attempted to reform what he calls the Aristotelian tradition in a way that is anti-elitist and capable of disputing the claims of both liberals and Nietzscheans.   == List of worksEdit ==  The works of Aristotle that have survived from antiquity through medieval manuscript transmission are collected in the Corpus Aristotelicum. These texts, as opposed to Aristotle's lost works, are technical philosophical treatises from within Aristotle's school. Reference to them is made according to the organization of Immanuel Bekker's Royal Prussian Academy edition (Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica, Berlin, 1831–1870), which in turn is based on ancient classifications of these works.   == EponymsEdit ==  The Aristotle Mountains along the Oscar II Coast of Graham Land, Antarctica, are named after Aristotle. He was the first person known to conjecture, in his book Meteorology, the existence of a landmass in the southern high-latitude region and call it "Antarctica". Aristoteles (crater) is a crater on the Moon bearing the classical form of Aristotle's name.   == See alsoEdit == Aristotelian physics Aristotelian society Aristotelian theology Conimbricenses List of writers influenced by Aristotle Otium Philia Pseudo-Aristotle   == Notes and referencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == The secondary literature on Aristotle is vast. The following references are only a small selection.   == External linksEdit == Aristotle at DMOZ Aristotle at PhilPapers. Aristotle at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project. At the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy:  From the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:  General article at The Catholic Encyclopedia  Diogenes Laërtius, Life of Aristotle, translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925). Works by Aristotle at Open Library. Timeline of Aristotle's life Aristotle at PlanetMath.org.. Collections of works At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (primarily in English). Works by Aristotle at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Aristotle at Internet Archive Works by Aristotle at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  (English) (Greek) Perseus Project at Tufts University. At the University of Adelaide (primarily in English). (Greek) (French) P. Remacle The 11-volume 1837 Bekker edition of Aristotle's Works in Greek (PDF · DJVU) Bekker's Prussian Academy of Sciences edition of the complete works of Aristotle at Archive.org:  (English) Aristotle Collection (translation).

Arthur Norman Prior, also known as A. N. Prior, (1914–1969) was a noted logician and philosopher. Prior (1957) founded tense logic, now also known as temporal logic, and made important contributions to intensional logic, particularly in Prior (1971).   == Biography == Prior was born in Masterton New Zealand, 4 December 1914, the only child of Australian-born parents: Norman Henry Prior (1882-1967) and his wife born Elizabeth Munton Rothesay Teague (1889-1914). His mother died less than 3 weeks after his birth and he was cared for by his father's sister. His father, a medical practitioner in general practice, remarried in 1920 and there were three more children. Prior was educated entirely in New Zealand, where he was fortunate to have come under the influence of John Niemeyer Findlay. Despite knowing only modest mathematics, he began teaching philosophy and logic at Canterbury University College in 1946, filling the vacancy created by Karl Popper's resignation. He became Professor in 1953. Thanks to the good offices of Gilbert Ryle, who had met Prior in New Zealand in 1954, Prior spent the year 1956 on leave at the University of Oxford, where he gave the John Locke lectures in philosophy. These were subsequently published as Time and Modality (1957). This is a seminal contribution to the study of tense logic and the metaphysics of time, in which Prior championed the A-theorist view that the temporal modalities past, present and future are basic ontological categories of fundamental importance for our understanding of time and the world. During his time at Oxford, Prior met Peter Geach and William Kneale, influenced John Lemmon, and corresponded with the adolescent Saul Kripke. Logic in the United Kingdom was then in a rather low state, and Prior's enthusiasm is believed to have contributed materially to its revival. From 1959 to 1966, he was Professor of Philosophy at the University of Manchester, having taught Osmund Lewry. From 1966 until his death he was Fellow and Tutor in philosophy at Balliol College, Oxford. His students include Max Cresswell, Kit Fine, and Robert Bull. Almost entirely self-taught in modern formal logic, Prior published his first paper on logic in 1952, when he was already 38 years of age, shortly after discovering the work of Józef Maria Bocheński and Jan Łukasiewicz, very little of whose work was then translated into English. He went on to employ Polish notation throughout his career. Prior (1955) distills much of his early teaching of logic in New Zealand. Prior's work on tense logic provides a systematic and extended defence of a tensed conception of reality in which material objects are construed as three-dimensional continuants which are wholly present at each moment of their existence. Prior stood out by virtue of his strong interest in the history of logic. He was one of the first English-speaking logicians to appreciate the nature and scope of the logical work of Charles Sanders Peirce, and the distinction between de dicto and de re in modal logic. Prior taught and researched modal logic before Kripke proposed his possible worlds semantics for it, at a time when modality and intentionality commanded little interest in the English speaking world, and had even come under sharp attack by Willard Van Orman Quine. He is now said to be the precursor of hybrid logic. Undertaking (in one section of his book Past, Present, and Future (1967)) the attempt to combine binary (e.g., "until") and unary (e.g., "will always be") temporal operators to one system of temporal logic, Prior—as an incidental result—builds a base for later hybrid languages. His work Time and Modality explored the use of a many-valued logic to explain the problem of non-referring names. Prior's work was both philosophical and formal and provides a productive synergy between formal innovation and linguistic analysis. Natural language, he remarked, can embody folly and confusion as well as the wisdom of our ancestors. He was scrupulous in setting out the views of his adversaries, and provided many constructive suggestions about the formal development of alternative views.   == Publications == The following books were either written by Prior, or are posthumous collections of journal articles and unpublished papers that he wrote: 1949. Logic and the Basis of Ethics. Oxford University Press (ISBN 0-19-824157-7) 1955, 1962. Formal Logic. Oxford University Press. 1957. Time and Modality. Oxford University Press. based on his 1956 John Locke lectures. 1962. "Changes in Events and Changes in Things". University of Kansas. 1967. Past, Present and Future. Oxford University Press. 1968. Papers on Time and Tense. Oxford University Press. 1971. Objects of Thought. Edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny. Oxford University Press. 1976. The Doctrine of Propositions and Terms. Edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny. London: Duckworth. 1976. Papers in Logic and Ethics. Edited by P. T. Geach and A. J. P. Kenny. London: Duckworth. 1977. Worlds, Times and Selves. Edited by Kit Fine. London: Duckworth. 2003. Papers on Time and Tense. Second expanded edition by Per Hasle, Peter Øhrstrøm, Torben Braüner & Jack Copeland. Oxford University Press.   == References ==   == Further reading == The nearest thing to a biography of Prior is: Copeland, B. J., 1996, "Prior's Life and Legacy," in his edited volume Logic and Reality: Essays on the Legacy of Arthur Prior, New York: Oxford University Press (pp. 519–32 of this volume contain a complete bibliography of Prior's known writings as of date). An excellent survey of Prior's life and achievement is: A. J. P. Kenny 1970, 'Arthur Norman Prior (1914–1969)' Proceedings of the British Academy 56: 321–349.   == External links == Arthur Prior entry by B. Jack Copeland in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Foundations of Temporal Logic The WWW-site for Prior-studies On Prior's Tense Logic by Patrick Blackburn Arthur Prior Centenary Conference, Balliol College, Oxford, 21 – 22 August, 2014

Augustus De Morgan (/dɪ ˈmɔrɡən/; 27 June 1806 – 18 March 1871) was a British mathematician and logician. He formulated De Morgan's laws and introduced the term mathematical induction, making its idea rigorous.   == Biography ==   === Childhood === Augustus De Morgan was born in Madurai, Madras Presidency, India in 1806. His father was Lieut.-Colonel John De Morgan (1772-1816), who held various appointments in the service of the East India Company. His mother, Elizabeth Dodson (1776-1856) descended from James Dodson, who computed a table of anti-logarithms, that is, the numbers corresponding to exact logarithms. Augustus De Morgan became blind in one eye a month or two after he was born. The family moved to England when Augustus was seven months old. As his father and grandfather had both been born in India, De Morgan used to say that he was neither English, nor Scottish, nor Irish, but a Briton "unattached", using the technical term applied to an undergraduate of Oxford or Cambridge who is not a member of any one of the Colleges. When De Morgan was ten years old, his father died. Mrs. De Morgan resided at various places in the southwest of England, and her son received his elementary education at various schools of no great account. His mathematical talents went unnoticed until he was fourteen, when a family-friend discovered him making an elaborate drawing of a figure in Euclid with ruler and compasses. She explained the aim of Euclid to Augustus, and gave him an initiation into demonstration. He received his secondary education from Mr. Parsons, a fellow of Oriel College, Oxford, who appreciated classics better than mathematics. His mother was an active and ardent member of the Church of England, and desired that her son should become a clergyman; but by this time De Morgan had begun to show his non-conforming disposition.   === University education === In 1823, at the age of sixteen, he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he came under the influence of George Peacock and William Whewell, who became his lifelong friends; from the former he derived an interest in the renovation of algebra, and from the latter an interest in the renovation of logic—the two subjects of his future life work. His college tutor was John Philips Higman, FRS (1793–1855). At college he played the flute for recreation and was prominent in the musical clubs. His love of knowledge for its own sake interfered with training for the great mathematical race; as a consequence he came out fourth wrangler. This entitled him to the degree of Bachelor of Arts; but to take the higher degree of Master of Arts and thereby become eligible for a fellowship it was then necessary to pass a theological test. To the signing of any such test De Morgan felt a strong objection, although he had been brought up in the Church of England. In about 1875 theological tests for academic degrees were abolished in the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.   === London University === As no career was open to him at his own university, he decided to go to the Bar, and took up residence in London; but he much preferred teaching mathematics to reading law. About this time the movement for founding London University (now University College London) took shape. The two ancient universities of Oxford and Cambridge were so guarded by theological tests that no Jew or Dissenter outside the Church of England could enter as a student, still less be appointed to any office. A body of liberal-minded men resolved to meet the difficulty by establishing in London a University on the principle of religious neutrality. De Morgan, then 22 years of age, was appointed professor of mathematics. His introductory lecture "On the study of mathematics" is a discourse upon mental education of permanent value, and has been recently reprinted in the United States. The London University was a new institution, and the relations of the Council of management, the Senate of professors and the body of students were not well defined. A dispute arose between the professor of anatomy and his students, and in consequence of the action taken by the Council, several professors resigned, headed by De Morgan. Another professor of mathematics was appointed, who then drowned a few years later. De Morgan had shown himself a prince of teachers: he was invited to return to his chair, which thereafter became the continuous centre of his labours for thirty years. The same body of reformers—headed by Lord Brougham, a Scotsman eminent both in science and politics who had instituted the London University—founded about the same time a Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. Its object was to spread scientific and other knowledge by means of cheap and clearly written treatises by the best writers of the time. One of its most voluminous and effective writers was De Morgan. He wrote a great work on The Differential and Integral Calculus which was published by the Society; and he wrote one-sixth of the articles in the Penny Cyclopedia, published by the Society, and issued in penny numbers. When De Morgan came to reside in London he found a congenial friend in William Frend, notwithstanding his mathematical heresy about negative quantities. Both were arithmeticians and actuaries, and their religious views were somewhat similar. Frend lived in what was then a suburb of London, in a country-house formerly occupied by Daniel Defoe and Isaac Watts. De Morgan with his flute was a welcome visitor. The London University of which De Morgan was a professor was a different institution from the University of London. The University of London was founded about ten years later by the Government for the purpose of granting degrees after examination, without any qualification as to residence. The London University was affiliated as a teaching college with the University of London, and its name was changed to University College. The University of London was not a success as an examining body; a teaching University was demanded. De Morgan was a highly successful teacher of mathematics. It was his plan to lecture for an hour, and at the close of each lecture to give out a number of problems and examples illustrative of the subject lectured on; his students were required to sit down to them and bring him the results, which he looked over and returned revised before the next lecture. In De Morgan's opinion, a thorough comprehension and mental assimilation of great principles far outweighed in importance any merely analytical dexterity in the application of half-understood principles to particular cases. During this period, he also promoted the work of the self-taught Indian mathematician Ramchundra, who has been called De Morgan's Ramanujan. He supervised the publication in London of Ramchundra's book on "Maxima and Minima" in 1859. In the introduction to this book, he acknowledged being aware of the Indian tradition of logic, although it is not known whether this had any influence on his own work.   === Family === Augustus was one of seven children, four of whom survived to adulthood. Eliza (1801-1836) married Lewis Hensley, a surgeon, living in Bath. Augustus (1806-1871) George (1808-1890), a Barrister-at-Law who married Josephine, daughter of Vice Admiral Josiah Coghill, 3rd Baronet Coghill Campbell Greig (1811-1876), a surgeon at the Middlesex Hospital In the autumn of 1837, he married Sophia Elizabeth (1809-1892), eldest daughter of William Frend (1757-1841) and Sarah Blackburne (1779-?), a granddaughter of Francis Blackburne (1705-1787), Archdeacon of Cleveland. De Morgan had three sons and four daughters, including fairytale author Mary de Morgan. His eldest son was the potter William De Morgan. His second son George acquired great distinction in mathematics at University College and the University of London. He and another like-minded alumnus conceived the idea of founding a Mathematical Society in London, where mathematical papers would be not only received (as by the Royal Society) but actually read and discussed. The first meeting was held in University College; De Morgan was the first president, his son the first secretary. It was the beginning of the London Mathematical Society.   === Retirement and death ===  In 1866 the chair of mental philosophy in University College fell vacant. James Martineau, a Unitarian clergyman and professor of mental philosophy, was recommended formally by the Senate to the Council; but in the Council there were some who objected to a Unitarian clergyman, and others who objected to theistic philosophy. A layman of the school of Bain and Spencer was appointed. De Morgan considered that the old standard of religious neutrality had been hauled down, and forthwith resigned. He was now 60 years of age. His pupils secured him a pension of £500 p.a., but misfortunes followed. Two years later his son George — the "younger Bernoulli", as Augustus loved to hear him called, in allusion to the eminent father-and-son mathematicians of that name — died. This blow was followed by the death of a daughter. Five years after his resignation from University College De Morgan died of nervous prostration on 18 March 1871.   == Mathematical work == De Morgan was a brilliant and witty writer, whether as a controversialist or as a correspondent. In his time there flourished two Sir William Hamiltons who have often been conflated. One was Sir William Hamilton, 9th Baronet (that is, his title was inherited), a Scotsman, professor of logic and metaphysics at the University of Edinburgh; the other was a knight (that is, won the title), an Irishman, professor at astronomy in the University of Dublin. The baronet contributed to logic, especially the doctrine of the quantification of the predicate; the knight, whose full name was William Rowan Hamilton, contributed to mathematics, especially geometric algebra, and first described the Quaternions. De Morgan was interested in the work of both, and corresponded with both; but the correspondence with the Scotsman ended in a public controversy, whereas that with the Irishman was marked by friendship and terminated only by death. In one of his letters to Rowan, De Morgan says, Be it known unto you that I have discovered that you and the other Sir W. H. are reciprocal polars with respect to me (intellectually and morally, for the Scottish baronet is a polar bear, and you, I was going to say, are a polar gentleman). When I send a bit of investigation to Edinburgh, the W. H. of that ilk says I took it from him. When I send you one, you take it from me, generalize it at a glance, bestow it thus generalized upon society at large, and make me the second discoverer of a known theorem. The correspondence of De Morgan with Hamilton the mathematician extended over twenty-four years; it contains discussions not only of mathematical matters, but also of subjects of general interest. It is marked by geniality on the part of Hamilton and by wit on the part of De Morgan. The following is a specimen: Hamilton wrote, My copy of Berkeley's work is not mine; like Berkeley, you know, I am an Irishman. De Morgan replied, Your phrase 'my copy is not mine' is not a bull. It is perfectly good English to use the same word in two different senses in one sentence, particularly when there is usage. Incongruity of language is no bull, for it expresses meaning. But incongruity of ideas (as in the case of the Irishman who was pulling up the rope, and finding it did not finish, cried out that somebody had cut off the other end of it) is the genuine bull. De Morgan was full of personal peculiarities. On the occasion of the installation of his friend, Lord Brougham, as Rector of the University of Edinburgh, the Senate offered to confer on him the honorary degree of LL. D.; he declined the honour as a misnomer. He once printed his name: Augustus De Morgan, H - O - M - O - P - A - U - C - A - R - U - M - L - I - T - E - R - A - R - U - M (Latin for "man of few letters"). He disliked the provinces outside London, and while his family enjoyed the seaside, and men of science were having a good time at a meeting of the British Association in the country he remained in the hot and dusty libraries of the metropolis. He said that he felt like Socrates, who declared that the farther he was from Athens the farther was he from happiness. He never sought to become a Fellow of the Royal Society, and he never attended a meeting of the Society; he said that he had no ideas or sympathies in common with the physical philosopher. His attitude was possibly due to his physical infirmity, which prevented him from being either an observer or an experimenter. He never voted at an election, and he never visited the House of Commons, or the Tower of London, or Westminster Abbey. Were the writings of De Morgan published in the form of collected works, they would form a small library, for example his writings for the Useful Knowledge Society. Mainly through the efforts of Peacock and Whewell, a Philosophical Society had been inaugurated at Cambridge; and to its Transactions De Morgan contributed four memoirs on the foundations of algebra, and an equal number on formal logic. The best presentation of his view of algebra is found in a volume, entitled Trigonometry and Double Algebra, published in 1849; and his earlier view of formal logic is found in a volume published in 1847. His most distinctive work is styled A Budget of Paradoxes; it originally appeared as letters in the columns of the Athenæum journal; it was revised and extended by De Morgan in the last years of his life, and was published posthumously by his widow. George Peacock's theory of algebra was much improved by D. F. Gregory, a younger member of the Cambridge School, who laid stress not on the permanence of equivalent forms, but on the permanence of certain formal laws. This new theory of algebra as the science of symbols and of their laws of combination was carried to its logical issue by De Morgan; and his doctrine on the subject is still followed by English algebraists in general. Thus George Chrystal founds his Textbook of Algebra on De Morgan's theory; although an attentive reader may remark that he practically abandons it when he takes up the subject of infinite series. De Morgan's theory is stated in his volume on Trigonometry and Double Algebra, where in Book II, Chapter II, headed "On symbolic algebra", he writes: In abandoning the meanings of symbols, we also abandon those of the words which describe them. Thus >addition is to be, for the present, a sound void of sense. It is a mode of combination represented by ; when  receives its meaning, so also will the word addition. It is most important that the student should bear in mind that, with one exception, no word nor sign of arithmetic or algebra has one atom of meaning throughout this chapter, the object of which is symbols, and their laws of combination, giving a symbolic algebra which may hereafter become the grammar of a hundred distinct significant algebras. If any one were to assert that  and  might mean reward and punishment, and , , , etc. might stand for virtues and vices, the reader might believe him, or contradict him, as he pleases—but not out of this chapter. The one exception above noted, which has some share of meaning, is the sign  placed between two symbols, as in . It indicates that the two symbols have the same resulting meaning, by whatever different steps attained. That  and , if quantities, are the same amount of quantity; that if operations, they are of the same effect, etc.   === Trigonometry and Double Algebra === De Morgan's work entitled Trigonometry and Double Algebra consists of two parts; the former of which is a treatise on trigonometry, and the latter a treatise on generalized algebra which he called "double algebra. The first stage in the development of algebra is arithmetic, where numbers only appear and symbols of operations such as , , etc. The next stage is universal arithmetic, where letters appear instead of numbers, so as to denote numbers universally, and the processes are conducted without knowing the values of the symbols. Let  and  denote any numbers; then such an expression as  may be impossible; so that in universal arithmetic there is always a proviso, provided the operation is possible. The third stage is single algebra, where the symbol may denote a quantity forwards or a quantity backwards, and is adequately represented by segments on a straight line passing through an origin. Negative quantities are then no longer impossible; they are represented by the backward segment. But an impossibility still remains in the latter part of such an expression as  which arises in the solution of the quadratic equation. The fourth stage is double algebra. The algebraic symbol denotes in general a segment of a line in a given plane. It is a double symbol because it involves two specifications, namely, length, and direction; and  is interpreted as denoting a quadrant. The expression  then represents a line in the plane having an abscissa  and an ordinate . Argand and Warren carried double algebra so far—but they were unable to interpret on this theory such an expression as . De Morgan attempted it by reducing such an expression to the form , and he considered that he had shown that it could be always so reduced. The remarkable fact is that this double algebra satisfies all the fundamental laws above enumerated, and as every apparently impossible combination of symbols has been interpreted it looks like the complete form of algebra. In chapter 6 he introduced hyperbolic functions and discussed the connection of common and hyperbolic trigonometry. If the above theory is true, the next stage of development ought to be triple algebra and if  truly represents a line in a given plane, it ought to be possible to find a third term which added to the above would represent a line in space. Argand and some others guessed that it was  although this contradicts the truth established by Euler that . De Morgan and many others worked hard at the problem, but nothing came of it until the problem was taken up by Hamilton. We now see the reason clearly: The symbol of double algebra denotes not a length and a direction; but a multiplier and an angle. In it the angles are confined to one plane. Hence the next stage will be a quadruple algebra, when the axis of the plane is made variable. And this gives the answer to the first question; double algebra is nothing but analytical plane trigonometry, and this is why it has been found to be the natural analysis for alternating currents. But De Morgan never got this far. He died with the belief "that double algebra must remain as the full development of the conceptions of arithmetic, so far as those symbols are concerned which arithmetic immediately suggests". In Book II, Chapter II, following the above quoted passage about the theory of symbolic algebra, De Morgan proceeds to give an inventory of the fundamental symbols of algebra, and also an inventory of the laws of algebra. The symbols are , , , , , , (), and letters; these only, all others are derived. As De Morgan explains, the last of these symbols represents writing a latter expression in superscript over and after a former. His inventory of the fundamental laws is expressed under fourteen heads, but some of them are merely definitions. The preceding list of symbols is the matter under the first of these heads. The laws proper may be reduced to the following, which, as he admits, are not all independent of one another, "but the unsymmetrical character of the exponential operation, and the want of the connecting process of  and  ... renders it necessary to state them separately": Identity laws.          Law of signs.         Commutative law.   Distributive law.     Index laws.      De Morgan professes to give a complete inventory of the laws which the symbols of algebra must obey, for he says, "Any system of symbols which obeys these rules and no others—except they be formed by combination of these rules—and which uses the preceding symbols and no others—except they be new symbols invented in abbreviation of combinations of these symbols—is symbolic algebra." From his point of view, none of the above principles are rules; they are formal laws, that is, arbitrarily chosen relations to which the algebraic symbols must be subject. He does not mention the law, which had already been pointed out by Gregory, namely,  and to which was afterwards given the name Law of association. If the commutative law fails, the associative may hold good; but not vice versa. It is an unfortunate thing for the symbolist or formalist that in universal arithmetic  is not equal to ; for then the commutative law would have full scope. Why does he not give it full scope? Because the foundations of algebra are, after all, real not formal, material not symbolic. To the formalists the index operations are exceedingly refractory, in consequence of which some take no account of them, but relegate them to applied mathematics. To give an inventory of the laws which the symbols of algebra must obey is an impossible task, and reminds one not a little of the task of those philosophers who attempt to give an inventory of the a priori knowledge of the mind.   === Formal Logic === When the study of mathematics revived at the University of Cambridge, so did the study of logic. The moving spirit was Whewell, the Master of Trinity College, whose principal writings were a History of the Inductive Sciences, and Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. Doubtless De Morgan was influenced in his logical investigations by Whewell; but other influential contemporaries were Sir William Rowan Hamilton of Dublin, and Professor Boole of Cork. De Morgan's work on Formal Logic, published in 1847, is principally remarkable for his development of the numerically definite syllogism. The followers of Aristotle say that from two particular propositions such as Some M's are A's , and Some M's are B's nothing follows of necessity about the relation of the A's and B's. But they go further and say in order that any relation about the A's and B's may follow of necessity, the middle term must be taken universally in one of the premises. De Morgan pointed out that from Most M's are A's and Most M's are B's it follows of necessity that some A's are B's and he formulated the numerically definite syllogism which puts this principle in exact quantitative form. Suppose that the number of the M's is , of the M's that are A's is , and of the M's that are B's is ; then there are at least  A's that are B's. Suppose that the number of souls on board a steamer was 1000, that 500 were in the saloon, and 700 were lost. It follows of necessity, that at least 700 + 500 - 1000, that is, 200, saloon passengers were lost. This single principle suffices to prove the validity of all the Aristotelian moods. It is therefore a fundamental principle in necessary reasoning. Here then De Morgan had made a great advance by introducing quantification of the terms. At that time Sir William Hamilton was teaching in Edinburgh a doctrine of the quantification of the predicate, and a correspondence sprang up. However, De Morgan soon perceived that Hamilton's quantification was of a different character; that it meant for example, substituting the two forms The whole of A is the whole of B, and The whole of A is a part of B for the Aristotelian form All A's are B's. Hamilton thought that he had placed the keystone in the Aristotelian arch, as he phrased it. Although it must have been a curious arch which could stand 2000 years without a keystone. As a consequence he had no room for De Morgan's innovations. He accused De Morgan of plagiarism, and the controversy raged for years in the columns of the Athenæum, and in the publications of the two writers. The memoirs on logic which De Morgan contributed to the Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society subsequent to the publication of his book on Formal Logic are by far the most important contributions which he made to the science, especially his fourth memoir, in which he begins work in the broad field of the logic of relatives. This is the true field for the logician of the twentieth century, in which work of the greatest importance is to be done towards improving language and facilitating thinking processes which occur all the time in practical life. Identity and difference are the two relations which have been considered by the logician; but there are many others equally deserving of study, such as equality, equivalence, consanguinity, affinity, etc.   === Budget of Paradoxes === In the introduction to the Budget of Paradoxes De Morgan explains what he means by the word. A great many individuals, ever since the rise of the mathematical method, have, each for himself, attacked its direct and indirect consequences. I shall call each of these persons a paradoxer, and his system a paradox. I use the word in the old sense: a paradox is something which is apart from general opinion, either in subject matter, method, or conclusion. Many of the things brought forward would now be called crotchets, which is the nearest word we have to old paradox. But there is this difference, that by calling a thing a crotchet we mean to speak lightly of it; which was not the necessary sense of paradox. Thus in the 16th century many spoke of the earth's motion as the paradox of Copernicus and held the ingenuity of that theory in very high esteem, and some I think who even inclined towards it. In the seventeenth century the deprivation of meaning took place, in England at least. How can the sound paradoxer be distinguished from the false paradoxer? De Morgan supplies the following test: The manner in which a paradoxer will show himself, as to sense or nonsense, will not depend upon what he maintains, but upon whether he has or has not made a sufficient knowledge of what has been done by others, especially as to the mode of doing it, a preliminary to inventing knowledge for himself... New knowledge, when to any purpose, must come by contemplation of old knowledge, in every matter which concerns thought; mechanical contrivance sometimes, not very often, escapes this rule. All the men who are now called discoverers, in every matter ruled by thought, have been men versed in the minds of their predecessors and learned in what had been before them. There is not one exception. I remember that just before the American Association met at Indianapolis in 1890, the local newspapers heralded a great discovery which was to be laid before the assembled savants — a young man living somewhere in the country had squared the circle. While the meeting was in progress I observed a young man going about with a roll of paper in his hand. He spoke to me, and complained that the paper containing his discovery had not been received. I asked him whether his object in presenting the paper was not to get it read, printed, and published so that everyone might inform himself of the result; to all of which he assented readily. But, said I, many men have worked at this question, and their results have been tested fully, and they are printed for the benefit of anyone who can read; have you informed yourself of their results? To this there was no assent, but the sickly smile of the false paradoxer. The Budget consists of a review of a large collection of paradoxical books which De Morgan had accumulated in his own library, partly by purchase at bookstands, partly from books sent to him for review, partly from books sent to him by the authors. He gives the following classification: squarers of the circle, trisectors of the angle, duplicators of the cube, constructors of perpetual motion, subverters of gravitation, stagnators of the earth, builders of the universe. You will still find specimens of all these classes in the New World and in the new century. De Morgan gives his personal knowledge of paradoxers. I suspect that I know more of the English class than any man in Britain. I never kept any reckoning: but I know that one year with another? — and less of late years than in earlier time? — I have talked to more than five in each year, giving more than a hundred and fifty specimens. Of this I am sure, that it is my own fault if they have not been a thousand. Nobody knows how they swarm, except those to whom they naturally resort. They are in all ranks and occupations, of all ages and characters. They are very earnest people, and their purpose is bona fide, the dissemination of their paradoxes. A great many — the mass, indeed — are illiterate, and a great many waste their means, and are in or approaching penury. These discoverers despise one another. A paradoxer to whom De Morgan paid the compliment which Achilles paid Hector — to drag him round the walls again and again — was James Smith, a successful merchant of Liverpool. He found . His mode of reasoning was a curious caricature of the reductio ad absurdum of Euclid. He said let , and then showed that on that supposition, every other value of  must be absurd. Consequently  is the true value. The following is a specimen of De Morgan's dragging round the walls of Troy:  Mr. Smith continues to write me long letters, to which he hints that I am to answer. In his last of 31 closely written sides of note paper, he informs me, with reference to my obstinate silence, that though I think myself and am thought by others to be a mathematical Goliath, I have resolved to play the mathematical snail, and keep within my shell. A mathematical snail! This cannot be the thing so called which regulates the striking of a clock; for it would mean that I am to make Mr. Smith sound the true time of day, which I would by no means undertake upon a clock that gains 19 seconds odd in every hour by false quadrative value of . But he ventures to tell me that pebbles from the sling of simple truth and common sense will ultimately crack my shell, and put me hors de combat. The confusion of images is amusing: Goliath turning himself into a snail to avoid  and James Smith, Esq., of the Mersey Dock Board: and put hors de combat by pebbles from a sling. If Goliath had crept into a snail shell, David would have cracked the Philistine with his foot. There is something like modesty in the implication that the crack-shell pebble has not yet taken effect; it might have been thought that the slinger would by this time have been singing — And thrice [and one-eighth] I routed all my foes, And thrice [and one-eighth] I slew the slain.  In the region of pure mathematics, De Morgan could detect easily the false from the true paradox; but he was not so proficient in the field of physics. His father-in-law was a paradoxer, and his wife a paradoxer; and in the opinion of the physical philosophers De Morgan himself scarcely escaped. His wife wrote a book describing the phenomena of spiritualism, table-rapping, table-turning, etc.; and De Morgan wrote a preface in which he said that he knew some of the asserted facts, believed others on testimony, but did not pretend to know whether they were caused by spirits, or had some unknown and unimagined origin. From this alternative he left out ordinary material causes. Faraday delivered a lecture on Spiritualism, in which he laid it down that in the investigation we ought to set out with the idea of what is physically possible, or impossible; De Morgan did not believe this.   === Relations === De Morgan discovered relation algebra in his Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic (1966: 208-46), first published in 1860. This algebra was extended by Charles Sanders Peirce (who admired De Morgan and met him shortly before his death), and re-exposited and further extended in vol. 3 of Ernst Schröder's Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik. Relation algebra proved critical to the Principia Mathematica of Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead. In turn, this algebra became the subject of much further work, starting in 1940, by Alfred Tarski and his colleagues and students at the University of California.   == Spiritualism == De Morgan later in his life became interested in the phenomena of Spiritualism. In 1849 he had investigated clairvoyance and was impressed by the subject. He later carried out paranormal investigations in his own home with the medium Maria Hayden. The result of these investigations was later published by his wife Sophia. De Morgan believed that his career as a scientist might have been affected if he had revealed his interest in the study of spiritualism so he helped to publish the book anonymously. The book was published in 1863 titled From Matter to Spirit: The Result of Ten Years Experience in Spirit Manifestations. According to (Oppenheim, 1988) De Morgan's wife Sophia was a convinced spiritualist but De Morgan shared a third way position on spiritualist phenomena which Oppenheim defined as a "wait-and-see position", he was neither a believer nor a skeptic, instead his viewpoint was that the methodology of the physical sciences does not automatically exclude psychic phenomena and that such phenomena may be explainable in time by the possible existence of natural forces which as yet physicists had not identified. In the preface of From Matter to Spirit (1863) De Morgan stated:  Thinking it very likely that the universe may contain a few agencies—say half a million—about which no man knows anything, I can not but suspect that a small proportion of these agencies—say five thousand—may be severally competent to the production of all the [spiritualist] phenomena, or may be quite up to the task among them. The physical explanations which I have seen are easy, but miserably insufficient: the spiritualist hypothesis is sufficient, but ponderously difficult. Time and thought will decide, the second asking the first for more results of trial.  In Parapsychology: A Concise History (1997), John Beloff wrote that De Morgan was the first notable scientist in Britain to take an interest in the study of spiritualism and his studies had influenced the decision of William Crookes to also study spiritualism. He also claims that De Morgan was an atheist and that this debarred him from a position at Oxford or Cambridge.   == Legacy == Beyond his great mathematical legacy, the headquarters of the London Mathematical Society is called De Morgan House and the student society of the Mathematics Department of University College London is called the August De Morgan Society. The crater De Morgan on the Moon is named after him.   == Selected writings == 1836. An Explanation of the Gnomonic Projection of the Sphere. London: Baldwin. 1837. Elements of Trigonometry, and Trigonometrical Analysis. London: Taylor & Walton. 1837. The Elements of Algebra. London: Taylor & Walton. 1838. An Essay on Probabilities. London: Longman, Orme, Brown, Green & Longmans. 1840. The Elements of Arithmetic. London: Taylor & Walton. 1840. First Notions of Logic, Preparatory to the Study of Geometry. London: Taylor & Walton. 1842. The Differential and Integral Calculus. London: Baldwin. 1845. The Globes, Celestial and Terrestrial. London: Malby & Co. 1847. Formal Logic or The Calculus of Inference. London: Taylor & Walton. 1849. Trigonometry and Double Algebra. London: Taylor, Walton & Malbery. 1860. Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic. London: Walton & Malbery. 1872. A Budget of Paradoxes. London: Longmans, Green.   == See also == Murphy's law   == Notes and references ==   == Further reading == De Morgan, A., 1966. Logic: On the Syllogism and Other Logical Writings. Heath, P., ed. Routledge. A useful collection of De Morgan's most important writings on logic. De Morgan, Sophia Elizabeth (1882). Memoir of Augustus De Morgan. London: Longmans, Green and Company.  Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (2000). The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton University Press.  Macfarlane, Alexander (1916). Lectures on Ten British Mathematicians of the Nineteenth Century (PDF). New York: John Wiley and Sons.  Merrill, Daniel D. (1990). Augustus De Morgan and the Logic of Relations. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.    == External links == Works by Augustus De Morgan at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Augustus De Morgan at Internet Archive Works by Augustus De Morgan at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Augustus De Morgan", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Papers of Augustus De Morgan held by Senate House Library, University of London Library of Augustus De Morgan Archival material relating to Augustus De Morgan listed at the UK National Archives Portraits of Augustus De Morgan at the National Portrait Gallery, London

This is a redirect from a page name that does not have diacritical marks (accents, umlauts, etc.) to essentially the same page name with diacritical marks. For more information follow the bold category link. Apply this redirect (without piping) when the subject page concerns language translation or foreign language equivalents. Other pages that use this redirect should be updated with a direct link to the redirect target (again, without piping).

Bernhard Placidus Johann Nepomuk Bolzano (Bernard Bolzano in English; 5 October 1781 – 18 December 1848) was a Bohemian mathematician, logician, philosopher, theologian and Catholic priest of Italian extraction, also known for his antimilitarist views. Bolzano wrote in German, his mother tongue. For the most part, his work came to prominence posthumously.   == FamilyEdit == Bolzano was the son of two pious Catholics. His father, Bernard Pompeius Bolzano, was an Italian who had moved to Prague, where he married Maria Cecilia Maurer, daughter of an Italian merchant who had likewise moved to Prague. Only two of their twelve children lived to adulthood.   == CareerEdit == Bolzano entered the University of Prague in 1796 and studied mathematics, philosophy and physics. Starting in 1800, he also began studying theology, becoming a Catholic priest in 1804. He was appointed to the then newly created chair of philosophy of religion at Prague University in 1805. He proved to be a popular lecturer not just in religion but also in philosophy, and was elected Dean of the Philosophical Faculty in 1818. Bolzano alienated many faculty and church leaders with his teachings of the social waste of militarism and the needlessness of war. He urged a total reform of the educational, social, and economic systems that would direct the nation's interests toward peace rather than toward armed conflict between nations. Upon his refusal to recant his beliefs, Bolzano was dismissed from the university in 1819. His political convictions (which he was inclined to share with others with some frequency) eventually proved to be too liberal for the Austrian authorities. He was exiled to the countryside and at that point devoted his energies to his writings on social, religious, philosophical, and mathematical matters. Although forbidden to publish in mainstream journals as a condition of his exile, Bolzano continued to develop his ideas and publish them either on his own or in obscure Eastern European journals. In 1842 he moved back to Prague, where he died in 1848.   == WorksEdit == Bolzano's posthumously published work Paradoxien des Unendlichen (The Paradoxes of the Infinite) (1851) was greatly admired by many of the eminent logicians who came after him, including Charles Sanders Peirce, Georg Cantor, and Richard Dedekind. Bolzano's main claim to fame, however, is his 1837 Wissenschaftslehre (Theory of Science), a work in four volumes that covered not only philosophy of science in the modern sense but also logic, epistemology and scientific pedagogy. The logical theory that Bolzano developed in this work has come to be acknowledged as ground-breaking. Other works are a four-volume Lehrbuch der Religionswissenschaft (Textbook of the Science of Religion) and the metaphysical work Athanasia, a defense of the immortality of the soul. Bolzano also did valuable work in mathematics, which remained virtually unknown until Otto Stolz rediscovered many of his lost journal articles and republished them in 1881.   == Wissenschaftslehre (Theory of Science)Edit == In his 1837 Wissenschaftslehre Bolzano attempted to provide logical foundations for all sciences, building on abstractions like part-relation, abstract objects, attributes, sentence-shapes, ideas and propositions in themselves, sums and sets, collections, substances, adherences, subjective ideas, judgments, and sentence-occurrences. These attempts were basically an extension of his earlier thoughts in the philosophy of mathematics, for example his 1810 Beiträge where he emphasized the distinction between the objective relationship between logical consequences and our subjective recognition of these connections. For Bolzano, it was not enough that we merely have confirmation of natural or mathematical truths, but rather it was the proper role of the sciences (both pure and applied) to seek out justification in terms of the fundamental truths that may or may not appear to be obvious to our intuitions.   === Introduction to WissenschaftslehreEdit === Bolzano begins his work by explaining what he means by theory of science, and the relation between our knowledge, truths and sciences. Human knowledge, he states, is made of all truths (or true propositions) that men know or have known. This is, however, only a very small fraction of all the truths that are out there, although still too much for one human being to comprehend. Therefore, our knowledge is divided into more accessible parts. Such a collection of truths is what Bolzano calls a science (Wissenschaft). It is important to note that not all true propositions of a science have to be known to men; hence, this is how we can make discoveries in a science. To better understand and comprehend the truths of a science, men have created textbooks (Lehrbuch), which of course contain only the true propositions of the science known to men. But how to know where to divide our knowledge, that is, which truths belong together? Bolzano explains that we will ultimately know this through some reflection, but that the resulting rules of how to divide our knowledge into sciences will be a science in itself. This science, that tells us which truths belong together and should be explained in a textbook, is the Theory of Science (Wissenschaftslehre).   === MetaphysicsEdit === In the Wissenschaftslehre, Bolzano is mainly concerned with three realms: (1) The realm of language, consisting in words and sentences. (2) The realm of thought, consisting in subjective ideas and judgements. (3) The realm of logic, consisting in objective ideas (or ideas in themselves) and propositions in themselves. Bolzano devotes a great part of the Wissenschaftslehre to an explanation of these realms and their relations. Two distinctions play a prominent role in his system. Firstly, the distinction between parts and wholes. For instance, words are parts of sentences, subjective ideas are parts of judgments, objective ideas are parts of propositions in themselves. Secondly, all objects divide into those that exist, which means that they are causally connected and located in time and/or space, and those that do not exist. Bolzano's original claim is that the logical realm is populated by objects of the latter kind.   === Satz an Sich (proposition in itself)Edit === Satz an Sich is a basic notion in Bolzano's Wissenschaftslehre. It is introduced at the very beginning, in section 19. Bolzano first introduces the notions of proposition (spoken or written or thought or in itself) and idea (spoken or written or thought or in itself). "The grass is green" is a proposition (Satz): in this connection of words, something is said or asserted. "Grass", however, is only an idea (Vorstellung). Something is represented by it, but it does not assert anything. Bolzano's notion of proposition is fairly broad: "A rectangle is round" is a proposition - even though it is false by virtue of self-contradiction - because it is composed in an intelligible manner out of intelligible parts. Bolzano does not give a complete definition of a Satz an Sich (i.e. proposition in itself) but he gives us just enough information to understand what he means by it. A proposition in itself (i) has no existence (that is: it has no position in time or place), (ii) is either true or false, independent of anyone knowing or thinking that it is true or false, and (iii) is what is 'grasped' by thinking beings. So a written sentence ('Socrates has wisdom') grasps a proposition in itself, namely the proposition [Socrates has wisdom]. The written sentence does have existence (it has a certain location at a certain time, say it is on your computer screen at this very moment) and expresses the proposition in itself which is in the realm of in itself (i.e. an sich). (Bolzano's use of the term an sich differs greatly from that of Kant; for Kant's use of the term see an sich.)   Every proposition in itself is composed out of ideas in themselves (for simplicity, we will use proposition to mean "proposition in itself" and idea to refer to an objective idea or idea in itself. Ideas are negatively defined as those parts of a proposition that are themselves not propositions. A proposition consists of at least three ideas, namely: a subject idea, a predicate idea and the copula (i.e. 'has', or another form of to have). (Though there are propositions which contain propositions, but we won't take them into consideration right now.) Bolzano identifies certain types of ideas. There are simple ideas that have no parts (as an example Bolzano uses [something]), but there are also complex ideas that consist of other ideas (Bolzano uses the example of [nothing], which consists of the ideas [not] and [something]). Complex ideas can have the same content (i.e. the same parts) without being the same - because their components are differently connected. The idea [A black pen with blue ink] is different from the idea [A blue pen with black ink] though the parts of both ideas are the same.    === Ideas and objectsEdit === It is important to understand that an idea does not need to have an object. Bolzano uses object to denote something that is represented by an idea. An idea that has an object, represents that object. But an idea that does not have an object represents nothing. (Don't get confused here by terminology: an objectless idea is an idea without a representation.) Let's consider, for further explanation, an example used by Bolzano. The idea [a round square], does not have an object, because the object that ought to be represented is self-contrary. A different example is the idea [nothing] which certainly does not have an object. However, the proposition [the idea of a round square has complexity] has as its subject-idea [the idea of a round square]. This subject-idea does have an object, namely the idea [a round square]. But, that idea does not have an object. Besides objectless ideas, there are ideas that have only one object, e.g. the idea [the first man on the moon] represents only one object. Bolzano calls these ideas 'singular ideas'. Obviously there are also ideas that have many objects (e.g. [the citizens of Amsterdam]) and even infinitely many objects (e.g. [a prime number]).   === Sensation and simple ideasEdit === Bolzano has a complex theory of how we are able to sense things. He explains sensation by means of the term intuition, in German called Anschauung. An intuition is a simple idea, it has only one object (Einzelvorstellung), but besides that, it is also unique (Bolzano needs this to explain sensation). Intuitions (Anschauungen) are objective ideas, they belong to the an sich realm, which means that they don’t have existence. As said, Bolzano’s argumentation for intuitions is by an explanation of sensation. What happens when you sense a real existing object, for instance a rose, is this: the different aspects of the rose, like its scent and its color, cause in you a change. That change means that before and after sensing the rose, your mind is in a different state. So sensation is in fact a change in your mental state. How is this related to objects and ideas? Bolzano explains that this change, in your mind, is essentially a simple idea (Vorstellung), like, ‘this smell’ (of this particular rose). This idea represents; it has as its object the change. Besides being simple, this change must also be unique. This is because literally you can’t have the same experience twice, nor can two people, who smell the same rose at the same time, have exactly the same experience of that smell (although they will be quite alike). So each single sensation causes a single (new) unique and simple idea with a particular change as its object. Now, this idea in your mind is a subjective idea, meaning that it is in you at a particular time. It has existence. But this subjective idea must correspond to, or has as a content, an objective idea. This is where Bolzano brings in intuitions (Anschauungen); they are the simple, unique and objective ideas that correspond to our subjective ideas of changes caused by sensation. So for each single possible sensation, there is a corresponding objective idea. Schematically the whole process is like this: whenever you smell a rose, its scent causes a change in you. This change is the object of your subjective idea of that particular smell. That subjective idea corresponds to the intuition or Anschauung.   === LogicEdit === According to Bolzano, all propositions are composed out of three (simple or complex) elements: a subject, a predicate and a copula. Instead of the more traditional copulative term 'is', Bolzano prefers 'has'. The reason for this is that 'has', unlike 'is', can connect a concrete term, such as 'Socrates', to an abstract term such as 'baldness'. "Socrates has baldness" is, according to Bolzano, preferable to "Socrates is bald" because the latter form is less basic: 'bald' is itself composed of the elements 'something', 'that', 'has' and 'baldness'. Bolzano also reduces existential propositions to this form: "Socrates exists" would simply become "Socrates has existence (Dasein)". A major role in Bolzano’s logical theory is played by the notion of variations: various logical relations are defined in terms of the changes in truth value that propositions incur when their non-logical parts are replaced by others. Logically analytical propositions, for instance, are those in which all the non-logical parts can be replaced without change of truth value. Two propositions are 'compatible' (verträglich) with respect to one of their component parts x if there is at least one term that can be inserted that would make both true. A proposition Q is 'deducible' (ableitbar) from a proposition P, with respect to certain of their non-logical parts, if any replacement of those parts that makes P true also makes Q true. If a proposition is deducible from another with respect to all its non-logical parts, it is said to be 'logically deducible'. Besides the relation of deducibility, Bolzano also has a stricter relation of 'consequentiality' (Abfolge). This is an asymmetric relation that obtains between true propositions, when one of the propositions is not only deducible from, but also explained by the other.   === TruthEdit === Bolzano distinguishes five meanings the words true and truth have in common usage, all of which Bolzano takes to be unproblematic. The meanings are listed in order of properness: I. Abstract objective meaning: Truth signifies an attribute that may apply to a proposition, primarily to a proposition in itself, namely the attribute on the basis of which the proposition expresses something that in reality is as is expressed. Antonyms: falsity, falseness, falsehood. II. Concrete objective meaning: (a) Truth signifies a proposition that has the attribute truth in the abstract objective meaning. Antonym: (a) falsehood. III. Subjective meaning: (a) Truth signifies a correct judgment. Antonym: (a) mistake. IV. Collective meaning: Truth signifies a body or multiplicity true propositions or judgments (e.g. the biblical truth). V. Improper meaning: True signifies that some object is in reality what some denomination states it to be. (e.g. the true God). Antonyms: false, unreal, illusory. Bolzano's primary concern is with the concrete objective meaning: with concrete objective truths or truths in themselves. All truths in themselves are a kind of propositions in themselves. They do not exist, i.e. they are not spatiotemporally located as thought and spoken propositions are. However, certain propositions have the attribute of being a truth in itself. Being a thought proposition is not a part of the concept of a truth in itself, notwithstanding the fact that, given God’s omniscience, all truths in themselves are also thought truths. The concepts ‘truth in itself’ and ‘thought truth’ are interchangeable, as they apply to the same objects, but they are not identical. Bolzano offers as the correct definition of (abstract objective) truth: a proposition is true if it expresses something that applies to its object. The correct definition of a (concrete objective) truth must thus be: a truth is a proposition that expresses something that applies to its object. This definition applies to truths in themselves, rather than to thought or known truths, as none of the concepts figuring in this definition are subordinate to a concept of something mental or known. Bolzano proves in §§31-32 of his Wissenschaftslehre three things: A There is at least one truth in itself (concrete objective meaning): 1. There are no true propositions (assumption) 2. 1. is a proposition (obvious) 3. 1. is true (assumed) and false (because of 1.) 4. 1. is self-contradictory (because of 3.) 5. 1. is false (because of 4.) 6. There is at least one true proposition (because of 1. and 5.) B. There is more than one truth in itself: 7. There is only one truth in itself, namely A is B (assumption) 8. A is B is a truth in itself (because of 7.) 9. There are no other truths in themselves apart from A is B (because of 7.) 10. 9. is a true proposition/ a truth in itself (because of 7.) 11. There are two truths in themselves (because of 8. and 10.) 12. There is more than one truth in itself (because of 11.) C. There are infinitely many truths in themselves: 13. There are only n truths in themselves, namely A is B .... Y is Z (assumption) 14. A is B .... Y is Z are n truths in themselves (because of 13.) 15. There are no other truths apart from A is B .... Y is Z (because of 13.) 16. 15. is a true proposition/ a truth in itself (because of 13.) 17. There are n+1 truths in themselves (because of 14. and 16.) 18. Steps 1 to 5 can be repeated for n+1, which results in n+2 truths and so on endlessly (because n is a variable) 19. There are infinitely many truths in themselves (because of 18.)   === Judgments and cognitionsEdit === A known truth has as its parts (Bestandteile) a truth in itself and a judgment (Bolzano, Wissenschaftslehre §26). A judgment is a thought which states a true proposition. In judging (at least when the matter of the judgment is a true proposition), the idea of an object is being connected in a certain way with the idea of a characteristic (§ 23). In true judgments, the relation between the idea of the object and the idea of the characteristic is an actual/existent relation (§28). Every judgment has as its matter a proposition, which is either true or false. Every judgment exists, but not ‘für sich’. Judgments, namely, in contrast with propositions in themselves, are dependent on subjective mental activity. Not every mental activity, though, has to be a judgment; recall that all judgments have as matter propositions, and hence all judgments need to be either true or false. Mere presentations or thoughts are examples of mental activities which do not necessarily need to be stated (behaupten), and so are not judgments (§ 34). Judgments that have as its matter true propositions can be called cognitions (§36). Cognitions are also dependent on the subject, and so, opposed to truths in themselves, cognitions do permit degrees; a proposition can be more or less known, but it cannot be more or less true. Every cognition implies necessarily a judgment, but not every judgment is necessarily cognition, because there are also judgments that are not true. Bolzano maintains that there are no such things as false cognitions, only false judgments (§34).   == MathematicsEdit == Bolzano made several original contributions to mathematics. His overall philosophical stance was that, contrary to much of the prevailing mathematics of the era, it was better not to introduce intuitive ideas such as time and motion into mathematics (Boyer 1959, pp. 268–269). To this end, he was one of the earliest mathematicians to begin instilling rigor into mathematical analysis with his three chief mathematical works Beyträge zu einer begründeteren Darstellung der Mathematik (1810), Der binomische Lehrsatz (1816) and Rein analytischer Beweis (1817). These works presented "...a sample of a new way of developing analysis", whose ultimate goal would not be realized until some fifty years later when they came to the attention of Karl Weierstrass (O'Connor & Robertson 2006). To the foundations of mathematical analysis he contributed the introduction of a fully rigorous ε-δ definition of a mathematical limit. Bolzano, like several others of his day, was skeptical of the possibility of Gottfried Leibniz's infinitesimals, that had been the earliest putative foundation for differential calculus. Bolzano's notion of a limit was similar to the modern one: that a limit, rather than being a relation among infinitesimals, must instead be cast in terms of how the dependent variable approaches a definite quantity as the independent variable approaches some other definite quantity. Bolzano also gave the first purely analytic proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra, which had originally been proven by Gauss from geometrical considerations. He also gave the first purely analytic proof of the intermediate value theorem (also known as Bolzano's theorem). Today he is mostly remembered for the Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, which Karl Weierstrass developed independently and published years after Bolzano's first proof and which was initially called the Weierstrass theorem until Bolzano's earlier work was rediscovered (Boyer & Merzbach 1991, p. 561).   == Philosophical legacyEdit == The effect of his thought on philosophy initially seemed destined to be slight; his work was rediscovered, however, by Edmund Husserl and Kazimierz Twardowski, both students of Franz Brentano. Through them, Bolzano became a formative influence on both phenomenology and analytic philosophy.   == WritingsEdit == Gesamtausgabe (Collected Works) Critical edition edited by Eduard Winter, Jan Berg, Friedrich Kambartel, Bob van Rootselaar, Stuttgart:Fromman-Holzboog, 1969 ss. (89 volls. published) Wissenschaftslehre, 4 voll., 2nd rev. ed. by W. Schultz, Leipzig I-II 1929, III 1980, IV 1931; Critical edition edited by Jan Berg: Bolzano's Gesamtausgabe, voll. 11-14 (1985–2000). Bernard Bolzano's Grundlegung der Logik. Ausgewählte Paragraphen aus der Wissenschaftslehre, Vol. 1 and 2, with supplementary text summaries, an introduction and indices, edited by F. Kambartel, Hamburg, 1963, 1978². Bolzano, Bernard (1810), Beyträge zu einer begründeteren Darstellung der Mathematik. Erste Lieferung  (Contributions to a better grounded presentation of mathematics; Ewald 1996, pp. 174–224 and The Mathematical Works of Bernard Bolzano, 2004, pp. 83–137). Bolzano, Bernard (1817), Rein analytischer Beweis des Lehrsatzes, dass zwischen je zwey Werthen, die ein entgegengesetzes Resultat gewähren, wenigstens eine reele Wurzel der Gleichung liege, Wilhelm Engelmann  (Purely analytic proof of the theorem that between any two values which give results of opposite sign, there lies at least one real root of the equation; Ewald 1996, pp. 225–48. Franz Prihonsky (1850) Der Neue Anti-Kant, Bautzen (an assessment of the Critique of Pure Reason by Bolzano, published posthumously by his friend F. Prihonsky).*Bolzano, Bernard (1851), Paradoxien des Unendlichen, C.H. Reclam  (Paradoxes of the Infinite; Ewald 1996, pp. 249–92 (excerpt)).   === Translations and compilationsEdit === Theory of Science, (Selection edited and translated by Rolf George, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1972). Theory of Science, (Selection edited, with an introduction, by Jan Berg. Translated from the German by Burnham Terrell, Dordrecht and Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1973). Theory of Science, First complete English translation in four volumes by Rolf George and Paul Rusnock, New York: Oxford University Press, 2014. The Mathematical Works of Bernard Bolzano, translated and edited by Steve Russ, New York: Oxford University Press, 2004. On the Mathematical Method and Correspondence with Exner, translated by Rolf George and Paul Rusnock, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2004. Selected Writings on Ethics and Politics, translated by Rolf George and Paul Rusnock, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2007. Franz Prihonsky, The New Anti-Kant, Edited by Sandra Lapointe and Clinton Tolley, New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.   == Named after BolzanoEdit == Bolzano's theorem, or "Intermediate value theorem", a theorem in mathematical analysis Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, a theorem concerning sequences in real analysis   == See alsoEdit == List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Boyer, Carl B. (1959), The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual Development, New York: Dover Publications, MR 0124178 . Boyer, Carl B.; Merzbach, Uta C. (1991), A History of Mathematics, New York: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-471-54397-8 . Ewald, William B., ed. (1996), From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 volumes, Oxford University Press . Künne, Wolfgang (1998), "Bolzano, Bernard", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy 1, London: Routledge, pp. 823–827 . Retrieved on 2007-03-05 Kamila, Veverková Kleinere Schriften des deutschen Lehrers und Priester Anton Krombholz (1790-1869). In Homiletisch – Liturgisches Korrespondenzblatt – Neue Folge. Nr 107, Jg 28/2011, str. 758-782. ISSN 0724-7680. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F. (2005), "Bolzano", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive .   == External linksEdit == Bernard Bolzano entry by Edgar Morscher in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bolzano's Logic entry by Jan Sebestik in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bolzano’s Philosophy of Mathematical Knowledge entry by Sandra Lapointe in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Philosophy of Bernard Bolzano: Logic and Ontology Bernard Bolzano: English Translations and Selected Texts Annotated Bibliography on the Philosophical Work of Bolzano (First Part: A - C) Annotated Bibliography on the Philosophical Work of Bolzano (Second Part: D - L) Annotated Bibliography on the Philosophical Work of Bolzano (Third Part: M - Z) Bernard Bolzano at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Works by or about Bernard Bolzano at Internet Archive Digitized Bolzano's works Volume 3 of Wissenschaftslehre in Gallica Volume 4 of Wissenschaftslehre in Gallica

Bertrand Arthur William Russell, 3rd Earl Russell OM FRS (/ˈrʌsəl/; 18 May 1872 – 2 February 1970) was a British philosopher, logician, mathematician, historian, writer, social critic and political activist. At various points in his life he considered himself a liberal, a socialist, and a pacifist, but he also admitted that he had never been any of these in any profound sense. He was born in Monmouthshire into one of the most prominent aristocratic families in Britain. In the early 20th century, Russell led the British "revolt against idealism". He is considered one of the founders of analytic philosophy along with his predecessor Gottlob Frege, colleague G. E. Moore, and his protégé Ludwig Wittgenstein. He is widely held to be one of the 20th century's premier logicians. With A. N. Whitehead he wrote Principia Mathematica, an attempt to create a logical basis for mathematics. His philosophical essay "On Denoting" has been considered a "paradigm of philosophy". His work has had a considerable influence on logic, mathematics, set theory, linguistics, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computer science (see type theory and type system), and philosophy, especially the philosophy of language, epistemology, and metaphysics. Russell was a prominent anti-war activist; he championed anti-imperialism and went to prison for his pacifism during World War I. Later, he campaigned against Adolf Hitler, then criticised Stalinist totalitarianism, attacked the involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War, and was an outspoken proponent of nuclear disarmament. In 1950 Russell was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature "in recognition of his varied and significant writings in which he champions humanitarian ideals and freedom of thought".   == Biography ==   === Early life and background ===  Bertrand Russell was born on the 18th of May, 1872 at Ravenscroft, Trellech, Monmouthshire, into an influential and liberal family of the British aristocracy. His parents, Viscount and Viscountess Amberley, were radical for their times. Lord Amberley consented to his wife's affair with their children's tutor, the biologist Douglas Spalding. Both were early advocates of birth control at a time when this was considered scandalous. Lord Amberley was an atheist and his atheism was evident when he asked the philosopher John Stuart Mill to act as Russell's secular godfather. Mill died the year after Russell's birth, but his writings had a great effect on Russell's life. His paternal grandfather, the Earl Russell, had been asked twice by Queen Victoria to form a government, serving her as Prime Minister in the 1840s and 1860s. The Russells had been prominent in England for several centuries before this, coming to power and the peerage with the rise of the Tudor dynasty (see: Duke of Bedford). They established themselves as one of Britain's leading Whig families, and participated in every great political event from the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536–40 to the Glorious Revolution in 1688–89 and the Great Reform Act in 1832. Lady Amberley was the daughter of Lord and Lady Stanley of Alderley. Russell often feared the ridicule of his maternal grandmother, one of the campaigners for education of women.   === Childhood and adolescence === Russell had two siblings: brother Frank (nearly seven years older than Bertrand), and sister Rachel (four years older). In June 1874 Russell's mother died of diphtheria, followed shortly by Rachel's death. In January 1876, his father died of bronchitis following a long period of depression. Frank and Bertrand were placed in the care of their staunchly Victorian paternal grandparents, who lived at Pembroke Lodge in Richmond Park. His grandfather, former Prime Minister Earl Russell, died in 1878, and was remembered by Russell as a kindly old man in a wheelchair. His grandmother, the Countess Russell (née Lady Frances Elliot), was the dominant family figure for the rest of Russell's childhood and youth. The countess was from a Scottish Presbyterian family, and successfully petitioned the Court of Chancery to set aside a provision in Amberley's will requiring the children to be raised as agnostics. Despite her religious conservatism, she held progressive views in other areas (accepting Darwinism and supporting Irish Home Rule), and her influence on Bertrand Russell's outlook on social justice and standing up for principle remained with him throughout his life. (One could challenge the view that Bertrand stood up for his principles, based on his own well-known quotation: "I would never die for my beliefs because I might be wrong".) Her favourite Bible verse, 'Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil' (Exodus 23:2), became his motto. The atmosphere at Pembroke Lodge was one of frequent prayer, emotional repression, and formality; Frank reacted to this with open rebellion, but the young Bertrand learned to hide his feelings. Russell's adolescence was very lonely, and he often contemplated suicide. He remarked in his autobiography that his keenest interests were in religion and mathematics, and that only his wish to know more mathematics kept him from suicide. He was educated at home by a series of tutors. At age eleven, his brother Frank introduced him to the work of Euclid, which transformed Russell's life. During these formative years he also discovered the works of Percy Bysshe Shelley. In his autobiography, he writes: "I spent all my spare time reading him, and learning him by heart, knowing no one to whom I could speak of what I thought or felt, I used to reflect how wonderful it would have been to know Shelley, and to wonder whether I should meet any live human being with whom I should feel so much sympathy". Russell claimed that beginning at age 15, he spent considerable time thinking about the validity of Christian religious dogma, which he found very unconvincing. At this age, he came to the conclusion that there is no free will and, two years later, that there is no life after death. Finally, at the age of 18, after reading Mill's "Autobiography", he abandoned the "First Cause" argument and became an atheist.   === University and first marriage === Russell won a scholarship to read for the Mathematical Tripos at Trinity College, Cambridge, and commenced his studies there in 1890, taking as coach Robert Rumsey Webb. He became acquainted with the younger George Edward Moore and came under the influence of Alfred North Whitehead, who recommended him to the Cambridge Apostles. He quickly distinguished himself in mathematics and philosophy, graduating as a high Wrangler in 1893 and becoming a Fellow in the latter in 1895. Russell first met the American Quaker Alys Pearsall Smith when he was 17 years old. He became a friend of the Pearsall Smith family—they knew him primarily as 'Lord John's grandson' and enjoyed showing him off—and travelled with them to the continent; it was in their company that Russell visited the Paris Exhibition of 1889 and was able to climb the Eiffel Tower soon after it was completed. He soon fell in love with the puritanical, high-minded Alys, who was a graduate of Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, and, contrary to his grandmother's wishes, married her on 13 December 1894. Their marriage began to fall apart in 1901 when it occurred to Russell, while he was cycling, that he no longer loved her. She asked him if he loved her and he replied that he didn't. Russell also disliked Alys's mother, finding her controlling and cruel. It was to be a hollow shell of a marriage and they finally divorced in 1921, after a lengthy period of separation. During this period, Russell had passionate (and often simultaneous) affairs with a number of women, including Lady Ottoline Morrell and the actress Lady Constance Malleson.   === Early career ===  Russell began his published work in 1896 with German Social Democracy, a study in politics that was an early indication of a lifelong interest in political and social theory. In 1896 he taught German social democracy at the London School of Economics. He was a member of the Coefficients dining club of social reformers set up in 1902 by the Fabian campaigners Sidney and Beatrice Webb. He now started an intensive study of the foundations of mathematics at Trinity. In 1898 he wrote An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry which discussed the Cayley–Klein metrics used for non-Euclidean geometry. He attended the International Congress of Philosophy in Paris in 1900 where he met Giuseppe Peano and Alessandro Padoa. The Italians had responded to Georg Cantor, making a science of set theory; they gave Russell their literature including the Formulario mathematico. Russell was impressed by the precision of Peano's arguments at the Congress, read the literature upon returning to England, and came upon Russell's paradox. In 1903 he published The Principles of Mathematics, a work on foundations of mathematics. It advanced a thesis of logicism, that mathematics and logic are one and the same. At the age of 29, in February 1901, Russell underwent what he called a "sort of mystic illumination", after witnessing Whitehead's wife's acute suffering in an angina attack. "I found myself filled with semi-mystical feelings about beauty... and with a desire almost as profound as that of the Buddha to find some philosophy which should make human life endurable", Russell would later recall. "At the end of those five minutes, I had become a completely different person." In 1905 he wrote the essay "On Denoting", which was published in the philosophical journal Mind. Russell was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1908. The three-volume Principia Mathematica, written with Whitehead, was published between 1910 and 1913. This, along with the earlier The Principles of Mathematics, soon made Russell world-famous in his field. In 1910 he became a lecturer in the University of Cambridge, where he was approached by the Austrian engineering student Ludwig Wittgenstein, who became his PhD student. Russell viewed Wittgenstein as a genius and a successor who would continue his work on logic. He spent hours dealing with Wittgenstein's various phobias and his frequent bouts of despair. This was often a drain on Russell's energy, but Russell continued to be fascinated by him and encouraged his academic development, including the publication of Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus in 1922. Russell delivered his lectures on Logical Atomism, his version of these ideas, in 1918, before the end of the First World War. Wittgenstein was, at that time, serving in the Austrian Army and subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp at the end of the conflict.   === First World War === During the First World War, Russell was one of the few people to engage in active pacifist activities and in 1916, he was dismissed from Trinity College following his conviction under the Defence of the Realm Act 1914. Russell played a significant part in the Leeds Convention in June 1917, a historic event which saw well over a thousand "anti-war socialists" gather; many being delegates from the Independent Labour Party and the Socialist Party, united in their pacifist beliefs and advocating a peace settlement. The international press reported that Russell appeared with a number of Labour MPs, including Ramsey McDonald and Philip Snowden, as well as former Liberal MP and anti-conscription campaigner, Professor Arnold Lupton. After the event, Russell told Lady Ottoline Morrell that, "to my surprise, when I got up to speak, I was given the greatest ovation that was possible to give anybody". The Trinity incident resulted in Russell being fined £100, which he refused to pay in hopes that he would be sent to prison but his books were sold at auction to raise the money. The books were bought by friends; he later treasured his copy of the King James Bible that was stamped "Confiscated by Cambridge Police". A later conviction for publicly lecturing against inviting the US to enter the war on Britain's side resulted in six months' imprisonment in Brixton prison (see Bertrand Russell's views on society) in 1918. While in prison, Russell read enormously and wrote the book Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy.  Russell was reinstated in 1919, resigned in 1920, was Tarner Lecturer 1926 and became a Fellow again in 1944 until 1949. In 1924, Bertrand again gained press attention when attending a "banquet" in the House of Commons with well-known campaigners, including Arnold Lupton, who had been a Member of Parliament and had also endured imprisonment for "passive resistance to military or naval service".   === G. H. Hardy on the Trinity Controversy and Russell's personal life === In 1941, G. H. Hardy wrote a 61-page pamphlet titled Bertrand Russell and Trinity—published later as a book by Cambridge University Press with a foreword by C. D. Broad—in which he gave an authoritative account about Russell's 1916 dismissal from Trinity College, explaining that a reconciliation between the college and Russell had later taken place and gave details about Russell's personal life. Hardy writes that Russell's dismissal had created a scandal since the vast majority of the Fellows of the College opposed the decision. The ensuing pressure from the Fellows induced the Council to reinstate Russell. In January 1920, it was announced that Russell had accepted the reinstatement offer from Trinity and would begin lecturing from October. In July 1920, Russell applied for a one year leave of absence; this was approved. He spent the year giving lectures in China and Japan. In January 1921, it was announced by Trinity that Russell had resigned and his resignation had been accepted. This resignation, Hardy explains, was completely voluntary and was not the result of another altercation. The reason for the resignation, according to Hardy, was that Russell was going through a tumultuous time in his personal life with a divorce and subsequent remarriage. Russell contemplated asking Trinity for another one year leave of absence but decided against it, since this would have been an 'unusual application' and the situation had the potential to snowball into another controversy. Although Russell did the right thing, in Hardy's opinion, the reputation of the College suffered due to Russell's resignation since the 'world of learning' knew about Russell's altercation with Trinity but not that the rift had healed. In 1925, Russell was asked by the Council of Trinity College to give the Tarner Lectures on the Philosophy of the Sciences; these would later be the basis for one of Russell's best received books according to Hardy: The Analysis of Matter, published in 1927. In the preface to this pamphlet, Hardy wrote:   === Between the wars ===  In August 1920, Russell traveled to Russia as part of an official delegation sent by the British government to investigate the effects of the Russian Revolution. He met Vladimir Lenin and had an hour-long conversation with him. In his autobiography, he mentions that he found Lenin disappointing, sensing an "impish cruelty" in him and comparing him to "an opinionated professor". He cruised down the Volga on a steamship. His experiences destroyed his previous tentative support for the revolution. He wrote a book The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism about his experiences on this trip, taken with a group of 24 others from Britain, all of whom came home thinking well of the régime, despite Russell's attempts to change their minds. For example, he told them that he heard shots fired in the middle of the night and was sure these were clandestine executions, but the others maintained that it was only cars backfiring. Russell's lover Dora Black, a British author, feminist and socialist campaigner, visited Russia independently at the same time; in contrast to his reaction, she was enthusiastic about the revolution. The following autumn Russell, accompanied by Dora, visited Peking (as it was then known in the West) to lecture on philosophy for a year. He went with optimism and hope, seeing China as then being on a new path. Other scholars present in China at the time included John Dewey and Rabindranath Tagore, the Indian Nobel-laureate poet. Before leaving China, Russell became gravely ill with pneumonia, and incorrect reports of his death were published in the Japanese press. When the couple visited Japan on their return journey, Dora took on the role of spurning the local press by handing out notices reading "Mr. Bertrand Russell, having died according to the Japanese press, is unable to give interviews to Japanese journalists". Apparently they found this harsh and reacted resentfully. Dora was six months pregnant when the couple returned to England on 26 August 1921. Russell arranged a hasty divorce from Alys, marrying Dora six days after the divorce was finalised, on 27 September 1921. Their children were John Conrad Russell, 4th Earl Russell, born on 16 November 1921, and Katharine Jane Russell (now Lady Katharine Tait), born on 29 December 1923. Russell supported his family during this time by writing popular books explaining matters of physics, ethics, and education to the layman. Some have suggested that at this point he had an affair with Vivienne Haigh-Wood, the English governess and writer, and first wife (the Eliots did not formally separate until 1933) of T. S. Eliot. Together with Dora, he founded the experimental Beacon Hill School in 1927. The school was run from a succession of different locations, including its original premises at the Russells' residence, Telegraph House, near Harting, West Sussex. On 8 July 1930 Dora gave birth to her third child Harriet Ruth. After he left the school in 1932, Dora continued it until 1943. On a tour through the USA in 1927 Russell met Barry Fox (later Barry Stevens) who became a well-known Gestalt therapist and writer in later years. Russell and Fox/Stevens developed an intensive relationship. In Fox/Stevens' words: "... for three years we were very close." Barry Fox/Stevens sent her daughter Judith to Beacon Hill School for some time. From 1927 to 1932 Russell wrote 34 letters to Barry Fox/Stevens. Upon the death of his elder brother Frank, in 1931, Russell became the 3rd Earl Russell. Russell's marriage to Dora grew increasingly tenuous, and it reached a breaking point over her having two children with an American journalist, Griffin Barry. They separated in 1932 and finally divorced. On 18 January 1936, Russell married his third wife, an Oxford undergraduate named Patricia ("Peter") Spence, who had been his children's governess since 1930. Russell and Peter had one son, Conrad Sebastian Robert Russell, 5th Earl Russell, who became a prominent historian and one of the leading figures in the Liberal Democratic party. Russell returned to the London School of Economics to lecture on the science of power in 1937. During the 1930s, Russell became a close friend and collaborator of V. K. Krishna Menon, then secretary of the India League, the foremost lobby in Great Britain for Indian self-rule.   === Second World War === Russell opposed rearmament against Nazi Germany, but in 1940 he changed his view that avoiding a full-scale world war was more important than defeating Hitler. He concluded that Adolf Hitler taking over all of Europe would be a permanent threat to democracy. In 1943, he adopted a stance toward large-scale warfare, "Relative Political Pacifism": War was always a great evil, but in some particularly extreme circumstances, it may be the lesser of two evils. Before World War II, Russell taught at the University of Chicago, later moving on to Los Angeles to lecture at the UCLA Department of Philosophy. He was appointed professor at the City College of New York (CCNY) in 1940, but after a public outcry the appointment was annulled by a court judgment that pronounced him "morally unfit" to teach at the college due to his opinions—notably those relating to sexual morality, detailed in Marriage and Morals (1929). The protest was started by the mother of a student who would not have been eligible for his graduate-level course in mathematical logic; many intellectuals, led by John Dewey, protested at his treatment. Albert Einstein's oft-quoted aphorism that "great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds" originated in his open letter, dated 19 March 1940, to Morris Raphael Cohen, a professor emeritus at CCNY, supporting Russell's appointment. Dewey and Horace M. Kallen edited a collection of articles on the CCNY affair in The Bertrand Russell Case. He soon joined the Barnes Foundation, lecturing to a varied audience on the history of philosophy; these lectures formed the basis of A History of Western Philosophy. His relationship with the eccentric Albert C. Barnes soon soured, and he returned to Britain in 1944 to rejoin the faculty of Trinity College.   === Later life === Russell participated in many broadcasts over the BBC, particularly The Brains Trust and the Third Programme, on various topical and philosophical subjects. By this time Russell was world-famous outside academic circles, frequently the subject or author of magazine and newspaper articles, and was called upon to offer opinions on a wide variety of subjects, even mundane ones. En route to one of his lectures in Trondheim, Russell was one of 24 survivors (among a total of 43 passengers) of an aeroplane crash in Hommelvik in October 1948. He said he owed his life to smoking since the people who drowned were in the non-smoking part of the plane. A History of Western Philosophy (1945) became a best-seller and provided Russell with a steady income for the remainder of his life. In 1942 Russell argued in favour of a moderate socialism, capable of overcoming its metaphysical principles, in an inquiry on Dialectical Materialism, launched by the Austrian artist and philosopher Wolfgang Paalen in his journal DYN, saying, "I think the metaphysics of both Hegel and Marx plain nonsense – Marx´s claim to be 'science' is no more justified than Mary Baker Eddy´s. This does not mean that I am opposed to socialism." In 1943, Russell expressed support for Zionism: "I have come gradually to see that, in a dangerous and largely hostile world, it is essential to Jews to have some country which is theirs, some region where they are not suspected aliens, some state which embodies what is distinctive in their culture". In a speech in 1948, Russell said that if the USSR's aggression continued, it would be morally worse to go to war after the USSR possessed an atomic bomb than before it possessed one, because if the USSR had no bomb the West's victory would come more swiftly and with fewer casualties than if there were atom bombs on both sides. At that time, only the United States possessed an atomic bomb, and the USSR was pursuing an extremely aggressive policy towards the countries in Eastern Europe which it was absorbing into its sphere of influence. Many understood Russell's comments to mean that Russell approved of a first strike in a war with the USSR, including Nigel Lawson, who was present when Russell spoke. Others, including Griffin, who obtained a transcript of the speech, have argued that he was merely explaining the usefulness of America's atomic arsenal in deterring the USSR from continuing its domination of Eastern Europe. However, just after the atomic bombs exploded over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Russell wrote letters, and published articles in newspapers from 1945 to 1948, stating clearly that it was morally justified and better to go to war against the USSR using atomic bombs while the USA possessed them and before the USSR did. After the USSR exploded the atomic bomb, Russell changed his position and advocated the total abolishment of atomic weapons. In 1948, Russell was invited by the BBC to deliver the inaugural Reith Lectures—what was to become an annual series of lectures, still broadcast by the BBC. His series of six broadcasts, titled Authority and the Individual, explored themes such as the role of individual initiative in the development of a community and the role of state control in a progressive society. Russell continued to write about philosophy. He wrote a foreword to Words and Things by Ernest Gellner, which was highly critical of the later thought of Ludwig Wittgenstein and of ordinary language philosophy. Gilbert Ryle refused to have the book reviewed in the philosophical journal Mind, which caused Russell to respond via The Times. The result was a month-long correspondence in The Times between the supporters and detractors of ordinary language philosophy, which was only ended when the paper published an editorial critical of both sides but agreeing with the opponents of ordinary language philosophy. In the King's Birthday Honours of 9 June 1949, Russell was awarded the Order of Merit, and the following year he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. When he was given the Order of Merit, George VI was affable but slightly embarrassed at decorating a former jailbird, saying, "You have sometimes behaved in a manner that would not do if generally adopted". Russell merely smiled, but afterwards claimed that the reply "That's right, just like your brother" immediately came to mind. In 1952 Russell was divorced by Spence, with whom he had been very unhappy. Conrad, Russell's son by Spence, did not see his father between the time of the divorce and 1968 (at which time his decision to meet his father caused a permanent breach with his mother). Russell married his fourth wife, Edith Finch, soon after the divorce, on 15 December 1952. They had known each other since 1925, and Edith had taught English at Bryn Mawr College near Philadelphia, sharing a house for 20 years with Russell's old friend Lucy Donnelly. Edith remained with him until his death, and, by all accounts, their marriage was a happy, close, and loving one. Russell's eldest son John suffered from serious mental illness, which was the source of ongoing disputes between Russell and his former wife Dora. John's wife Susan was also mentally ill, and eventually Russell and Edith became the legal guardians of their three daughters, two of whom were later diagnosed with schizophrenia. In September 1961, at the age of 89, Russell was jailed for seven days in Brixton Prison after taking part in an anti-nuclear demonstration in London, for "breach of peace". The magistrate offered to exempt him from jail if he pledged himself to "good behaviour", to which Russell replied: "No, I won't." In 1962 Russell played a public role in the Cuban Missile Crisis: in an exchange of telegrams with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev assured him that the Soviet government would not be reckless. Russell sent this telegram to President Kennedy:  YOUR ACTION DESPERATE. THREAT TO HUMAN SURVIVAL. NO CONCEIVABLE JUSTIFICATION. CIVILIZED MAN CONDEMNS IT. WE WILL NOT HAVE MASS MURDER. ULTIMATUM MEANS WAR... END THIS MADNESS.  According to historian Peter Knight, after JFK's assassination, Russell, "prompted by the emerging work of the lawyer Mark Lane in the US ... rallied support from other noteworthy and left-leaning compatriots to form a Who Killed Kennedy Committee in June 1964, members of which included Michael Foot MP, Caroline Benn, the publisher Victor Gollancz, the writers John Arden and J. B. Priestley, and the Oxford history professor Hugh Trevor-Roper. Russell published a highly critical article weeks before the Warren Commission Report was published, setting forth 16 Questions on the Assassination and equating the Oswald case with the Dreyfus affair of late 19th-century France, in which the state wrongly convicted an innocent man. Russell also criticised the American press for failing to heed any voices critical of the official version.   === Political causes ===  Russell spent the 1950s and 1960s engaged in political causes primarily related to nuclear disarmament and opposing the Vietnam War. The 1955 Russell–Einstein Manifesto was a document calling for nuclear disarmament and was signed by eleven of the most prominent nuclear physicists and intellectuals of the time. In 1966–67, Russell worked with Jean-Paul Sartre and many other intellectual figures to form the Russell Vietnam War Crimes Tribunal to investigate the conduct of the United States in Vietnam. He wrote a great many letters to world leaders during this period. In 1956, immediately before and during the Suez Crisis, Russell expressed his opposition to what he viewed as European imperialism in the Middle East. He viewed the crisis as another reminder of what he saw as a pressing need for a more effective mechanism for international governance, and to restrict national sovereignty to places such as the Suez Canal area "where general interest is involved". At the same time the Suez Crisis was taking place, the world was also captivated by the Hungarian Revolution and the subsequent crushing of the revolt by intervening Soviet forces. Russell attracted criticism for speaking out fervently against the Suez war while ignoring Soviet repression in Hungary, to which he responded that he did not criticise the Soviets "because there was no need. Most of the so-called Western World was fulminating". Although he later feigned a lack of concern, at the time he was disgusted by the brutal Soviet response, and on 16 November 1956, he expressed approval for a declaration of support for Hungarian scholars which Michael Polanyi had cabled to the Soviet embassy in London twelve days previously, shortly after Soviet troops had already entered Budapest. In November 1957 Russell wrote an article addressing US President Dwight D. Eisenhower and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, urging a summit to consider "the conditions of co-existence". Khrushchev responded that peace could indeed be served by such a meeting. In January 1958 Russell elaborated his views in The Observer, proposing a cessation of all nuclear-weapons production, with Britain taking the first step by unilaterally suspending its own nuclear-weapons program if necessary, and with Germany "freed from all alien armed forces and pledged to neutrality in any conflict between East and West". US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles replied for Eisenhower. The exchange of letters was published as The Vital Letters of Russell, Khrushchev, and Dulles. Russell was asked by The New Republic, a liberal American magazine, to elaborate his views on world peace. He suggested that all nuclear-weapons testing and constant flights by planes armed with nuclear weapons be halted immediately, and negotiations be opened for the destruction of all hydrogen bombs, with the number of conventional nuclear devices limited to ensure a balance of power. He proposed that Germany be reunified and accept the Oder-Neisse line as its border, and that a neutral zone be established in Central Europe, consisting at the minimum of Germany, Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, with each of these countries being free of foreign troops and influence, and prohibited from forming alliances with countries outside the zone. In the Middle East, Russell suggested that the West avoid opposing Arab nationalism, and proposed the creation of a United Nations peacekeeping force to guard Israel's frontiers to ensure that Israel was protected from aggression and prevented from committing it. He also suggested Western recognition of the People's Republic of China, and that it be admitted to the UN with a permanent seat on the UN Security Council. He was in contact with Lionel Rogosin while the latter was filming his anti-war film Good Times, Wonderful Times in the 1960s. He became a hero to many of the youthful members of the New Left. In early 1963, in particular, Russell became increasingly vocal in his disapproval of the Vietnam War, and felt that the US government's policies there were near-genocidal. In 1963 he became the inaugural recipient of the Jerusalem Prize, an award for writers concerned with the freedom of the individual in society. In 1964 he was one of eleven world figures who issued an appeal to Israel and the Arab countries to accept an arms embargo and international supervision of nuclear plants and rocket weaponry. In October 1965 he tore up his Labour Party card because he suspected Harold Wilson's Labour government was going to send troops to support the United States in Vietnam.   === Final years and death ===  Russell published his three-volume autobiography in 1967, 1968, and 1969. Russell made a cameo appearance playing himself in the anti-war Hindi film Aman which was released in India in 1967. This was Russell's only appearance in a feature film. On 23 November 1969 he wrote to The Times newspaper saying that the preparation for show trials in Czechoslovakia was "highly alarming". The same month, he appealed to Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to support an international war crimes commission to investigate alleged torture and genocide by the United States in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War. The following month, he protested to Alexei Kosygin over the expulsion of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn from the Soviet Union of Writers. On 31 January 1970 Russell issued a statement condemning "Israel's aggression in the Middle East", and in particular, Israeli bombing raids being carried out deep in Egyptian territory as part of the War of Attrition. He called for an Israeli withdrawal to the pre-Six-Day War borders. This was Russell's final political statement or act. It was read out at the International Conference of Parliamentarians in Cairo on 3 February 1970, the day after his death. Russell died of influenza on 2 February 1970 at his home, Plas Penrhyn, in Penrhyndeudraeth, Merionethshire, Wales. His body was cremated in Colwyn Bay on 5 February 1970. In accordance with his will, there was no religious ceremony; his ashes were scattered over the Welsh mountains later that year. He left an estate valued at £69,423. In 1980 a memorial to Russell was commissioned by a committee including the philosopher A. J. Ayer. It consists of a bust of Russell in Red Lion Square in London sculpted by Marcelle Quinton.   === Titles and honours from birth === Russell held throughout his life the following styles and honours: from birth until 1908: The Honourable Bertrand Arthur William Russell from 1908 until 1931: The Honourable Bertrand Arthur William Russell, FRS from 1931 until 1949: The Right Honourable The Earl Russell, FRS from 1949 until death: The Right Honourable The Earl Russell, OM, FRS   == Views ==   === Philosophy ===  Russell is generally credited with being one of the founders of analytic philosophy. He was deeply impressed by Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), and wrote on every major area of philosophy except aesthetics. He was particularly prolific in the field of metaphysics, the logic and the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of language, ethics and epistemology. When Brand Blanshard asked Russell why he didn't write on aesthetics, Russell replied that he didn't know anything about it, "but that is not a very good excuse, for my friends tell me it has not deterred me from writing on other subjects".   === Religion === Russell described himself as an agnostic, "speaking to a purely philosophical audience", but as an atheist "speaking popularly", on the basis that he could not disprove the Christian God – similar to the way that he could not disprove the Olympic gods either. For most of his adult life, Russell maintained that religion is little more than superstition and, despite any positive effects that religion might have, it is largely harmful to people. He believed that religion and the religious outlook serve to impede knowledge and foster fear and dependency, and are responsible for much of our world's wars, oppression, and misery. He was a member of the Advisory Council of the British Humanist Association and President of Cardiff Humanists until his death.   === Society ===  Political and social activism occupied much of Russell's time for most of his life. Russell remained politically active almost to the end of his life, writing to and exhorting world leaders and lending his name to various causes. Russell argued for a "scientific society", where war would be abolished, population growth would be limited, and prosperity would be shared. He suggested the establishment of a "single supreme world government" able to enforce peace, claiming that "the only thing that will redeem mankind is co-operation". Russell was an active supporter of the Homosexual Law Reform Society, being one of the signatories of A. E. Dyson's 1958 letter to The Times calling for a change in the law regarding male homosexual practices, which were partly legalised in 1967, when Russell was still alive. In "Reflections on My Eightieth Birthday" ("Postscript" in his Autobiography), Russell wrote: "I have lived in the pursuit of a vision, both personal and social. Personal: to care for what is noble, for what is beautiful, for what is gentle; to allow moments of insight to give wisdom at more mundane times. Social: to see in imagination the society that is to be created, where individuals grow freely, and where hate and greed and envy die because there is nothing to nourish them. These things I believe, and the world, for all its horrors, has left me unshaken".   == Ancestry ==   == Selected bibliography == A selected bibliography of Russell's books in English, sorted by year of first publication: 1896. German Social Democracy. London: Longmans, Green. 1897. An Essay on the Foundations of Geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1900. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge University Press. 1903 A Free man's worship, and other essays. 1905. On Denoting, Mind, Vol. 14. ISSN: 00264425. Basil Blackwell. 1910. Philosophical Essays. London: Longmans, Green. 1910–1913. Principia Mathematica (with Alfred North Whitehead). 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1912. The Problems of Philosophy. London: Williams and Norgate. 1914. Our Knowledge of the External World as a Field for Scientific Method in Philosophy. Chicago and London: Open Court Publishing. 1916. Principles of Social Reconstruction. London, George Allen and Unwin. 1916. Why Men Fight. New York: The Century Co. 1916. The Policy of the Entente, 1904-1914 : a reply to Professor Gilbert Murray. Manchester: The National Labour Press 1916. Justice in War-time. Chicago: Open Court. 1917. Political Ideals. New York: The Century Co. 1918. Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1918. Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism, Anarchism, and Syndicalism. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: George Allen & Unwin. (ISBN 0-415-09604-9 for Routledge paperback) 1920. The Practice and Theory of Bolshevism. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1921. The Analysis of Mind. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1922. The Problem of China. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1923. The Prospects of Industrial Civilization, in collaboration with Dora Russell. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1923. The ABC of Atoms, London: Kegan Paul. Trench, Trubner. 1924. Icarus; or, The Future of Science. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1925. The ABC of Relativity. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1925. What I Believe. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1926. On Education, Especially in Early Childhood. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1927. The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. 1927. An Outline of Philosophy. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1927. Why I Am Not a Christian. London: Watts. 1927. Selected Papers of Bertrand Russell. New York: Modern Library. 1928. Sceptical Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1929. Marriage and Morals. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1930. The Conquest of Happiness. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1931. The Scientific Outlook, London: George Allen & Unwin. 1932. Education and the Social Order, London: George Allen & Unwin. 1934. Freedom and Organization, 1814–1914. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1935. In Praise of Idleness. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1935. Religion and Science. London: Thornton Butterworth. 1936. Which Way to Peace?. London: Jonathan Cape. 1937. The Amberley Papers: The Letters and Diaries of Lord and Lady Amberley, with Patricia Russell, 2 vols., London: Leonard & Virginia Woolf at the Hogarth Press. 1938. Power: A New Social Analysis. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1940. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. 1945. A History of Western Philosophy and Its Connection with Political and Social Circumstances from the Earliest Times to the Present Day New York: Simon and Schuster. 1948. Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1949. Authority and the Individual. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1950. Unpopular Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1951. New Hopes for a Changing World. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1952. The Impact of Science on Society. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1953. Satan in the Suburbs and Other Stories. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1954. Human Society in Ethics and Politics. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1954. Nightmares of Eminent Persons and Other Stories. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1956. Portraits from Memory and Other Essays. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1956. Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901–1950, edited by Robert C. Marsh. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1957. Why I Am Not A Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects, edited by Paul Edwards. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1958. Understanding History and Other Essays. New York: Philosophical Library. 1959. Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1959. My Philosophical Development. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1959. Wisdom of the West, edited by Paul Foulkes. London: Macdonald. 1960. Bertrand Russell Speaks His Mind, Cleveland and New York: World Publishing Company. 1961. The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell, edited by R. E. Egner and L. E. Denonn. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1961. Fact and Fiction. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1961. Has Man a Future? London: George Allen & Unwin. 1963. Essays in Skepticism. New York: Philosophical Library. 1963. Unarmed Victory. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1965. Legitimacy Versus Industrialism, 1814–1848. London: George Allen & Unwin (first published as Parts I and II of Freedom and Organization, 1814–1914, 1934). 1965. On the Philosophy of Science, edited by Charles A. Fritz, Jr. Indianapolis: The Bobbs–Merrill Company. 1966. The ABC of Relativity. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1967. Russell's Peace Appeals, edited by Tsutomu Makino and Kazuteru Hitaka. Japan: Eichosha's New Current Books. 1967. War Crimes in Vietnam. London: George Allen & Unwin. 1951–1969. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols., London: George Allen & Unwin. Vol. 2, 1956 1969. Dear Bertrand Russell... A Selection of his Correspondence with the General Public 1950–1968, edited by Barry Feinberg and Ronald Kasrils. London: George Allen and Unwin. Russell also wrote many pamphlets, introductions, articles, and letters to the editor. One pamphlet titled, I Appeal unto Caesar: The Case of the Conscientious Objectors, ghostwritten for Margaret Hobhouse, the mother of imprisoned peace activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse allegedly helped secure the release of hundreds of conscientious objectors from prison. His works can be found in anthologies and collections, perhaps most notably The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, which McMaster University began publishing in 1983. This collection of his shorter and previously unpublished works is now up to 16 volumes, and many more are forthcoming. An additional three volumes catalogue just his bibliography. The Russell Archives at McMaster University possess over 30,000 of his letters.   == See also == Russell's teapot Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club Criticism of Jesus Doctrine of internal relations In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays List of peace activists Structuralism (philosophy of science)   == References ==   === Russell === 1900, Sur la logique des relations avec des applications à la théorie des séries, Rivista di matematica 7: 115–148. 1901, On the Notion of Order, Mind (n.s.) 10: 35–51. 1902, (with Alfred North Whitehead), On Cardinal Numbers, American Journal of Mathematics 24: 367–384. 1948, BBC Reith Lectures: Authority and the Individual A series of six radio lectures broadcast on the BBC Home Service in December 1948.   === Secondary references === John Newsome Crossley. A Note on Cantor's Theorem and Russell's Paradox, Australian Journal of Philosophy 51, 1973, 70–71. Ivor Grattan-Guinness. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000. Alan Ryan. Bertrand Russell: A Political Life, New York: Oxford University Press, 1981.   === Books about Russell's philosophy === Alfred Julius Ayer. Russell, London: Fontana, 1972. ISBN 0-00-632965-9. A lucid summary exposition of Russell's thought. Celia Green. The Lost Cause: Causation and the Mind-Body Problem, Oxford: Oxford Forum, 2003. ISBN 0-9536772-1-4 Contains a sympathetic analysis of Russell's views on causality. A. C. Grayling. Russell: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2002. Nicholas Griffin. Russell's Idealist Apprenticeship, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991. A. D. Irvine (ed.). Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, 4 volumes, London: Routledge, 1999. Consists of essays on Russell's work by many distinguished philosophers. Michael K. Potter. Bertrand Russell's Ethics, Bristol: Thoemmes Continuum, 2006. A clear and accessible explanation of Russell's moral philosophy. Elizabeth Ramsden Eames. Bertrand Russell's Theory of Knowledge, London: George Allen and Unwin, 1969. A clear description of Russell's philosophical development. P. A. Schilpp (ed.). The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, Evanston and Chicago: Northwestern University, 1944. John Slater. Bertrand Russell, Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1994.   === Biographical books === A. J. Ayer. Bertrand Russell, New York: Viking Press, 1972, reprint ed. London: University of Chicago Press, 1988: ISBN 0-226-03343-0 Ronald W. Clark. The Life of Bertrand Russell, London: Jonathan Cape,1975 ISBN 0-394-49059-2 Ronald W. Clark. Bertrand Russell and His World, London: Thames & Hudson, 1981 ISBN 0-500-13070-1 Rupert Crawshay-Williams. Russell Remembered, London: Oxford University Press, 1970. Written by a close friend of Russell's John Lewis. Bertrand Russell: Philosopher and Humanist, London: Lawerence & Wishart, 1968 Ray Monk. Bertrand Russell: Mathematics: Dreams and Nightmares London: Phoenix, 1997 ISBN 0-7538-0190-6 Ray Monk. Bertrand Russell: 1872–1920 The Spirit of Solitude Vol. I, New York: Routledge, 1997 ISBN 0-09-973131-2 Ray Monk. Bertrand Russell: 1921–1970 The Ghost of Madness Vol. II, New York: Routledge, 2001 ISBN 0-09-927275-X George Santayana. 'Bertrand Russell', in Selected Writings of George Santayana, ed. Norman Henfrey, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, I, 1968, pp. 326–329 Katharine Tait. My father Bertrand Russell, New York: Thoemmes Press, 1975 David Wallechinsky & Wallace Irving. 1975–1981, "Famous Marriages Bertrand Russell & Alla Pearsall Smith Part 1" & "Part 3", on "Alys" Pearsall Smith, webpage content from The People's Almanac, webpages: Part 1 & Part 3 (accessed 18 May 2014). Alan Wood. Bertrand Russell The Passionate Sceptic London: George Allen & Unwin, 1957. Russell had a good opinion of this author.   == External links == Bertrand Russell entry by A. D. Irvine in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1 May 2003 Bertrand Russell's Ethics entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bertrand Russell's Metaphysics entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Bertrand Russell Archives at McMaster University The Bertrand Russell Society The Bertrand Russell Peace Foundation Bertrand Russell at the Internet Movie Database Bertrand Russell in Japan Photographs at the National Portrait Gallery (London) Resource list The First Reith Lecture given by Russell (Real Audio) Complete Bibliography of Bertrand Russell's Works Nobel Prize Bertrand Russell at 100 Welsh Heroes Key Participants: Bertrand Russell – Linus Pauling and the International Peace Movement: A Documentary History PM@100: LOGIC FROM 1910 TO 1927 Conference at the Bertrand Russell Research Centre (McMaster University, Ontario, Canada), to be held on 21–24 May 2010, celebrating the 100th anniversary of the publication of Principia Mathematica Bertrand Russell Society Bulletin (2013–present Editor Michael Berumen) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Bertrand Russell", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .   === Other writings available online === Works by Bertrand Russell at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Bertrand Russell at Internet Archive Works by Bertrand Russell at Open Library "A Free Man's Worship" (1903) "On Denoting" (1905) Anti-Suffragist Anxieties (1910) "The Elements of Ethics" (1910) War and Non-Resistance (1915) The War and Non-Resistance — A Rejoinder to Professor Perry (1915) The Ethics of War (1915) Justice in Wartime (1917) Why Men Fight: A Method of Abolishing the International Duel (1917) The Philosophy of Logical Atomism (1918–19) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) "The Conquest of Happiness" (1930) "Has Religion Made Useful Contributions to Civilization?" (1930) Legitimacy Versus Industrialism 1814–1848 (1935) "Am I an Atheist or an Agnostic?" (1947) "Ideas that Have Harmed Mankind" (1950) "What Desires Are Politically Important?" Bertrand Russell's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech (1950) An Outline of Philosophy (1951) Is There a God? (1952) Russell, Bertrand (1953). "What is an Agnostic?". Archived from the original on 2 February 2008.  The Scientific Outlook (1954) "16 Questions on the Assassination" (of President Kennedy) (1964) Bertrand Russell, Selected Writings   === Audio === Works by Bertrand Russell at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Sound clips of Bertrand Russell speaking Russell's BBC broadcast on "Man's Peril" (1954) and the "Russell–Einstein Manifesto" Press conference (1955) "What Desires Are Politically Important?" Bertrand Russell's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech (1950)

Bjarni Jónsson (born February 15, 1920) is an Icelandic mathematician and logician working in universal algebra and lattice theory. He is emeritus Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at Vanderbilt University and the honorary editor in chief of Algebra Universalis. He received his PhD in 1946 at UC Berkeley under supervision of Alfred Tarski. Several mathematical objects are named for him, among them Jónsson algebras, ω-Jónsson functions, Jónsson cardinals, Jónsson terms, Jónsson–Tarski algebras and Jónsson–Tarski duality. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == Publications == Jónsson, Bjarni (1972), Topics in universal algebra, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 250, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, doi:10.1007/BFb0058648, MR 0345895    == References ==   == External links == Bjarni Jónsson's homepage

Robert Bernard Meyer (born August 4, 1939, in Toledo, Ohio) is an American former Major League Baseball left-handed pitcher. He was signed by the New York Yankees as an amateur free agent in 1960. Meyer pitched for the Yankees (1964), Los Angeles Angels (1964), Kansas City Athletics (1964), Seattle Pilots (1969), and Milwaukee Brewers (1970). His first major league strikeout victim was future Hall of Famer Carl Yastrzemski. During a 3-year baseball career, Meyer compiled 2 wins, 92 strikeouts, and a 4.38 earned run average. Meyer is probably best known for being the loser in the best big league game he ever pitched. On September 12, 1964, while starting for the Athletics on the road at Memorial Stadium, he and Baltimore Orioles left-hander Frank Bertaina each pitched a complete game one-hitter, but the A's lost 1-0 as Jackie Brandt hit a sacrifice fly in the bottom of the 8th to score pinch-runner Bob Saverine from third. Other career highlights include a six scoreless inning win against the Kansas City Athletics on June 26, 1964, a six-hit, complete game win (6-1) against the Baltimore Orioles on September 7, 1964, and pitching the first nine innings and giving up one unearned run in a 13-inning victory over the New York Yankees on September 1, 1969.   == External links ==  Career statistics and player information from Baseball-Reference, or Baseball-Reference (Minors) Retrosheet Baseball Library

Anicius Manlius Severinus Boëthius, commonly called Boethius (/boʊˈiːθiəs/; also Boetius /boʊˈiːʃəs/; c. 480–524 AD), was a Roman senator, consul, magister officiorum, and philosopher of the early 6th century. He was born four years after Odoacer deposed the last Roman Emperor and declared himself King of Italy, and entered public service under Ostrogothic King Theodoric the Great, who later imprisoned and executed him in 524 on charges of conspiracy to overthrow him. While jailed, Boethius composed his Consolation of Philosophy, a philosophical treatise on fortune, death, and other issues, which became one of the most popular and influential works of the Middle Ages.   == Biography ==   === Early life and rise to power === Boethius was born in Rome to a patrician family around 480 AD, but his exact birth date is unknown. His family, the Anicii, included emperors Petronius Maximus and Olybrius and many consuls. His father, Manlius Boethius, who was appointed consul in 487, died while Boethius was young. Another patrician, Quintus Aurelius Memmius Symmachus, adopted and raised Boethius, instilling in him a love for literature and philosophy. Both Memmius Symmachus and Boethius were fluent in Greek, an increasingly rare skill at the time in the Western Empire; for this reason, some scholars believe that Boethius was educated in the East. According to John Moorhead, the traditional view is that Boethius studied in Athens based on Cassiodorus's rhetoric describing Boethius' learning in one of his letters, but this appears to be a misreading and his studying in Athens is more likely a legend. The French scholar Pierre Courcelle has argued that Boethius studied at Alexandria with the Neo-Platonist philosopher Ammonius Hermiae. However, Moorhead observes that the evidence supporting Boethius having studied in Alexandria "is not as strong as it may appear", and observes that Boethius may have been able to acquire his formidable learning without travelling. On account of his erudition, Boethius entered the service of Theodoric the Great at a young age and was already a senator by the age of 25. His earliest documented acts on behalf of the Ostrogothic ruler were to investigate allegations that the paymaster of Theodoric's bodyguards had debased the coins of their pay; to produce a waterclock for Theodoric to give to king Gundobad of the Burgunds; and to recruit a lyre-player to perform for Clovis king of the Franks. Boethius married his foster-father's daughter, Rusticiana; their children included two boys, Symmachus and Boethius. During Theodoric's reign, Boethius held many important offices, including the consulship in the year 510, but Boethius confesses in his De consolatione philosophiae that his greatest achievement was to have both his sons made co-consuls for the same year (522), one representing the east and the other the west, and finding himself sitting "between the two consuls and as if it were a military triumph [letting his] largesse fulfill the wildest expectations of the people packed in their seats around [him]". In 522, the same year his two sons were appointed joint consuls, Boethius accepted the appointment to the position of magister officiorum, the head of all the government and court services.   === Fall and death ===  In 520, Boethius was working to revitalize the relationship between the Roman See and the Constantinopalian See; though still both a part of the same Church, disagreements had begun to emerge between them. This may have set in place a course of events that would lead to loss of royal favour. Five-hundred years later, this continuing disagreement led to the East-West Schism in 1054, in which communion between the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church was broken. In 523 Boethius fell from power. After a period of imprisonment in Pavia for what was deemed a treasonable offense, he was executed in 524. The primary sources are in general agreement over the facts of what happened. At a meeting of the Royal Council in Verona, the referandarius Cyprianus accused the ex-consul Caecina Decius Faustus Albinus of treasonous correspondence with Justin I. Boethius leapt to his defense, crying, "The charge of Cyprianus is false, but if Albinus did that, so also have I and the whole senate with one accord done it; it is false, my Lord King." Cyprianus then also accused Boethius of the same crime, and produced three men who claimed they had witnessed the crime. Boethius and Basilius were arrested. First the pair were detained in the baptistery of a church, then Boethius was exiled to the Ager Calventianus, a distant country estate, where he was put to death. Not long afterwards Theodoric had Boethius' father-in-law Symmachus put to death, according to Procopius, on the grounds that he and Boethius together were planning a revolution, and confiscated their property. "The basic facts in the case are not in dispute," writes Jeffrey Richards. "What is disputed about this sequence of events is the interpretation that should be put on them." Boethius claims his crime was seeking "the safety of the Senate." He describes the three witnesses against him as dishonorable: Basilius had been dismissed from Royal service for his debts, while Venantius Opilio and Gaudentius had been exiled for fraud. However, other sources depict these men in far more positive light. For example, Cassiodorus describes Cyprianus and Opilio as "utterly scrupulous, just and loyal" and mentions they are brothers and grandsons of the consul Opilio; Theodoric was feeling threatened by international events. The Acacian Schism had been resolved, and the Nicene Christian aristocrats of his kingdom were seeking to renew their ties with Constantinople. The Catholic Hilderic had become king of the Vandals and had put Theodoric's sister Amalafrida to death, and Arians in the East were being persecuted. Then there was the matter that with his previous ties to Theodahad, Boethius apparently found himself on the wrong side in the succession dispute following the untimely death of Eutharic, Theodoric's announced heir. The method of Boethius' execution varies in the sources. Perhaps he was killed with an axe or a sword, or, possibly, he was clubbed to death. According to another version a rope was attached round his head and tightened till his eyes bulged out; then his skull was cracked. In any case, his remains were entombed in the church of San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro in Pavia, also the resting place of Augustine of Hippo. In Dante's The Divine Comedy, Paradise, Canto X, lines 121–29, the spirit of Boethius is pointed out by Saint Thomas Aquinas:  Now if thy mental eye conducted be From light to light, as I resound their frame, The eighth well worth attention thou wilt see. The soul who pointed out the world's dark ways, To all who listen, its deceits unfolding. Beneath in Cieldauro lies the frame Whence it was driven; -from woe and exile, to This fair abode of peace and bliss it came.  Past Classical and Medieval historians have had a hard time accepting a sincere Christian who was also a serious Hellenist. Arnaldo Momigliano argues that "many people have turned to Christianity for consolation. Boethius turned to paganism. His Christianity collapsed—it collapsed so thoroughly that perhaps he did not even notice its disappearance." However, this view does not reflect the majority of current scholarship on the matter. The community that he was part of valued both classical culture and Christian belief.   == Works ==   === De consolatione philosophiae ===  Boethius's best known work is the Consolation of Philosophy (De consolatione philosophiae), which he wrote most likely while in exile under house arrest or in prison while awaiting his execution. This work represented an imaginary dialogue between himself and philosophy, with philosophy personified as a woman. The book argues that despite the apparent inequality of the world, there is, in Platonic fashion, a higher power and everything else is secondary to that divine Providence. Several manuscripts survived and these were widely edited, translated and printed throughout the late 15th century and later in Europe. Beyond Consolation of Philosophy, his lifelong project was a deliberate attempt to preserve ancient classical knowledge, particularly philosophy. Boethius intended to translate all the works of Aristotle and Plato from the original Greek into Latin.   === De topicis differentiis === His completed translations of Aristotle's works on logic were the only significant portions of Aristotle available in Latin Christendom from the sixth century until the 12th century. However, some of his translations (such as his treatment of the topoi in The Topics) were mixed with his own commentary, which reflected both Aristotelian and Platonic concepts. Unfortunately, the commentaries themselves have been lost. In addition to his commentary on the Topics, Boethius composed two treatises on Topical argumentation, In Ciceronis Topica and De topicis differentiis. The first work has six books, and is largely a response to Cicero's Topica. The first book of In Ciceronis Topica begins with a dedication to Patricius. It includes distinctions and assertions important to Boethius's overall philosophy, such as his view of the role of philosophy to "establish our judgment concerning the governing of life," and definitions of logic from Plato, Aristotle and Cicero. He breaks logic into three parts: that which defines, that which divides, and that which deduces. He asserts that there are three types of arguments: those of necessity, of ready believability, and sophistry. He follows Aristotle in defining one sort of Topic as the maximal proposition, a proposition which is somehow shown to be universal or readily believable. The other sort of Topic, the differentiae, are "Topics that contain and include the maximal propositions"; means of categorizing the Topics which Boethius credits to Cicero. Book II covers two kinds of topics: those from related things and those from extrinsic topics. Book III discusses the relationship between things studied through Topics, Topics themselves, and the nature of definition. Book IV analyzes partition, designation and relationships between things (such as pairing, numbering, genus, and species, etc.) After a review of his terms, Boethius spends Book V discussing Stoic logic and Aristotelian causation. Book VI relates the nature of the Topic to causes. In Topicis Differentiis has four books; Book I discusses the nature of rhetorical and dialectical Topics together, Boethius's overall purpose being "to show what the Topics are, what their differentiae are, and which are suited for what syllogisms." He distinguishes between argument (that which constitutes belief) and argumentation (that which demonstrates belief). Propositions are divided into three parts: those that are universal, those that are particular, and those that are somewhere in between. These distinctions, and others, are applicable to both types of Topical argument, rhetorical and dialectical. Books II and III are primarily focused on Topics of dialectic (syllogisms), while Book IV concentrates on the unit of the rhetorical Topic, the enthymeme. Topical argumentation is at the core of Boethius’s conception of dialectic, which "have categorical rather than conditional conclusions, and he conceives of the discovery of an argument as the discovery of a middle term capable of linking the two terms of the desired conclusion." Not only are these texts of paramount importance to the study of Boethius, they are also crucial to the history of topical lore. It is largely due to Boethius that the Topics of Aristotle and Cicero were revived, and the Boethian tradition of topical argumentation spans its influence throughout the Middle Ages and into the early Renaissance: "In the works of Ockham, Buridan, Albert of Saxony, and the Pseudo-Scotus, for instance, many of the rules of consequence bear a strong resemblance to or are simply identical with certain Boethian Topics...Boethius’s influence, direct and indirect, on this tradition is enormous." It was also in De Topicis Differentiis that Boethius made a unique contribution to the discourse on dialectic and rhetoric. Topical argumentation for Boethius is dependent upon a new category for the topics discussed by Aristotle and Cicero, and "[u]nlike Aristotle, Boethius recognizes two different types of Topics. First, he says, a Topic is a maximal proposition (maxima propositio), or principle; but there is a second kind of Topic, which he calls the differentia of a maximal proposition..." Maximal propositions are "propositions [that are] known per se, and no proof can be found for these." This is the basis for the idea that demonstration (or the construction of arguments) is dependent ultimately upon ideas or proofs that are known so well and are so fundamental to human understanding of logic that no other proofs come before it. They must hold true in and of themselves. According to Stump, "the role of maximal propositions in argumentation is to ensure the truth of a conclusion by ensuring the truth of its premises either directly or indirectly." These propositions would be used in constructing arguments through the Differentia, which is the second part of Boethius' theory. This is "the genus of the intermediate in the argument." So maximal propositions allow room for an argument to be founded in some sense of logic while differentia are critical for the demonstration and construction of arguments. Boethius’ definition of “differentiae” is that they are "the Topics of arguments...The Topics which are the Differentiae of [maximal] propositions are more universal than those propositions, just as rationality is more universal than man." This is the second part of Boethius’ unique contribution to the field of rhetoric. Differentia operate under maximal propositions to "be of use in finding maximal propositions as well as intermediate terms," or the premises that follow maximal propositions. Though Boethius is drawing from Aristotle’s Topics, Differentiae are not the same as Topics in some ways. Boethius arranges differentiae through statements, instead of generalized groups as Aristotle does. Stump articulates the difference. They are "expressed as words or phrases whose expansion into appropriate propositions is neither intended nor readily conceivable," unlike Aristotle’s clearly defined four groups of Topics. Aristotle had hundreds of topics organized into those four groups, whereas Boethius has twenty-eight "Topics" that are “highly ordered among themselves." This distinction is necessary to understand Boethius as separate from past rhetorical theories. Maximal propositions and Differentiae belong not only to rhetoric, but also to dialectic. Boethius defines dialectic through an analysis of "thesis" and hypothetical propositions. He claims that "[t]here are two kinds of questions. One is that called, ‘thesis’ by the [Greek] dialecticians. This is the kind of question which asks about and discusses things stripped of relation to other circumstances; it is the sort of question dialecticians most frequently dispute about—for example, ‘Is pleasure the greatest good?’ [or] ‘Should one marry?’." Dialectic has "dialectical topics" as well as "dialectical-rhetorical topics," all of which are still discussed in De Topicis Differentiis. Dialectic, especially in Book I, comprises a major component of Boethius’ discussion on Topics. Boethius planned to completely translate Plato's Dialogues, but there is no known surviving translation, if it was actually ever begun.   === De arithmetica === Boethius intended to pass on the great Greco-Roman culture to future generations by writing manuals on music and astronomy, geometry, and arithmetic. Several of Boethius' writings, which were largely influential during the Middle Ages, drew from the thinking of Porphyry and Iamblichus. Boethius wrote a commentary on the Isagoge by Porphyry, which highlighted the existence of the problem of universals: whether these concepts are subsistent entities which would exist whether anyone thought of them, or whether they only exist as ideas. This topic concerning the ontological nature of universal ideas was one of the most vocal controversies in medieval philosophy. Besides these advanced philosophical works, Boethius is also reported to have translated important Greek texts for the topics of the quadrivium  His loose translation of Nicomachus's treatise on arithmetic (De institutione arithmetica libri duo) and his textbook on music (De institutione musica libri quinque, unfinished) contributed to medieval education. De arithmetica begins with modular arithmetic, such as even and odd, evenly even, evenly odd, and oddly even. He then turns to unpredicted complexity by categorizing numbers and parts of numbers. His translations of Euclid on geometry and Ptolemy on astronomy, if they were completed, no longer survive. Boethius made Latin translations of Aristotle's De interpretatione and Categories with commentaries. In his article The Ancient Classics in the Mediaeval Libraries, James Stuart Beedie sites Boethius as the reason Aristotle’s works were popular in the Middle Ages, as Boethius preserved many of the philosopher’s works.   === De institutione musica === Boethius' De institutione musica was one of the first musical works to be printed in Venice between the years of 1491 and 1492. It was written toward the beginning of the sixth century and helped medieval authors during the ninth century understand Greek music. In "De Musica," Boethius introduced the threefold classification of music: Musica mundana — music of the spheres/world Musica humana — harmony of human body and spiritual harmony Musica instrumentalis — instrumental music In De musica I.2, Boethius describes 'musica instrumentis' as music produced by something under tension (e.g. strings), by wind (e.g. aulos), by water, or by percussion (e.g. cymbals). Boethius himself doesn't use the term 'instrumentalis', which was used by Adalbold II of Utrecht (975-1026) in his Epistola cum tractatu. The term is much more common in the 13th century and later. It is also in these later texts that musica instrumentalis is firmly associated with audible music in general, including vocal music. Scholars have traditionally assumed that Boethius also made this connection, possibly under the header of wind instruments ("administratur ... aut spiritu ut tibiis" ), but Boethius himself never writes about "instrumentalis" as separate from "instrumentis" explicitly in his very brief description. In one of his works within De institutione musica, was to say that "music is so naturally united with us that we cannot be free from it even if we so desired." During the Middle Ages, Boethius was connected to several texts that were used to teach liberal arts. Although he did not address the subject of trivium, he did write many treatises explaining the principles of rhetoric, grammar, and logic. During the Middle Ages, his works of these disciplines were commonly used when studying the three elementary arts.   === Opuscula sacra === Boethius also wrote Christian theological treatises, which supported Catholicism and condemned Arianism and other heterodox forms of Christianity. Five theological works are known: De Trinitate – "The Trinity", where he defends the Council of Chalcedon Trinitarian position, that God is in three persons who have no differences in nature. He argues against the Arian view of the nature of God, which put him at odds with the faith of Arian King of Italy. Utrum Pater et filius et Spiritus Sanctus de divinitale substantialiter praedicentur – "Whether Father, Son and Holy Spirit are Substantially Predicated of the Divinity," A short work where he uses reason and Aristotelian epistemology to argue that the Catholic faiths' views of the nature of God are correct. Quomodo substantiae De fide catholica - On the Catholic Faith Contra Eutychen et Nestorium – "Against Eutyches and Nestorius," from around 513, which dates it as the earliest of his theological works. Eutyches and Nestorius were contemporaries from the early to mid 5th century who held divergent Christological theologies, Boethius argues for a middle ground in conformity with Roman Catholic faith. His theological works played an important part during the Middle Ages on philosophical thought, including the fields of logic, ontology, and metaphysics.   == History of reception == Lorenzo Valla described Boethius as the last of the Romans and the first of the scholastic philosophers. Despite the use of his mathematical texts in the early universities, it is his final work, the Consolation of Philosophy, that assured his legacy in the Middle Ages and beyond. This work is cast as a dialogue between Boethius himself, at first bitter and despairing over his imprisonment, and the spirit of philosophy, depicted as a woman of wisdom and compassion. "Alternately composed in prose and verse, the Consolation teaches acceptance of hardship in a spirit of philosophical detachment from misfortune". Parts of the work are reminiscent of the Socratic method of Plato's dialogues, as the spirit of philosophy questions Boethius and challenges his emotional reactions to adversity. The work was translated into Old English by King Alfred, although Alfred's authorship of this Old English translation has recently been questioned, and into later English by Chaucer and Queen Elizabeth; many manuscripts survive and it was extensively edited, translated and printed throughout Europe from the 14th century onwards. Many commentaries on it were compiled and it has been one of the most influential books in European culture. No complete bibliography has ever been assembled but it would run into thousands of items. "The Boethian Wheel" is a model for Boethius' belief that history is a wheel, that Boethius uses frequently in the Consolation; it remained very popular throughout the Middle Ages, and is still often seen today. As the wheel turns those that have power and wealth will turn to dust; men may rise from poverty and hunger to greatness, while those who are great may fall with the turn of the wheel. It was represented in the Middle Ages in many relics of art depicting the rise and fall of man. Descriptions of "The Boethian Wheel" can be found in the literature of the Middle Ages from the Romance of the Rose to Chaucer.   == Veneration ==  Boethius is recognized as a martyr for the Catholic faith by the Roman Martyrology. His cult is held in Pavia and in the Church of Santa Maria in Portico in Rome. His feast day is October 23. He was declared a saint by the Sacred Congregation of Rites in 1883, and Pope Benedict XVI explains the relevance of Boethius to modern day Christians by linking his teachings to an understanding of Providence.   == See also == De Fide Catolica   == Notes ==   == References ==   === Works available online === James, H. R. (translator) [1897] (2007), The Consolation of Philosophy of Boethius, The University of Adelaide: eBooks @ Adelaide . Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (1867). "De institutione arithmetica libri duo". In Gottfried Friedlein. Anicii Manlii Torquati Severini Boetii De institutione arithmetica libri duo: De institutione musica libri quinque. Accedit geometria quae fertur Boetii (in Latin). in aedibus B.G. Teubneri. pp. 1–173. Retrieved 2008-08-03.  Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (1867). "De institutione musica libri quinque". In Gottfried Friedlein. Anicii Manlii Torquati Severini Boetii De institutione arithmetica libri duo: De institutione musica libri quinque. Accedit geometria quae fertur Boetii (in Latin). in aedibus B.G. Teubneri. pp. 177–371. Retrieved 2015-10-08.    === Bibliography === Attwater, Donald; Catherine Rachel John (1995). The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-051312-4. OCLC 34361179.  Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008). From Plato to Derrida. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-158591-6.  Chadwick, Henry (1981). Boethius, the Consolations of Music, Logic, Theology, and Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-826549-2. OCLC 8533668.  Colish, Marcia L. (2002). Medieval Foundations of the Western Intellectual Tradition, 400-1400. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-07852-8. OCLC 185694056.  Magee, John (1989). Boethius on Signification and Mind. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 9-0040-9096-7.  Marenbon, John (2004). Boethius. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513407-9. OCLC 186379876.  Marenbon, John (2009). The Cambridge Companion to Boethius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-52-187266-9.  Suto, Taki (2011). Boethius on Mind, Grammar and Logic. A Study of Boethius' Commentaries on Peri Hermeneias. Cambridge: Brill. ISBN 978-9004214187.  Westfall, Joseph (2008). "Boethius: Kierkegaard and The Consolation". In Stewart, Jon. Kierkegaard and the Patristic and Medieval Traditions. Ashgate. pp. 207–222. ISBN 9780754663911.    == Further reading == Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (1926), trans., H. F. Stewart, E. K. Rand, and "I. T.". The Theological Tractates and The Consolation of Philosophy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard, Loeb Classical Library, parallel text. Papahagi, Adrian (2010). Boethiana Mediaevalia – A Collection of Studies on the Early Medieval Fortune of Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy. Bucharest: Zeta Books. ISBN 978-973-199-779-7.   == Discography == Carlo Forlivesi, Boethius (2008) for biwa. The piece is included in the CD album Silenziosa Luna (ALCD 76).   == External links ==   === Works === Works by Boethius at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Boethius at Internet Archive Works by Boethius at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  {en} De Trinitate (On the Holy Trinity) — Boethius, Erik Kenyon (trans.) {en} Theological Tractates; Christian Classics Ethereal Library A 10th-century manuscript of Institutio Arithmetica is available online from Lund University, Sweden The Geoffrey Freudlin 1885 edition of the Arithmetica, from the Cornell Library Historical Mathematics Monographs Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by Boethius in .jpg and .tiff format.   === On Boethius' life and works === Blessed Severinus Boethius at Patron Saints Index Blackwood, Stephen.The Meters of Boethius: Rhythmic Therapy in the Consolation of Philosophy. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Boethius", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Phillips, Philip Edward. Boethius: A Selected Bibliography for Students Boethius at The Online Library of Liberty On Boethius and Cassiodorus — Pope Benedict XVI   === On Boethius' logic and philosophy === Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius entry by John Marenbon in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Contribution of Boethius to the Development of Medieval Logic



Carveth Read (1848–1931) was a 19th and 20th century British philosopher and logician.   == Life == He was born 16, March 1848 in Falmouth, Cornwall, England. He was the third son of Edward Read and Elizabeth Truscott. He attended the University of Cambridge (Christ's College). He received a B.A. (Moral Sciences Tripos, 1st) in 1873 and an M.A. in 1877. He was the Hilbert travelling scholar, studying at Leipzig and Heidelberg Universities in 1874-1877. In 1877 he married Evelyn Thompson. From 1878 he lectured at Wren's 'Coaching' establishment (located at 7 Powis Square, Westbourne Park, London). He was Grote professor of philosophy of mind and logic  at the University College London (UCL) from 1903 to 1911. From 1911 to 1921 he was Lecturer in Comparative Psychology at UCL. He died 6 December 1931 in Solihull, Warwickshire, England.   == Work == In the preface to the fourth edition of his book Logic: Deductive and Inductive (1920), he identifies his significant influences. He states, "the work may be considered, on the whole, as attached to the school of Mill; to whose System of Logic, and to Bain's Logic, it is deeply indebted. Amongst the works of living writers, the Empirical Logic of Venn and the Formal Logic of Keynes have given me most assistance." In Chapter 22 of Logic, Read says: "It is better to be vaguely right than exactly wrong", the original source of the much quoted aphorism "It is better to be roughly right than exactly wrong" that is often, incorrently attributed to John Maynard Keynes.   == Bibliography == Theory in Logic (1878) Logic: Deductive and Inductive (1898 – first edition) The Metaphysics of Nature (1905 - first edition) Natural and Social Morals (1909) The Origin of Man and His Superstitions (1920)   == References ==   == External links == Works by Carveth Read at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Carveth Read at Internet Archive

The Categoriae decem, also known as the Ten Categories and as the Paraphrasis Themistiana, was a Latin summary of the Categories of Aristotle. It is thought to date to the fourth century. Once and traditionally attributed to St. Augustine, it is now no longer thought to be his work. From the eighth century onwards, this text became one of the major sources of logical teaching in medieval Europe, where it was taken at times as a full translation of Aristotle's work, rather than a compression. Its importance rests in the revival of the study of logic it stimulated in the early medieval West, beginning, it would seem, at the court of Charlemagne. Those influenced included Alcuin, particularly in his De Dialectica, Fridugisus  and Johannes Scotus Eriugena. From around the eleventh century the influence of the Categoriae decem waned, as translations of the original work of Aristotle gained currency in Western Europe.   == Notes == ^ The Themistian paraphrase, an attribution to Themistius; other scholars play safe with Pseudo-Augustinus. ^ According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, [1]: 'An anonymous paraphrase of the Categories falsely attributed to Augustine and traditionally known as Categoriae Decem has survived only because it was widely read and used in the early Middle Ages.' ^ See, for example, this PDF, p.34. ^ A.Arlig's unpublished Ohio PhD thesis, 'A study in early medieval Mereology', note p.34, describes its popularity in the ninth and tenth centuries. It was glossed by Heiric, this PDF, note p.30. ^ The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy[2] describes the work as ‘neoplatonic’; it also states 'In the early Middle Ages, Neoplatonic works such as the Categoriae decem were very important'[3]. ^ 'It seems to have been Alcuin who introduced both Boethius' discussions of logic and the Categoriae Decem into general circulation in the Frankish kingdom, or at least, it is in his writings that the earliest extant evidence of these works being read is to be seen'. Rosamond McKitterick, The Frankish Kingdoms under the Carolingians (1983), p.287. On p.286 she includes Ratramnus of Corbie with those knowing Aristotle through the work. ^ Edited in J-P. Migne, Patrologia Latina ^ S.Haverkamp, 'Making something of Nothing: the Content and Context of Fredegisus of Tours' 'De substantia nihili et tenebrarum', unpublished thesis, Utrecht 2006 , ^ Eriugena's synthesis began with Dionysius' two branches of theology: apophatic and cataphatic. Apophasis was then considered from the perspective of the ten categories of Aristotle, interpreted through Augustine and the ps.-Augustinian Categoriae decem. ([4] p.23) ^ [5], reference to John Marenbon, ‘John Scottus and the “Categoriae decem”’, in Werner Beierwaltes (ed.), Eriugena: Studien zu seinen Quellen, Vorträge des III. Internationalen Eriugena-Colloquiums, Freiburg im Breisgau, 27.–30. August 1979   == References == Edition in the Aristoteles Latinus, editor Lorenzo Minio-Paluello: Categoriae vel Praedicamenta. Translatio Boethii, Editio Composite, Translatio Guillelmi de Moerbeka, Lemmata e Simplicii commentario decerpta, Pseudo-Augustini Paraphrasis Themistiana - Desclée De Brouwer (Bruges-Paris 1961).

This is a redirect from a page name that does not have diacritical marks (accents, umlauts, etc.) to essentially the same page name with diacritical marks. For more information follow the bold category link. Apply this redirect (without piping) when the subject page concerns language translation or foreign language equivalents. Other pages that use this redirect should be updated with a direct link to the redirect target (again, without piping).

Charles Parsons may refer to: Charles Algernon Parsons (1854–1931), Irish engineer (of Anglo-Irish background) known for his invention of the steam turbine Charles Parsons (philosopher) (born 1933), professor in the philosophy of mathematics at Harvard University Chick Parsons (Charles Thomas Parsons, Jr., 1900–1988), American businessman, diplomat, and decorated World War II veteran Chuck Parsons (Charles W. Parsons, 1924–1999), American sports car racing driver Charlie Parsons (born 1958), television producer Charlie Parsons (baseball) (1863–1936), Major League Baseball pitcher Charles Parsons (company), a large Australian textile company   == See also == Charlie Parsons (disambiguation)

Charles Sanders Peirce (/ˈpɜrs/, like "purse", September 10, 1839 – April 19, 1914) was an American philosopher, logician, mathematician, and scientist who is sometimes known as "the father of pragmatism". He was educated as a chemist and employed as a scientist for 30 years. Today he is appreciated largely for his contributions to logic, mathematics, philosophy, scientific methodology, and semiotics, and for his founding of pragmatism. An innovator in mathematics, statistics, philosophy, research methodology, and various sciences, Peirce considered himself, first and foremost, a logician. He made major contributions to logic, but logic for him encompassed much of that which is now called epistemology and philosophy of science. He saw logic as the formal branch of semiotics, of which he is a founder, and which foreshadowed the debate among logical positivists and proponents of philosophy of language that dominated 20th century Western philosophy; additionally, he defined the concept of abductive reasoning, as well as rigorously formulated mathematical induction and deductive reasoning. As early as 1886 he saw that logical operations could be carried out by electrical switching circuits; the same idea was used decades later to produce digital computers. In 1934, the philosopher Paul Weiss called Peirce "the most original and versatile of American philosophers and America's greatest logician". Webster's Biographical Dictionary said in 1943 that Peirce was "now regarded as the most original thinker and greatest logician of his time." Keith Devlin similarly referred to Peirce as one of the greatest philosophers ever.   == LifeEdit ==  Peirce was born at 3 Phillips Place in Cambridge, Massachusetts. He was the son of Sarah Hunt Mills and Benjamin Peirce, himself a professor of astronomy and mathematics at Harvard University and perhaps the first serious research mathematician in America. At age 12, Charles read his older brother's copy of Richard Whately's Elements of Logic, then the leading English-language text on the subject. So began his lifelong fascination with logic and reasoning. He went on to earn the A.B. and A.M. from Harvard; in 1863 the Lawrence Scientific School awarded him a B.Sc. that was Harvard's first summa cum laude chemistry degree; and otherwise his academic record was undistinguished. At Harvard, he began lifelong friendships with Francis Ellingwood Abbot, Chauncey Wright, and William James. One of his Harvard instructors, Charles William Eliot, formed an unfavorable opinion of Peirce. This opinion proved fateful, because Eliot, while President of Harvard 1869–1909—a period encompassing nearly all of Peirce's working life—repeatedly vetoed Harvard's employing Peirce in any capacity. Peirce suffered from his late teens onward from a nervous condition then known as "facial neuralgia", which would today be diagnosed as trigeminal neuralgia. Brent says that when in the throes of its pain "he was, at first, almost stupefied, and then aloof, cold, depressed, extremely suspicious, impatient of the slightest crossing, and subject to violent outbursts of temper". Its consequences may have led to the social isolation which made his life's later years so tragic.   === Early employmentEdit === Between 1859 and 1891, Peirce was intermittently employed in various scientific capacities by the United States Coast Survey and its successor, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey, where he enjoyed his highly influential father's protection until the latter's death in 1880. That employment exempted Peirce from having to take part in the Civil War; it would have been very awkward for him to do so, as the Boston Brahmin Peirces sympathized with the Confederacy. At the Survey, he worked mainly in geodesy and gravimetry, refining the use of pendulums to determine small local variations in the Earth's gravity. He was elected a resident fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in January 1867. The Survey sent him to Europe five times, first in 1871 as part of a group sent to observe a solar eclipse; there, he sought out Augustus De Morgan, William Stanley Jevons, and William Kingdon Clifford, British mathematicians and logicians whose turn of mind resembled his own. From 1869 to 1872, he was employed as an Assistant in Harvard's astronomical observatory, doing important work on determining the brightness of stars and the shape of the Milky Way. On April 20, 1877 he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences. Also in 1877, he proposed measuring the meter as so many wavelengths of light of a certain frequency, the kind of definition employed from 1960 to 1983. During the 1880s, Peirce's indifference to bureaucratic detail waxed while his Survey work's quality and timeliness waned. Peirce took years to write reports that he should have completed in months. Meanwhile, he wrote entries, ultimately thousands during 1883–1909, on philosophy, logic, science, and other subjects for the encyclopedic Century Dictionary. In 1885, an investigation by the Allison Commission exonerated Peirce, but led to the dismissal of Superintendent Julius Hilgard and several other Coast Survey employees for misuse of public funds. In 1891, Peirce resigned from the Coast Survey at Superintendent Thomas Corwin Mendenhall's request. He never again held regular employment.   === Johns Hopkins UniversityEdit === In 1879, Peirce was appointed Lecturer in logic at the new Johns Hopkins University, which had strong departments in a number of areas that interested him, such as philosophy (Royce and Dewey completed their PhDs at Hopkins), psychology (taught by G. Stanley Hall and studied by Joseph Jastrow, who coauthored a landmark empirical study with Peirce), and mathematics (taught by J. J. Sylvester, who came to admire Peirce's work on mathematics and logic). 1883 saw publication of his Studies in Logic by Members of the Johns Hopkins University containing works by himself and Allan Marquand, Christine Ladd, Benjamin Ives Gilman, and Oscar Howard Mitchell, several of whom were his graduate students. Peirce's nontenured position at Hopkins was the only academic appointment he ever held. Brent documents something Peirce never suspected, namely that his efforts to obtain academic employment, grants, and scientific respectability were repeatedly frustrated by the covert opposition of a major Canadian-American scientist of the day, Simon Newcomb. Peirce's efforts may also have been hampered by a difficult personality; Brent conjectures as to further psychological difficulty. Conversely, Keith Devlin believes that Peirce's work was too far ahead of his time to be appreciated by the academic establishment of the day and that this played a large role in Peirce's inability to obtain a tenured position. Peirce's personal life worked against his professional success. After his first wife, Harriet Melusina Fay ("Zina"), left him in 1875, Peirce, while still legally married, became involved with Juliette, whose name, given variously as Froissy and Pourtalai and nationality (she spoke French) remain uncertain. When his divorce from Zina became final in 1883, he married Juliette. That year, Newcomb pointed out to a Johns Hopkins trustee that Peirce, while a Hopkins employee, had lived and traveled with a woman to whom he was not married; the ensuing scandal led to his dismissal in January 1884. Over the years Peirce sought academic employment at various universities without success. He had no children by either marriage.   === PovertyEdit === In 1887 Peirce spent part of his inheritance from his parents to buy 2,000 acres (8 km2) of rural land near Milford, Pennsylvania, which never yielded an economic return. There he had an 1854 farmhouse remodeled to his design. The Peirces named the property "Arisbe". There they lived with few interruptions for the rest of their lives, Charles writing prolifically, much of it unpublished to this day (see Works). Living beyond their means soon led to grave financial and legal difficulties. He spent much of his last two decades unable to afford heat in winter and subsisting on old bread donated by the local baker. Unable to afford new stationery, he wrote on the verso side of old manuscripts. An outstanding warrant for assault and unpaid debts led to his being a fugitive in New York City for a while. Several people, including his brother James Mills Peirce and his neighbors, relatives of Gifford Pinchot, settled his debts and paid his property taxes and mortgage. Peirce did some scientific and engineering consulting and wrote much for meager pay, mainly encyclopedic dictionary entries, and reviews for The Nation (with whose editor, Wendell Phillips Garrison, he became friendly). He did translations for the Smithsonian Institution, at its director Samuel Langley's instigation. Peirce also did substantial mathematical calculations for Langley's research on powered flight. Hoping to make money, Peirce tried inventing. He began but did not complete a number of books. In 1888, President Grover Cleveland appointed him to the Assay Commission.  From 1890 on, he had a friend and admirer in Judge Francis C. Russell of Chicago, who introduced Peirce to editor Paul Carus and owner Edward C. Hegeler of the pioneering American philosophy journal The Monist, which eventually published at least 14 articles by Peirce. He wrote many texts in James Mark Baldwin's Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology (1901–5); half of those credited to him appear to have been written actually by Christine Ladd-Franklin under his supervision. He applied in 1902 to the newly formed Carnegie Institution for a grant to write a systematic book of his life's work. The application was doomed; his nemesis Newcomb served on the Institution's executive committee, and its President had been the President of Johns Hopkins at the time of Peirce's dismissal. The one who did the most to help Peirce in these desperate times was his old friend William James, dedicating his Will to Believe (1897) to Peirce, and arranging for Peirce to be paid to give two series of lectures at or near Harvard (1898 and 1903). Most important, each year from 1907 until James's death in 1910, James wrote to his friends in the Boston intelligentsia to request financial aid for Peirce; the fund continued even after James died. Peirce reciprocated by designating James's eldest son as his heir should Juliette predecease him. It has been believed that this was also why Peirce used "Santiago" ("St. James" in English) as a middle name, but he appeared in print as early as 1890 as Charles Santiago Peirce. (See Charles Santiago Sanders Peirce for discussion and references). Peirce died destitute in Milford, Pennsylvania, twenty years before his widow.   === Slavery, the Civil War and racismEdit === Peirce grew up in a home where the supremacy of the white Anglo-Saxon male was taken for granted, Irish immigrants were considered inferior and Negro slavery was considered natural. Until the outbreak of the Civil War his father described himself as a secessionist, but after the outbreak of the war, this stopped and he became a Union partisan, supporting with donations the Sanitary Commission, the leading Northern war charity. No members of the Peirce family volunteered or enlisted. Peirce shared his father's views and liked to use the syllogism     All Men are equal in their political rights,    Negroes are Men    -  Negroes are equal in political rights to whites  to illustrate the unreliability of traditional forms of logic. See: Peirce's law#Other proofs of Peirce's law   == ReceptionEdit == Bertrand Russell (1959) wrote, "Beyond doubt [...] he was one of the most original minds of the later nineteenth century, and certainly the greatest American thinker ever." (Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica, published from 1910 to 1913, does not mention Peirce; Peirce's work was not widely known until later.) A. N. Whitehead, while reading some of Peirce's unpublished manuscripts soon after arriving at Harvard in 1924, was struck by how Peirce had anticipated his own "process" thinking. (On Peirce and process metaphysics, see Lowe 1964.) Karl Popper viewed Peirce as "one of the greatest philosophers of all times". Yet Peirce's achievements were not immediately recognized. His imposing contemporaries William James and Josiah Royce admired him, and Cassius Jackson Keyser at Columbia and C. K. Ogden wrote about Peirce with respect, but to no immediate effect. The first scholar to give Peirce his considered professional attention was Royce's student Morris Raphael Cohen, the editor of an anthology of Peirce's writings titled Chance, Love, and Logic (1923) and the author of the first bibliography of Peirce's scattered writings. John Dewey studied under Peirce at Johns Hopkins and, from 1916 onwards, Dewey's writings repeatedly mention Peirce with deference. His 1938 Logic: The Theory of Inquiry is much influenced by Peirce. The publication of the first six volumes of the Collected Papers (1931–35), the most important event to date in Peirce studies and one that Cohen made possible by raising the needed funds, did not prompt an outpouring of secondary studies. The editors of those volumes, Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss, did not become Peirce specialists. Early landmarks of the secondary literature include the monographs by Buchler (1939), Feibleman (1946), and Goudge (1950), the 1941 Ph.D. thesis by Arthur W. Burks (who went on to edit volumes 7 and 8), and the studies edited by Wiener and Young (1952). The Charles S. Peirce Society was founded in 1946. Its Transactions, an academic quarterly specializing in Peirce, pragmatism, and American philosophy, has appeared since 1965. In 1949, while doing unrelated archival work, the historian of mathematics Carolyn Eisele (1902–2000) chanced on an autograph letter by Peirce. So began her 40 years of research on Peirce the mathematician and scientist, culminating in Eisele (1976, 1979, 1985). Beginning around 1960, the philosopher and historian of ideas Max Fisch (1900–1995) emerged as an authority on Peirce; Fisch (1986) includes many of his relevant articles, including a wide-ranging survey (Fisch 1986: 422–48) of the impact of Peirce's thought through 1983. Peirce has gained a significant international following, marked by university research centers devoted to Peirce studies and pragmatism in Brazil (CeneP/CIEP), Finland (HPRC, including Commens), Germany (Wirth's group, Hoffman's and Otte's group, and Deuser's and Härle's group), France (L'I.R.S.C.E.), Spain (GEP), and Italy (CSP). His writings have been translated into several languages, including German, French, Finnish, Spanish, and Swedish. Since 1950, there have been French, Italian, Spanish, British, and Brazilian Peirceans of note. For many years, the North American philosophy department most devoted to Peirce was the University of Toronto's, thanks in good part to the leadership of Thomas Goudge and David Savan. In recent years, U.S. Peirce scholars have clustered at Indiana University - Purdue University Indianapolis, home of the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), and the Pennsylvania State University.  Currently, considerable interest is being taken in Peirce's ideas by researchers wholly outside the arena of academic philosophy. The interest comes from industry, business, technology, intelligence organizations, and the military; and it has resulted in the existence of a substantial number of agencies, institutes, businesses, and laboratories in which ongoing research into and development of Peircean concepts are being vigorously undertaken.  In recent years, Peirce's trichotomy of signs is exploited by a growing number of practitioners for marketing and design tasks.   == WorksEdit == Peirce's reputation rests largely on a number of academic papers published in American scientific and scholarly journals such as Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Journal of Speculative Philosophy, The Monist, Popular Science Monthly, the American Journal of Mathematics, Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences, The Nation, and others. See Articles by Peirce, published in his lifetime for an extensive list with links to them online. The only full-length book (neither extract nor pamphlet) that Peirce authored and saw published in his lifetime was Photometric Researches (1878), a 181-page monograph on the applications of spectrographic methods to astronomy. While at Johns Hopkins, he edited Studies in Logic (1883), containing chapters by himself and his graduate students. Besides lectures during his years (1879–1884) as Lecturer in Logic at Johns Hopkins, he gave at least nine series of lectures, many now published; see Lectures by Peirce. Harvard University obtained from Peirce's widow soon after his death the papers found in his study, but did not microfilm them until 1964. Only after Richard Robin (1967) catalogued this Nachlass did it become clear that Peirce had left approximately 1650 unpublished manuscripts, totaling over 100,000 pages, mostly still unpublished except on microfilm. On the vicissitudes of Peirce's papers, see Houser (1989). Reportedly the papers remain in unsatisfactory condition. The first published anthology of Peirce's articles was the one-volume Chance, Love and Logic: Philosophical Essays, edited by Morris Raphael Cohen, 1923, still in print. Other one-volume anthologies were published in 1940, 1957, 1958, 1972, 1994, and 2009, most still in print. The main posthumous editions of Peirce's works in their long trek to light, often multi-volume, and some still in print, have included: 1931–58: Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (CP), 8 volumes, includes many published works, along with a selection of previously unpublished work and a smattering of his correspondence. This long-time standard edition drawn from Peirce's work from the 1860s to 1913 remains the most comprehensive survey of his prolific output from 1893 to 1913. It is organized thematically, but texts (including lecture series) are often split up across volumes, while texts from various stages in Peirce's development are often combined, requiring frequent visits to editors' notes. Edited (1–6) by Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss and (7–8) by Arthur Burks, in print and online. 1975–87: Charles Sanders Peirce: Contributions to The Nation, 4 volumes, includes Peirce's more than 300 reviews and articles published 1869–1908 in The Nation. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner and James Edward Cook, online. 1976: The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce, 4 volumes in 5, included many previously unpublished Peirce manuscripts on mathematical subjects, along with Peirce's important published mathematical articles. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1977: Semiotic and Significs: The Correspondence between C. S. Peirce and Victoria Lady Welby (2nd edition 2001), included Peirce's entire correspondence (1903–1912) with Victoria, Lady Welby. Peirce's other published correspondence is largely limited to the 14 letters included in volume 8 of the Collected Papers, and the 20-odd pre-1890 items included so far in the Writings. Edited by Charles S. Hardwick with James Cook, out of print. 1982–now: Writings of Charles S. Peirce, A Chronological Edition (W), Volumes 1–6 & 8, of a projected 30. The limited coverage, and defective editing and organization, of the Collected Papers led Max Fisch and others in the 1970s to found the Peirce Edition Project (PEP), whose mission is to prepare a more complete critical chronological edition. Only seven volumes have appeared to date, but they cover the period from 1859–1892, when Peirce carried out much of his best-known work. W 8 was published in November 2010; and work continues on W 7, 9, and 11. In print and online. 1985: Historical Perspectives on Peirce's Logic of Science: A History of Science, 2 volumes. Auspitz has said, "The extent of Peirce's immersion in the science of his day is evident in his reviews in the Nation [...] and in his papers, grant applications, and publishers' prospectuses in the history and practice of science", referring latterly to Historical Perspectives. Edited by Carolyn Eisele, back in print. 1992: Reasoning and the Logic of Things collects in one place Peirce's 1898 series of lectures invited by William James. Edited by Kenneth Laine Ketner, with commentary by Hilary Putnam, in print. 1992–98: The Essential Peirce (EP), 2 volumes, is an important recent sampler of Peirce's philosophical writings. Edited (1) by Nathan Hauser and Christian Kloesel and (2) by PEP editors, in print. 1997: Pragmatism as a Principle and Method of Right Thinking collects Peirce's 1903 Harvard "Lectures on Pragmatism" in a study edition, including drafts, of Peirce's lecture manuscripts, which had been previously published in abridged form; the lectures now also appear in EP 2. Edited by Patricia Ann Turisi, in print. 2010: Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Writings collects important writings by Peirce on the subject, many not previously in print. Edited by Matthew E. Moore, in print.   == MathematicsEdit ==  Peirce's most important work in pure mathematics was in logical and foundational areas. He also worked on linear algebra, matrices, various geometries, topology and Listing numbers, Bell numbers, graphs, the four-color problem, and the nature of continuity. He worked on applied mathematics in economics, engineering, and map projections (such as the Peirce quincuncial projection), and was especially active in probability and statistics. Discoveries Peirce made a number of striking discoveries in formal logic and foundational mathematics, nearly all of which came to be appreciated only long after he died: In 1860 he suggested a cardinal arithmetic for infinite numbers, years before any work by Georg Cantor (who completed his dissertation in 1867) and without access to Bernard Bolzano's 1851 (posthumous) Paradoxien des Unendlichen.  In 1880–81 he showed how Boolean algebra could be done via a repeated sufficient single binary operation (logical NOR), anticipating Henry M. Sheffer by 33 years. (See also De Morgan's Laws). In 1881 he set out the axiomatization of natural number arithmetic, a few years before Richard Dedekind and Giuseppe Peano. In the same paper Peirce gave, years before Dedekind, the first purely cardinal definition of a finite set in the sense now known as "Dedekind-finite", and implied by the same stroke an important formal definition of an infinite set (Dedekind-infinite), as a set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with one of its proper subsets. In 1885 he distinguished between first-order and second-order quantification. In the same paper he set out what can be read as the first (primitive) axiomatic set theory, anticipating Zermelo by about two decades (Brady 2000, pp. 132–3). In 1886 he saw that Boolean calculations could be carried out via electrical switches, anticipating Claude Shannon by more than 50 years.  By the later 1890s he was devising existential graphs, a diagrammatic notation for the predicate calculus. Based on them are John F. Sowa's conceptual graphs and Sun-Joo Shin's diagrammatic reasoning. The New Elements of Mathematics Peirce wrote drafts for an introductory textbook, with the working title The New Elements of Mathematics, that presented mathematics from an original standpoint. Those drafts and many other of his previously unpublished mathematical manuscripts finally appeared in The New Elements of Mathematics by Charles S. Peirce (1976), edited by mathematician Carolyn Eisele. Nature of mathematics Peirce agreed with Auguste Comte in regarding mathematics as more basic than philosophy and the special sciences (of nature and mind). Peirce classified mathematics into three subareas: (1) mathematics of logic, (2) discrete series, and (3) pseudo-continua (as he called them, including the real numbers) and continua. Influenced by his father Benjamin, Peirce argued that mathematics studies purely hypothetical objects and is not just the science of quantity but is more broadly the science which draws necessary conclusions; that mathematics aids logic, not vice versa; and that logic itself is part of philosophy and is the science about drawing conclusions necessary and otherwise.   === Mathematics of logicEdit ===  Beginning with his first paper on the "Logic of Relatives" (1870), Peirce extended the theory of relations that Augustus De Morgan had just recently awakened from its Cinderella slumbers. Much of the mathematics of relations now taken for granted was "borrowed" from Peirce, not always with all due credit; on that and on how the young Bertrand Russell, especially his Principles of Mathematics and Principia Mathematica, did not do Peirce justice, see Anellis (1995). In 1918 the logician C. I. Lewis wrote, "The contributions of C.S. Peirce to symbolic logic are more numerous and varied than those of any other writer — at least in the nineteenth century." Beginning in 1940, Alfred Tarski and his students rediscovered aspects of Peirce's larger vision of relational logic, developing the perspective of relation algebra. Relational logic gained applications. In mathematics, it influenced the abstract analysis of E. H. Moore and the lattice theory of Garrett Birkhoff. In computer science, the relational model for databases was developed with Peircean ideas in work of Edgar F. Codd, who was a doctoral student of Arthur W. Burks, a Peirce scholar. In economics, relational logic was used by Frank P. Ramsey, John von Neumann, and Paul Samuelson to study preferences and utility and by Kenneth J. Arrow in Social Choice and Individual Values, following Arrow's association with Tarski at City College of New York. On Peirce and his contemporaries Ernst Schröder and Gottlob Frege, Hilary Putnam (1982) documented that Frege's work on the logic of quantifiers had little influence on his contemporaries, although it was published four years before the work of Peirce and his student Oscar Howard Mitchell. Putnam found that mathematicians and logicians learned about the logic of quantifiers through the independent work of Peirce and Mitchell, particularly through Peirce's "On the Algebra of Logic: A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation" (1885), published in the premier American mathematical journal of the day, and cited by Peano and Schröder, among others, who ignored Frege. They also adopted and modified Peirce's notations, typographical variants of those now used. Peirce apparently was ignorant of Frege's work, despite their overlapping achievements in logic, philosophy of language, and the foundations of mathematics. Peirce's work on formal logic had admirers besides Ernst Schröder: Philosophical algebraist William Kingdon Clifford and logician William Ernest Johnson, both British; The Polish school of logic and foundational mathematics, including Alfred Tarski; Arthur Prior, who praised and studied Peirce's logical work in a 1964 paper and in Formal Logic (saying on page 4 that Peirce "perhaps had a keener eye for essentials than any other logician before or since."). A philosophy of logic, grounded in his categories and semiotic, can be extracted from Peirce's writings and, along with Peirce's logical work more generally, is exposited and defended in Hilary Putnam (1982); the Introduction in Nathan Houser et al. (1997); and Randall Dipert's chapter in Cheryl Misak (2004).   === ContinuaEdit === Continuity and synechism are central in Peirce's philosophy: "I did not at first suppose that it was, as I gradually came to find it, the master-Key of philosophy". From a mathematical point of view, he embraced infinitesimals and worked long on the mathematics of continua. He long held that the real numbers constitute a pseudo-continuum; that a true continuum is the real subject matter of analysis situs (topology); and that a true continuum of instants exceeds—and within any lapse of time has room for—any Aleph number (any infinite multitude as he called it) of instants. In 1908 Peirce wrote that he found that a true continuum might have or lack such room. Jérôme Havenel (2008): "It is on May 26, 1908, that Peirce finally gave up his idea that in every continuum there is room for whatever collection of any multitude. From now on, there are different kinds of continua, which have different properties."   === Probability and statisticsEdit === Peirce held that science achieves statistical probabilities, not certainties, and that spontaneity (absolute chance) is real (see Tychism on his view). Most of his statistical writings promote the frequency interpretation of probability (objective ratios of cases), and many of his writings express skepticism about (and criticize the use of) probability when such models are not based on objective randomization. Though Peirce was largely a frequentist, his possible world semantics introduced the "propensity" theory of probability before Karl Popper. Peirce (sometimes with Joseph Jastrow) investigated the probability judgments of experimental subjects, "perhaps the very first" elicitation and estimation of subjective probabilities in experimental psychology and (what came to be called) Bayesian statistics. Peirce was one of the founders of statistics. He formulated modern statistics in "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" (1877–8) and "A Theory of Probable Inference" (1883). With a repeated measures design, Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow introduced blinded, controlled randomized experiments in 1884 (Hacking 1990:205) (before Ronald A. Fisher). He invented optimal design for experiments on gravity, in which he "corrected the means". He used correlation and smoothing. Peirce extended the work on outliers by Benjamin Peirce, his father. He introduced terms "confidence" and "likelihood" (before Jerzy Neyman and Fisher). (See Stephen Stigler's historical books and Ian Hacking 1990).   == PhilosophyEdit ==  It is not sufficiently recognized that Peirce's career was that of a scientist, not a philosopher; and that during his lifetime he was known and valued chiefly as a scientist, only secondarily as a logician, and scarcely at all as a philosopher. Even his work in philosophy and logic will not be understood until this fact becomes a standing premise of Peircean studies.  Peirce was a working scientist for 30 years, and arguably was a professional philosopher only during the five years he lectured at Johns Hopkins. He learned philosophy mainly by reading, each day, a few pages of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, in the original German, while a Harvard undergraduate. His writings bear on a wide array of disciplines, including mathematics, logic, philosophy, statistics, astronomy, metrology, geodesy, experimental psychology, economics, linguistics, and the history and philosophy of science. This work has enjoyed renewed interest and approval, a revival inspired not only by his anticipations of recent scientific developments but also by his demonstration of how philosophy can be applied effectively to human problems. Peirce's philosophy includes (see below in related sections) a pervasive three-category system, belief that truth is immutable and is both independent from actual opinion (fallibilism) and discoverable (no radical skepticism), logic as formal semiotic on signs, on arguments, and on inquiry's ways—including philosophical pragmatism (which he founded), critical common-sensism, and scientific method—and, in metaphysics: Scholastic realism, e.g. John Duns Scotus, belief in God, freedom, and at least an attenuated immortality, objective idealism, and belief in the reality of continuity and of absolute chance, mechanical necessity, and creative love. In his work, fallibilism and pragmatism may seem to work somewhat like skepticism and positivism, respectively, in others' work. However, for Peirce, fallibilism is balanced by an anti-skepticism and is a basis for belief in the reality of absolute chance and of continuity, and pragmatism commits one to anti-nominalist belief in the reality of the general (CP 5.453–7). For Peirce, First Philosophy, which he also called cenoscopy, is less basic than mathematics and more basic than the special sciences (of nature and mind). It studies positive phenomena in general, phenomena available to any person at any waking moment, and does not settle questions by resorting to special experiences. He divided such philosophy into (1) phenomenology (which he also called phaneroscopy or categorics), (2) normative sciences (esthetics, ethics, and logic), and (3) metaphysics; his views on them are discussed in order below.   === Theory of categoriesEdit ===  On May 14, 1867, the 27-year-old Peirce presented a paper entitled "On a New List of Categories" to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, which published it the following year. The paper outlined a theory of predication, involving three universal categories that Peirce developed in response to reading Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel, categories that Peirce applied throughout his work for the rest of his life. Peirce scholars generally regard the "New List" as foundational or breaking the ground for Peirce's "architectonic", his blueprint for a pragmatic philosophy. In the categories one will discern, concentrated, the pattern that one finds formed by the three grades of clearness in "How To Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878 paper foundational to pragmatism), and in numerous other trichotomies in his work. "On a New List of Categories" is cast as a Kantian deduction; it is short but dense and difficult to summarize. The following table is compiled from that and later works. In 1893, Peirce restated most of it for a less advanced audience.  *Note: An interpretant is an interpretation (human or otherwise) in the sense of the product of an interpretive process.   === Aesthetics and ethicsEdit === Peirce did not write extensively in aesthetics and ethics, but came by 1902 to hold that aesthetics, ethics, and logic, in that order, comprise the normative sciences. He characterized aesthetics as the study of the good (grasped as the admirable), and thus of the ends governing all conduct and thought.   == Philosophy: logic, or semioticEdit ==   === Logic as philosophicalEdit === Peirce regarded logic per se as a division of philosophy, as a normative science based on esthetics and ethics, as more basic than metaphysics, and as "the art of devising methods of research". More generally, as inference, "logic is rooted in the social principle", since inference depends on a standpoint that, in a sense, is unlimited. Peirce called (with no sense of deprecation) "mathematics of logic" much of the kind of thing which, in current research and applications, is called simply "logic". He was productive in both (philosophical) logic and logic's mathematics, which were connected deeply in his work and thought. Peirce argued that logic is formal semiotic, the formal study of signs in the broadest sense, not only signs that are artificial, linguistic, or symbolic, but also signs that are semblances or are indexical such as reactions. Peirce held that "all this universe is perfused with signs, if it is not composed exclusively of signs", along with their representational and inferential relations. He argued that, since all thought takes time, all thought is in signs and sign processes ("semiosis") such as the inquiry process. He divided logic into: (1) speculative grammar, or stechiology, on how signs can be meaningful and, in relation to that, what kinds of signs there are, how they combine, and how some embody or incorporate others; (2) logical critic, or logic proper, on the modes of inference; and (3) speculative or universal rhetoric, or methodeutic, the philosophical theory of inquiry, including pragmatism.   ==== Presuppositions of logicEdit ==== In his "F.R.L." [First Rule of Logic] (1899), Peirce states that the first, and "in one sense, the sole", rule of reason is that, to learn, one needs to desire to learn and desire it without resting satisfied with that which one is inclined to think. So, the first rule is, to wonder. Peirce proceeds to a critical theme in research practices and the shaping of theories: ...there follows one corollary which itself deserves to be inscribed upon every wall of the city of philosophy: Do not block the way of inquiry. Peirce adds, that method and economy are best in research but no outright sin inheres in trying any theory in the sense that the investigation via its trial adoption can proceed unimpeded and undiscouraged, and that "the one unpardonable offence" is a philosophical barricade against truth's advance, an offense to which "metaphysicians in all ages have shown themselves the most addicted". Peirce in many writings holds that logic precedes metaphysics (ontological, religious, and physical). Peirce goes on to list four common barriers to inquiry: (1) Assertion of absolute certainty; (2) maintaining that something is absolutely unknowable; (3) maintaining that something is absolutely inexplicable because absolutely basic or ultimate; (4) holding that perfect exactitude is possible, especially such as to quite preclude unusual and anomalous phenomena. To refuse absolute theoretical certainty is the heart of fallibilism, which Peirce unfolds into refusals to set up any of the listed barriers. Peirce elsewhere argues (1897) that logic's presupposition of fallibilism leads at length to the view that chance and continuity are very real (tychism and synechism). The First Rule of Logic pertains to the mind's presuppositions in undertaking reason and logic, presuppositions, for instance, that truth and the real do not depend on yours or my opinion of them but do depend on representational relation and consist in the destined end in investigation taken far enough (see below). He describes such ideas as, collectively, hopes which, in particular cases, one is unable seriously to doubt.   ==== Four incapacitiesEdit ====  In three articles in 1868–69, Peirce rejected mere verbal or hyperbolic doubt and first or ultimate principles, and argued that we have (as he numbered them): No power of Introspection. All knowledge of the internal world comes by hypothetical reasoning from known external facts. No power of Intuition (cognition without logical determination by previous cognitions). No cognitive stage is absolutely first in a process. All mental action has the form of inference. No power of thinking without signs. A cognition must be interpreted in a subsequent cognition in order to be a cognition at all. No conception of the absolutely incognizable. (The above sense of the term "intuition" is almost Kant's, said Peirce. It differs from the current looser sense that encompasses instinctive or anyway half-conscious inference.) Peirce argued that those incapacities imply the reality of the general and of the continuous, the validity of the modes of reasoning, and the falsity of philosophical Cartesianism (see below). Peirce rejected the conception (usually ascribed to Kant) of the unknowable thing-in-itself and later said that to "dismiss make-believes" is a prerequisite for pragmatism.   ==== Logic as formal semioticEdit ==== Peirce sought, through his wide-ranging studies through the decades, formal philosophical ways to articulate thought's processes, and also to explain the workings of science. These inextricably entangled questions of a dynamics of inquiry rooted in nature and nurture led him to develop his semiotic with very broadened conceptions of signs and inference, and, as its culmination, a theory of inquiry for the task of saying 'how science works' and devising research methods. This would be logic by the medieval definition taught for centuries: art of arts, science of sciences, having the way to the principles of all methods. Influences radiate from points on parallel lines of inquiry in Aristotle's work, in such loci as: the basic terminology of psychology in On the Soul; the founding description of sign relations in On Interpretation; and the differentiation of inference into three modes that are commonly translated into English as abduction, deduction, and induction, in the Prior Analytics, as well as inference by analogy (called paradeigma by Aristotle), which Peirce regarded as involving the other three modes. Peirce began writing on semiotic in the 1860s, around the time when he devised his system of three categories. He called it both semiotic and semeiotic. Both are current in singular and plural. He based it on the conception of a triadic sign relation, and defined semiosis as "action, or influence, which is, or involves, a cooperation of three subjects, such as a sign, its object, and its interpretant, this tri-relative influence not being in any way resolvable into actions between pairs". As to signs in thought, Peirce emphasized the reverse:  To say, therefore, that thought cannot happen in an instant, but requires a time, is but another way of saying that every thought must be interpreted in another, or that all thought is in signs.  Peirce held that all thought is in signs, issuing in and from interpretation, where 'sign' is the word for the broadest variety of conceivable semblances, diagrams, metaphors, symptoms, signals, designations, symbols, texts, even mental concepts and ideas, all as determinations of a mind or quasi-mind, that which at least functions like a mind, as in the work of crystals or bees — the focus is on sign action in general rather than on psychology, linguistics, or social studies (fields which he also pursued). Inquiry is a kind of inference process, a manner of thinking and semiosis. Global divisions of ways for phenomena to stand as signs, and the subsumption of inquiry and thinking within inference as a sign process, enable the study of inquiry on semiotics' three levels: Conditions for meaningfulness. Study of significatory elements and combinations, their grammar. Validity, conditions for true representation. Critique of arguments in their various separate modes. Conditions for determining interpretations. Methodology of inquiry in its mutually interacting modes. Peirce uses examples often from common experience, but defines and discusses such things as assertion and interpretation in terms of philosophical logic. In a formal vein, Peirce said:  On the Definition of Logic. Logic is formal semiotic. A sign is something, A, which brings something, B, its interpretant sign, determined or created by it, into the same sort of correspondence (or a lower implied sort) with something, C, its object, as that in which itself stands to C. This definition no more involves any reference to human thought than does the definition of a line as the place within which a particle lies during a lapse of time. It is from this definition that I deduce the principles of logic by mathematical reasoning, and by mathematical reasoning that, I aver, will support criticism of Weierstrassian severity, and that is perfectly evident. The word "formal" in the definition is also defined.     —Peirce, "Carnegie Application", The New Elements of Mathematics v. 4, p. 54.   === SignsEdit ===  A list of noted writings by Peirce on signs and sign relations is at Semiotic elements and classes of signs (Peirce)#References and further reading.   ==== Sign relationEdit ==== Peirce's theory of signs is known to be one of the most complex semiotic theories due to its generalistic claim. Anything is a sign — not absolutely as itself, but instead in some relation or other. The sign relation is the key. It defines three roles encompassing (1) the sign, (2) the sign's subject matter, called its object, and (3) the sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of effect called its interpretant (a further sign, for example a translation). It is an irreducible triadic relation, according to Peirce. The roles are distinct even when the things that fill those roles are not. The roles are but three; a sign of an object leads to one or more interpretants, and, as signs, they lead to further interpretants. Extension × intension = information. Two traditional approaches to sign relation, necessary though insufficient, are the way of extension (a sign's objects, also called breadth, denotation, or application) and the way of intension (the objects' characteristics, qualities, attributes referenced by the sign, also called depth, comprehension, significance, or connotation). Peirce adds a third, the way of information, including change of information, to integrate the other two approaches into a unified whole. For example, because of the equation above, if a term's total amount of information stays the same, then the more that the term 'intends' or signifies about objects, the fewer are the objects to which the term 'extends' or applies. Determination. A sign depends on its object in such a way as to represent its object — the object enables and, in a sense, determines the sign. A physically causal sense of this stands out when a sign consists in an indicative reaction. The interpretant depends likewise on both the sign and the object — an object determines a sign to determine an interpretant. But this determination is not a succession of dyadic events, like a row of toppling dominoes; sign determination is triadic. For example, an interpretant does not merely represent something which represented an object; instead an interpretant represents something as a sign representing the object. The object (be it a quality or fact or law or even fictional) determines the sign to an interpretant through one's collateral experience with the object, in which the object is found or from which it is recalled, as when a sign consists in a chance semblance of an absent object. Peirce used the word "determine" not in a strictly deterministic sense, but in a sense of "specializes," bestimmt, involving variable amount, like an influence. Peirce came to define representation and interpretation in terms of (triadic) determination. The object determines the sign to determine another sign — the interpretant — to be related to the object as the sign is related to the object, hence the interpretant, fulfilling its function as sign of the object, determines a further interpretant sign. The process is logically structured to perpetuate itself, and is definitive of sign, object, and interpretant in general.   ==== Semiotic elementsEdit ==== Peirce held there are exactly three basic elements in semiosis (sign action): A sign (or representamen) represents, in the broadest possible sense of "represents". It is something interpretable as saying something about something. It is not necessarily symbolic, linguistic, or artificial—a cloud might be a sign of rain for instance, or ruins the sign of ancient civilization. As Peirce sometimes put it (he defined sign at least 76 times), the sign stands for the object to the interpretant. A sign represents its object in some respect, which respect is the sign's ground. An object (or semiotic object) is a subject matter of a sign and an interpretant. It can be anything thinkable, a quality, an occurrence, a rule, etc., even fictional, such as Prince Hamlet. All of those are special or partial objects. The object most accurately is the universe of discourse to which the partial or special object belongs. For instance, a perturbation of Pluto's orbit is a sign about Pluto but ultimately not only about Pluto. An object either (i) is immediate to a sign and is the object as represented in the sign or (ii) is a dynamic object, the object as it really is, on which the immediate object is founded "as on bedrock". An interpretant (or interpretant sign) is a sign's meaning or ramification as formed into a kind of idea or effect, an interpretation, human or otherwise. An interpretant is a sign (a) of the object and (b) of the interpretant's "predecessor" (the interpreted sign) as a sign of the same object. An interpretant either (i) is immediate to a sign and is a kind of quality or possibility such as a word's usual meaning, or (ii) is a dynamic interpretant, such as a state of agitation, or (iii) is a final or normal interpretant, a sum of the lessons which a sufficiently considered sign would have as effects on practice, and with which an actual interpretant may at most coincide. Some of the understanding needed by the mind depends on familiarity with the object. To know what a given sign denotes, the mind needs some experience of that sign's object, experience outside of, and collateral to, that sign or sign system. In that context Peirce speaks of collateral experience, collateral observation, collateral acquaintance, all in much the same terms.   ==== Classes of signsEdit ==== Among Peirce's many sign typologies, three stand out, interlocked. The first typology depends on the sign itself, the second on how the sign stands for its denoted object, and the third on how the sign stands for its object to its interpretant. Also, each of the three typologies is a three-way division, a trichotomy, via Peirce's three phenomenological categories: (1) quality of feeling, (2) reaction, resistance, and (3) representation, mediation. I. Qualisign, sinsign, legisign (also called tone, token, type, and also called potisign, actisign, famisign): This typology classifies every sign according to the sign's own phenomenological category—the qualisign is a quality, a possibility, a "First"; the sinsign is a reaction or resistance, a singular object, an actual event or fact, a "Second"; and the legisign is a habit, a rule, a representational relation, a "Third". II. Icon, index, symbol: This typology, the best known one, classifies every sign according to the category of the sign's way of denoting its object—the icon (also called semblance or likeness) by a quality of its own, the index by factual connection to its object, and the symbol by a habit or rule for its interpretant. III. Rheme, dicisign, argument (also called sumisign, dicisign, suadisign, also seme, pheme, delome, and regarded as very broadened versions of the traditional term, proposition, argument): This typology classifies every sign according to the category which the interpretant attributes to the sign's way of denoting its object—the rheme, for example a term, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of quality; the dicisign, for example a proposition, is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of fact; and the argument is a sign interpreted to represent its object in respect of habit or law. This is the culminating typology of the three, where the sign is understood as a structural element of inference. Every sign belongs to one class or another within (I) and within (II) and within (III). Thus each of the three typologies is a three-valued parameter for every sign. The three parameters are not independent of each other; many co-classifications are absent, for reasons pertaining to the lack of either habit-taking or singular reaction in a quality, and the lack of habit-taking in a singular reaction. The result is not 27 but instead ten classes of signs fully specified at this level of analysis.   === Modes of inferenceEdit ===  Borrowing a brace of concepts from Aristotle, Peirce examined three basic modes of inference — abduction, deduction, and induction — in his "critique of arguments" or "logic proper". Peirce also called abduction "retroduction", "presumption", and, earliest of all, "hypothesis". He characterized it as guessing and as inference to an explanatory hypothesis. He sometimes expounded the modes of inference by transformations of the categorical syllogism Barbara (AAA), for example in "Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis" (1878). He does this by rearranging the rule (Barbara's major premise), the case (Barbara's minor premise), and the result (Barbara's conclusion): Peirce 1883 in "A Theory of Probable Inference" (Studies in Logic) equated hypothetical inference with the induction of characters of objects (as he had done in effect before). Eventually dissatisfied, by 1900 he distinguished them once and for all and also wrote that he now took the syllogistic forms and the doctrine of logical extension and comprehension as being less basic than he had thought. In 1903 he presented the following logical form for abductive inference:  The surprising fact, C, is observed; But if A were true, C would be a matter of course, Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true.  The logical form does not also cover induction, since induction neither depends on surprise nor proposes a new idea for its conclusion. Induction seeks facts to test a hypothesis; abduction seeks a hypothesis to account for facts. "Deduction proves that something must be; Induction shows that something actually is operative; Abduction merely suggests that something may be." Peirce did not remain quite convinced that one logical form covers all abduction. In his methodeutic or theory of inquiry (see below), he portrayed abduction as an economic initiative to further inference and study, and portrayed all three modes as clarified by their coordination in essential roles in inquiry: hypothetical explanation, deductive prediction, inductive testing.   === PragmatismEdit ===  Peirce's recipe for pragmatic thinking, which he called pragmatism and, later, pragmaticism, is recapitulated in several versions of the so-called pragmatic maxim. Here is one of his more emphatic reiterations of it:  Consider what effects that might conceivably have practical bearings you conceive the objects of your conception to have. Then, your conception of those effects is the whole of your conception of the object.  As a movement, pragmatism began in the early 1870s in discussions among Peirce, William James, and others in the Metaphysical Club. James among others regarded some articles by Peirce such as "The Fixation of Belief" (1877) and especially "How to Make Our Ideas Clear" (1878) as foundational to pragmatism. Peirce (CP 5.11–12), like James (Pragmatism: A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking, 1907), saw pragmatism as embodying familiar attitudes, in philosophy and elsewhere, elaborated into a new deliberate method for fruitful thinking about problems. Peirce differed from James and the early John Dewey, in some of their tangential enthusiasms, in being decidedly more rationalistic and realistic, in several senses of those terms, throughout the preponderance of his own philosophical moods. In 1905 Peirce coined the new name pragmaticism "for the precise purpose of expressing the original definition", saying that "all went happily" with James's and F.C.S. Schiller's variant uses of the old name "pragmatism" and that he coined the new name because of the old name's growing use in "literary journals, where it gets abused". Yet he cited as causes, in a 1906 manuscript, his differences with James and Schiller and, in a 1908 publication, his differences with James as well as literary author Giovanni Papini's declaration of pragmatism's indefinability. Peirce in any case regarded his views that truth is immutable and infinity is real, as being opposed by the other pragmatists, but he remained allied with them on other issues. Pragmatism begins with the idea that belief is that on which one is prepared to act. Peirce's pragmatism is a method of clarification of conceptions of objects. It equates any conception of an object to a conception of that object's effects to a general extent of the effects' conceivable implications for informed practice. It is a method of sorting out conceptual confusions occasioned, for example, by distinctions that make (sometimes needed) formal yet not practical differences. He formulated both pragmatism and statistical principles as aspects of scientific logic, in his "Illustrations of the Logic of Science" series of articles. In the second one, "How to Make Our Ideas Clear", Peirce discussed three grades of clearness of conception: Clearness of a conception familiar and readily used, even if unanalyzed and undeveloped. Clearness of a conception in virtue of clearness of its parts, in virtue of which logicians called an idea "distinct", that is, clarified by analysis of just what makes it applicable. Elsewhere, echoing Kant, Peirce called a likewise distinct definition "nominal" (CP 5.553). Clearness in virtue of clearness of conceivable practical implications of the object's conceived effects, such as fosters fruitful reasoning, especially on difficult problems. Here he introduced that which he later called the pragmatic maxim. By way of example of how to clarify conceptions, he addressed conceptions about truth and the real as questions of the presuppositions of reasoning in general. In clearness's second grade (the "nominal" grade), he defined truth as a sign's correspondence to its object, and the real as the object of such correspondence, such that truth and the real are independent of that which you or I or any actual, definite community of inquirers think. After that needful but confined step, next in clearness's third grade (the pragmatic, practice-oriented grade) he defined truth as that opinion which would be reached, sooner or later but still inevitably, by research taken far enough, such that the real does depend on that ideal final opinion—a dependence to which he appeals in theoretical arguments elsewhere, for instance for the long-run validity of the rule of induction. Peirce argued that even to argue against the independence and discoverability of truth and the real is to presuppose that there is, about that very question under argument, a truth with just such independence and discoverability. Peirce said that a conception's meaning consists in "all general modes of rational conduct" implied by "acceptance" of the conception—that is, if one were to accept, first of all, the conception as true, then what could one conceive to be consequent general modes of rational conduct by all who accept the conception as true?—the whole of such consequent general modes is the whole meaning. His pragmatism does not equate a conception's meaning, its intellectual purport, with the conceived benefit or cost of the conception itself, like a meme (or, say, propaganda), outside the perspective of its being true, nor, since a conception is general, is its meaning equated with any definite set of actual consequences or upshots corroborating or undermining the conception or its worth. His pragmatism also bears no resemblance to "vulgar" pragmatism, which misleadingly connotes a ruthless and Machiavellian search for mercenary or political advantage. Instead the pragmatic maxim is the heart of his pragmatism as a method of experimentational mental reflection arriving at conceptions in terms of conceivable confirmatory and disconfirmatory circumstances—a method hospitable to the formation of explanatory hypotheses, and conducive to the use and improvement of verification. Peirce's pragmatism, as method and theory of definitions and conceptual clearness, is part of his theory of inquiry, which he variously called speculative, general, formal or universal rhetoric or simply methodeutic. He applied his pragmatism as a method throughout his work.   ==== Theory of inquiryEdit ====   ===== Critical common-sensismEdit ===== Critical common-sensism, treated by Peirce as a consequence of his pragmatism, is his combination of Thomas Reid's common-sense philosophy with a fallibilism that recognizes that propositions of our more or less vague common sense now indubitable may later come into question, for example because of transformations of our world through science. It includes efforts to work up in tests genuine doubts for a core group of common indubitables that vary slowly if at all.   ===== Rival methods of inquiryEdit ===== In The Fixation of Belief (1877), Peirce described inquiry in general not as the pursuit of truth per se but as the struggle to move from irritating, inhibitory doubt born of surprise, disagreement, and the like, and to reach a secure belief, belief being that on which one is prepared to act. That let Peirce frame scientific inquiry as part of a broader spectrum and as spurred, like inquiry generally, by actual doubt, not mere verbal, quarrelsome, or hyperbolic doubt, which he held to be fruitless. Peirce sketched four methods of settling opinion, ordered from least to most successful: The method of tenacity (policy of sticking to initial belief) — which brings comforts and decisiveness but leads to trying to ignore contrary information and others' views as if truth were intrinsically private, not public. The method goes against the social impulse and easily falters since one may well notice when another's opinion seems as good as one's own initial opinion. Its successes can be brilliant but tend to be transitory. The method of authority — which overcomes disagreements but sometimes brutally. Its successes can be majestic and long-lasting, but it cannot regulate people thoroughly enough to withstand doubts indefinitely, especially when people learn about other societies present and past. The method of the a priori — which promotes conformity less brutally but fosters opinions as something like tastes, arising in conversation and comparisons of perspectives in terms of "what is agreeable to reason." Thereby it depends on fashion in paradigms and goes in circles over time. It is more intellectual and respectable but, like the first two methods, sustains accidental and capricious beliefs, destining some minds to doubt it. The method of science — wherein inquiry supposes that the real is discoverable but independent of particular opinion, such that, unlike in the other methods, inquiry can, by its own account, go wrong (fallibilism), not only right, and thus purposely tests itself and criticizes, corrects, and improves itself. Peirce held that, in practical affairs, slow and stumbling ratiocination is often dangerously inferior to instinct and traditional sentiment, and that the scientific method is best suited to theoretical research, which in turn should not be trammeled by the other methods and practical ends; reason's "first rule" is that, in order to learn, one must desire to learn and, as a corollary, must not block the way of inquiry. Scientific method excels the others finally by being deliberately designed to arrive — eventually — at the most secure beliefs, upon which the most successful practices can be based. Starting from the idea that people seek not truth per se but instead to subdue irritating, inhibitory doubt, Peirce showed how, through the struggle, some can come to submit to truth for the sake of belief's integrity, seek as truth the guidance of potential conduct correctly to its given goal, and wed themselves to the scientific method.   ===== Scientific methodEdit ===== Insofar as clarification by pragmatic reflection suits explanatory hypotheses and fosters predictions and testing, pragmatism points beyond the usual duo of foundational alternatives: deduction from self-evident truths, or rationalism; and induction from experiential phenomena, or empiricism. Based on his critique of three modes of argument and different from either foundationalism or coherentism, Peirce's approach seeks to justify claims by a three-phase dynamic of inquiry: Active, abductive genesis of theory, with no prior assurance of truth; Deductive application of the contingent theory so as to clarify its practical implications; Inductive testing and evaluation of the utility of the provisional theory in anticipation of future experience, in both senses: prediction and control. Thereby, Peirce devised an approach to inquiry far more solid than the flatter image of inductive generalization simpliciter, which is a mere re-labeling of phenomenological patterns. Peirce's pragmatism was the first time the scientific method was proposed as an epistemology for philosophical questions. A theory that succeeds better than its rivals in predicting and controlling our world is said to be nearer the truth. This is an operational notion of truth used by scientists. Peirce extracted the pragmatic model or theory of inquiry from its raw materials in classical logic and refined it in parallel with the early development of symbolic logic to address problems about the nature of scientific reasoning. Abduction, deduction, and induction make incomplete sense in isolation from one another but comprise a cycle understandable as a whole insofar as they collaborate toward the common end of inquiry. In the pragmatic way of thinking about conceivable practical implications, every thing has a purpose, and, as possible, its purpose should first be denoted. Abduction hypothesizes an explanation for deduction to clarify into implications to be tested so that induction can evaluate the hypothesis, in the struggle to move from troublesome uncertainty to more secure belief. No matter how traditional and needful it is to study the modes of inference in abstraction from one another, the integrity of inquiry strongly limits the effective modularity of its principal components. Peirce's outline of the scientific method in §III–IV of "A Neglected Argument" is summarized below (except as otherwise noted). There he also reviewed plausibility and inductive precision (issues of critique of arguments). 1. Abductive (or retroductive) phase. Guessing, inference to explanatory hypotheses for selection of those best worth trying. From abduction, Peirce distinguishes induction as inferring, on the basis of tests, the proportion of truth in the hypothesis. Every inquiry, whether into ideas, brute facts, or norms and laws, arises from surprising observations in one or more of those realms (and for example at any stage of an inquiry already underway). All explanatory content of theories comes from abduction, which guesses a new or outside idea so as to account in a simple, economical way for a surprising or complicated phenomenon. The modicum of success in our guesses far exceeds that of random luck, and seems born of attunement to nature by developed or inherent instincts, especially insofar as best guesses are optimally plausible and simple in the sense of the "facile and natural", as by Galileo's natural light of reason and as distinct from "logical simplicity". Abduction is the most fertile but least secure mode of inference. Its general rationale is inductive: it succeeds often enough and it has no substitute in expediting us toward new truths. In 1903, Peirce called pragmatism "the logic of abduction". Coordinative method leads from abducting a plausible hypothesis to judging it for its testability and for how its trial would economize inquiry itself. The hypothesis, being insecure, needs to have practical implications leading at least to mental tests and, in science, lending themselves to scientific tests. A simple but unlikely guess, if not costly to test for falsity, may belong first in line for testing. A guess is intrinsically worth testing if it has plausibility or reasonably objective probability, while subjective likelihood, though reasoned, can be misleadingly seductive. Guesses can be selected for trial strategically, for their caution (for which Peirce gave as example the game of Twenty Questions), breadth, or incomplexity. One can discover only that which would be revealed through their sufficient experience anyway, and so the point is to expedite it; economy of research demands the leap, so to speak, of abduction and governs its art. 2. Deductive phase. Two stages: i. Explication. Not clearly premised, but a deductive analysis of the hypothesis so as to render its parts as clear as possible. ii. Demonstration: Deductive Argumentation, Euclidean in procedure. Explicit deduction of consequences of the hypothesis as predictions about evidence to be found. Corollarial or, if needed, Theorematic. 3. Inductive phase. Evaluation of the hypothesis, inferring from observational or experimental tests of its deduced consequences. The long-run validity of the rule of induction is deducible from the principle (presuppositional to reasoning in general) that the real "is only the object of the final opinion to which sufficient investigation would lead"; in other words, anything excluding such a process would never be real. Induction involving the ongoing accumulation of evidence follows "a method which, sufficiently persisted in," will "diminish the error below any predesignate degree." Three stages: i. Classification. Not clearly premised, but an inductive classing of objects of experience under general ideas. ii. Probation: direct Inductive Argumentation. Crude or Gradual in procedure. Crude Induction, founded on experience in one mass (CP 2.759), presumes that future experience on a question will not differ utterly from all past experience (CP 2.756). Gradual Induction makes a new estimate of the proportion of truth in the hypothesis after each test, and is Qualitative or Quantitative. Qualitative Gradual Induction depends on estimating the relative evident weights of the various qualities of the subject class under investigation (CP 2.759; see also CP 7.114–20). Quantitative Gradual Induction depends on how often, in a fair sample of instances of S, S is found actually accompanied by P that was predicted for S (CP 2.758). It depends on measurements, or statistics, or counting. iii. Sentential Induction. "...which, by Inductive reasonings, appraises the different Probations singly, then their combinations, then makes self-appraisal of these very appraisals themselves, and passes final judgment on the whole result".   ===== Against CartesianismEdit ===== Peirce drew on the methodological implications of the four incapacities — no genuine introspection, no intuition in the sense of non-inferential cognition, no thought but in signs, and no conception of the absolutely incognizable — to attack philosophical Cartesianism, of which he said that: 1. "It teaches that philosophy must begin in universal doubt" — when, instead, we start with preconceptions, "prejudices [...] which it does not occur to us can be questioned", though we may find reason to question them later. "Let us not pretend to doubt in philosophy what we do not doubt in our hearts." 2. "It teaches that the ultimate test of certainty is...in the individual consciousness" — when, instead, in science a theory stays on probation till agreement is reached, then it has no actual doubters left. No lone individual can reasonably hope to fulfill philosophy's multi-generational dream. When "candid and disciplined minds" continue to disagree on a theoretical issue, even the theory's author should feel doubts about it. 3. It trusts to "a single thread of inference depending often upon inconspicuous premisses" — when, instead, philosophy should, "like the successful sciences", proceed only from tangible, scrutinizable premisses and trust not to any one argument but instead to "the multitude and variety of its arguments" as forming, not a chain at least as weak as its weakest link, but "a cable whose fibers", soever "slender, are sufficiently numerous and intimately connected". 4. It renders many facts "absolutely inexplicable, unless to say that 'God makes them so' is to be regarded as an explanation" — when, instead, philosophy should avoid being "unidealistic", misbelieving that something real can defy or evade all possible ideas, and supposing, inevitably, "some absolutely inexplicable, unanalyzable ultimate", which explanatory surmise explains nothing and so is inadmissible.   == Philosophy: metaphysicsEdit ==  Peirce divided metaphysics into (1) ontology or general metaphysics, (2) psychical or religious metaphysics, and (3) physical metaphysics. Ontology. Peirce was a Scholastic Realist, declaring for the reality of generals as early as 1868. Regarding modalities (possibility, necessity, etc.), he came in later years to regard himself as having wavered earlier as to just how positively real the modalities are. In his 1897 "The Logic of Relatives" he wrote:  I formerly defined the possible as that which in a given state of information (real or feigned) we do not know not to be true. But this definition today seems to me only a twisted phrase which, by means of two negatives, conceals an anacoluthon. We know in advance of experience that certain things are not true, because we see they are impossible.  Peirce retained, as useful for some purposes, the definitions in terms of information states, but insisted that the pragmaticist is committed to a strong modal realism by conceiving of objects in terms of predictive general conditional propositions about how they would behave under certain circumstances. Psychical or religious metaphysics. Peirce believed in God, and characterized such belief as founded in an instinct explorable in musing over the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits — and it is a belief in God not as an actual or existent being (in Peirce's sense of those words), but all the same as a real being. In "A Neglected Argument for the Reality of God" (1908), Peirce sketches, for God's reality, an argument to a hypothesis of God as the Necessary Being, a hypothesis which he describes in terms of how it would tend to develop and become compelling in musement and inquiry by a normal person who is led, by the hypothesis, to consider as being purposed the features of the worlds of ideas, brute facts, and evolving habits (for example scientific progress), such that the thought of such purposefulness will "stand or fall with the hypothesis"; meanwhile, according to Peirce, the hypothesis, in supposing an "infinitely incomprehensible" being, starts off at odds with its own nature as a purportively true conception, and so, no matter how much the hypothesis grows, it both (A) inevitably regards itself as partly true, partly vague, and as continuing to define itself without limit, and (B) inevitably has God appearing likewise vague but growing, though God as the Necessary Being is not vague or growing; but the hypothesis will hold it to be more false to say the opposite, that God is purposeless. Peirce also argued that the will is free and (see Synechism) that there is at least an attenuated kind of immortality. Physical metaphysics. Peirce held the view, which he called objective idealism, that "matter is effete mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws". Peirce asserted the reality of (1) absolute chance (his tychist view), (2) mechanical necessity (anancist view), and (3) that which he called the law of love (agapist view), echoing his categories Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, respectively. He held that fortuitous variation (which he also called "sporting"), mechanical necessity, and creative love are the three modes of evolution (modes called "tychasm", "anancasm", and "agapasm") of the cosmos and its parts. He found his conception of agapasm embodied in Lamarckian evolution; the overall idea in any case is that of evolution tending toward an end or goal, and it could also be the evolution of a mind or a society; it is the kind of evolution which manifests workings of mind in some general sense. He said that overall he was a synechist, holding with reality of continuity, especially of space, time, and law.   == Science of reviewEdit ==  Peirce outlined two fields, "Cenoscopy" and "Science of Review", both of which he called philosophy. Both included philosophy about science. In 1903 he arranged them, from more to less theoretically basic, thus: Science of Discovery. Mathematics. Cenoscopy (philosophy as discussed earlier in this article—categorial, normative, metaphysical), as First Philosophy, concerns positive phenomena in general, does not rely on findings from special sciences, and includes the general study of inquiry and scientific method. Idioscopy, or the Special Sciences (of nature and mind).  Science of Review, as Ultimate Philosophy, arranges "...the results of discovery, beginning with digests, and going on to endeavor to form a philosophy of science". His examples included Humboldt's Cosmos, Comte's Philosophie positive, and Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy. Practical Science, or the Arts. Peirce placed, within Science of Review, the work and theory of classifying the sciences (including mathematics and philosophy). His classifications, on which he worked for many years, draw on argument and wide knowledge, and are of interest both as a map for navigating his philosophy and as an accomplished polymath's survey of research in his time.   == See alsoEdit == Contemporaries associated with Peirce   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography has external links throughout to such materials as biographical and overview articles on Peirce at encyclopedias, study sites, etc.; individual works by Peirce; and collections, bibliographies, and Peirce's definitions in the Baldwin dictionary. Other useful sets of links: Existential graph references and external links. Pragmatism external links. Semiotics external links. Peirce sites

Christian Wolff may refer to: Christian Wolff (philosopher) (1679–1754), German philosopher and mathematician Christian Wolff (baroque composer) (1705–1773), German composer Christian Wolff (composer) (born 1934), American composer of experimental classical music Christian Wolff (actor) (born 1938), German actor   == See also == Christian Wulff (born 1959), President of Germany, 2010–2012 Christian Wolf, board game designer

Christine Ladd-Franklin (December 1, 1847 – March 5, 1930) was an American psychologist, logician, and mathematician.   == Early life and education == Christine Ladd, sometimes known by her nickname "Kitty," was born on December 1, 1847 in Windsor, Connecticut to Eliphalet Ladd, a merchant, and Augusta Niles Ladd. During her early childhood, she lived with her parents and younger brother Henry (born 1850) in New York City. In 1853 the family moved back to Windsor, Connecticut where her sister Jane Augusta Ladd McCordia was born the following year. Throughout her childhood, Ladd's mother and aunt, Juliet Niles, often chose to bring the young Christine with them to numerous women's rights lectures and suffrage meetings because both were incredibly passionate supporters of women's rights. Augusta Ladd believed that women had every right to be in the same positions that were held by men and "belonged every place where a man should be." Ladd's mother wanted to instill these same beliefs into her impressionable daughter so that she could grow up to be successful in later life and not be held back by societal expectations. Following the death of her mother in spring 1860 to pneumonia, Ladd went to live with her paternal grandmother in Portsmouth, New Hampshire where she attended school. Ladd's father remarried in 1862 and produced her half-sister Katherine (born 1862) and half-brother George (born 1867). Ladd was a precocious child who sought to find “a mean to continue her education beyond secondary school.”. Ladd's wish was granted when her father enrolled her in a two-year program at a coeducational Welshing academy in Wilbraham, Massachusetts; she took the same courses that prepared boys in furthering their education to colleges such as Harvard. In 1865 Christine Ladd graduated as valedictorian from Welshing Academy and made the decision to pursue further education at Vassar College. This decision would not be supported by her family due to the fact that Ladd's father and grandmother believed college was unnecessary for a woman and by choosing to go to Vassar, Ladd would end up being too old to take a husband. The family saw college as a hindrance since women in the nineteenth century were expected to wed young, produce children, and stay at home to raise a family. Ladd was ultimately able to argue that she was "not attractive enough to find a husband and that there was a shortage of men as a result of the Civil War."  This argument was eventually effective in convincing her family that college was the best option for her. In the fall of 1866 Ladd enrolled in Vassar College with a loan provided by her late mother's sister. She only studied at Vassar until the end of the spring term due to financial issues. During the time that she was not attending college Ladd worked as a public school teacher until her aunt's aid allowed her to reenter Vassar and graduate in 1869. While attending Vassar, Ladd began working under the mentorship of astronomy professor, Maria Mitchell, who was famous for having been "the first woman to discover a new comet, using a telescope, in 1847" Mitchell was also a suffragette and strove to inspire women to gain more self-confidence in order to succeed in male-dominated fields during the time period. Under the guidance of Mitchell, Ladd was able to blossom and quickly developed a love for the fields of physics and mathematics. Since women in the nineteenth century were not allowed in the male dominated physics laboratories, Ladd was unable to pursue her first love of physics and chose instead to study mathematics. Later in her life, Ladd would eventually reflect back on her decision and say, "had it not been for the impossibility, in those days, in the case of women, of obtaining access to laboratory facilities" she would have eagerly gone on to study physics.    == Early career == After graduating, Ladd taught science and mathematics at secondary level in Washington, Pennsylvania. During this time, Ladd contributed seventy-seven mathematical problems and solutions to the Educational Times of London. She also published six items in The Analyst: A Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics and three in the American Journal of Mathematics.   == Graduate education == In 1878, Ladd was accepted into Johns Hopkins University with the help of James J. Sylvester, an English mathematician who remembered some of Ladd's earlier works in London's Educational Times. Ladd's application for the University fellowship was signed "C. Ladd", and Hopkins offered the fellowship to her without realizing she was a woman. When they did realize this, the board moved to revoke the offer, but Sylvester insisted that Ladd should be his student, and so she was. She held a fellowship at Hopkins for three years, but the trustees did not allow her name to be printed in circulars with those of other fellows, for fear of setting a precedent. Furthermore, dissension over her continued presence forced one of the original trustees to resign. Since Hopkins did not approve of coeducation, Ladd was initially allowed only in classes taught by Sylvester. But after displaying exceptional work in Sylvester's courses, Ladd was allowed to take courses with different professors. Even though she was awarded a stipend, she was known as a fellow student. During 1879–1880, Ladd took classes taught by Charles Sanders Peirce, who has been called the first American experimental psychologist. She wrote a dissertation "On the Algebra of Logic" with Peirce as the thesis advisor. The dissertation was published in Studies in Logic (Peirce, ed.) in 1883. Due to her studies with Peirce, Ladd became the first American woman to be involved in psychology, mathematics and logic. Since women were not allowed to graduate at Hopkins, Ladd was refused a Ph.D. in Mathematics and Logic, although she was the first woman to complete all the requirements for a PhD at Hopkins. However, Hopkins officially granted her a Ph.D. in February 22, 1926 (44 years after she had earned it) at the age of seventy-eight. In 1884 Cristine attended Kelvin's master class. She married another attendee in class, Fabian Franklin, Ph.D. (mathematics), hence she became Christine Ladd-Franklin. Ladd-Franklin had two children, one of whom died in infancy. The other, Margaret Ladd-Franklin, became a prominent member in the women's suffrage movement.   == Major contributions and achievements == After leaving Hopkins, Ladd-Franklin worked with German psychologist G. E. Müller, where she carried out experimental work in vision. Ladd-Franklin was also able to work in the laboratory of Hermann von Helmholtz, where she attended his lectures on theory of color vision. After attending these lectures, Ladd-Franklin developed her own theory of color vision. In 1929 she published Color and Color Theories.   === Ladd-Franklin's theory of color vision === One of the major contributions that Ladd-Franklin made to psychology was her theory of color vision, which was based on evolution. Ladd-Franklin noted that: "some animals are color blind and assumed that achromatic vision appeared first in evolution and color vision came later. She assumed further that the human eye carries vestiges of its earlier evolutionary development. She observed that the most highly evolved part of the eye is the fovea, where, at least in daylight, visual acuity and color sensitivity are greatest. Ladd-Franklin assumed that peripheral vision (provided by the rods of the retina) was more primitive than foveal vision (provided by the cones of the retina) because night vision and movement detection are crucial for survival."   === Stages of color vision === Ladd-Franklin concluded that color vision evolved in three stages: achromatic vision (black and white), blue-yellow sensitivity and red-green sensitivity. Since red-green sensitivity was the last to evolve it explains why many people suffer from red-green color blindness. The next one that affects a small population is blue-yellow color blindness. Since achromatic vision was the first to evolve it explains why the majority of the population are not affected by black-white color blindness.   === Mathematics and logic === Ladd-Franklin was the first woman to have a published paper in the Analyst. She was also the first woman to receive a Ph.D. in mathematics and logic. The majority of her publications were based on visual processes and logic. Her views on logic influenced Charles S. Peirce's logic and she was highly praised by Prior.   === Professional involvement === Ladd-Franklin was among the first women to be inducted into the American Psychological Association in December 1893. From 1894-1925, Ladd-Franklin presented ten papers at APA meetings. She was also one of the first female members of the Optical Society of America (OSA) in 1919. During the OSA meetings she presented six papers and two exhibits. She was also a prominent member of the women's rights movement. Ladd-Franklin was included in the Who's Who in America during 1901-1902 and 1914-1915. Ladd-Franklin remained a member of APA and OSA until her death on March 5, 1930 in New York, New York. In 1948, Bertrand Russell wrote: "I once received a letter from an eminent logician, Mrs. Christine Ladd-Franklin, saying that she was a solipsist, and was surprised that there were no others. Coming from a logician and a solipsist, her surprise surprised me."   == Published works == "Quaternions", The Analyst v. 4, n. 6, pp. 172–4 (Nov 1877). Google Books The Analyst p. 172 in n. 6 (November) in v. 4 (1877). Also JSTOR "Quaternions" first page.  (Several journals have been called "The Analyst". See The Analyst (disambiguation). Internet searches for The Analyst, the one which became The Annals of Mathematics, should use the search phrase "The Analyst" mathematics, otherwise The Analyst about chemistry will dominate search results.) "On the Algebra of Logic" in Studies in Logic, C. S. Peirce, ed., pp. 17–71, 1883. Google Books Eprint. Internet Archive Eprint. "On Some Characteristics of Symbolic Logic" in the American Journal of Psychology, v. 2, n. 4, pp. 543–567, August 1889. Google Books Eprint. Internet Archive Eprint. "Epistemology for the logician" in Verhandlungen des III. Interntionalen Kongresses fur Philosophie., pp. 64–670, 1908. Also separately as an offprint. "Charles Peirce at the Johns Hopkins", The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Methods v. 13, n. 26, 715–723, December 1916. Google Books Eprint (badly done) and seek the text. "The Reddish Blue Arcs and the Reddish Blue Glow of the Retina; an Emanation from Stimulated Nerve Fibre." in VIIIth International Congress of Psychology: Proceedings and Papers, 1926. Colour and Colour Theories, Routledge, 320 pages, 1929.   == Notes ==   == References == Furumoto, L (December 1994). "Christine Ladd-Franklin's color theory: strategy for claiming scientific authority?". Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. (UNITED STATES) 727 (1 Aspects of th): 91–100. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb27502.x. PMID 7857009.  Hurvich, Dorothea Jameson (1975), "Ladd-Franklin, Christine" Notable American Women, Vol. 2, 4th ed., The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Nubiola, Jaime and Cobo, Jesús (2000), "The Spanish Mathematician Ventura Reyes Prósper and His Connections with Charles S. Peirce and Christine Ladd-Franklin", Arisbe, Lubbock, TX. Eprint. Includes an English translation "Christine Ladd Franklin: American Mathematician and her influence on symbolic logic" of the paper "Cristina Ladd Franklin. Matemática americana y su influencia en la lógica simbólica" by Prósper published in El Progreso Matemático, 12 (1891), 297–300. Spillman, Scott, “Institutional Limits: Christine Ladd-Franklin, Fellowships, and American Women’s Academic Careers, 1880–1920,” History of Education Quarterly 52 (May 2012), 196–221. Notable Women in Mathematics, a Biographical Dictionary, edited by Charlene Morrow and Teri Perl, Greenwood Press, 1998. pp 107–113 This article incorporates material from Christine Ladd-Franklin on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution/Share-Alike License.   == External links == The Christine Ladd-Franklin Diary 1866–1873

Chrysippus of Soli (Greek: Χρύσιππος ὁ Σολεύς, Chrysippos ho Soleus; c. 279 – c. 206 BC) was a Greek Stoic philosopher. He was a native of Soli, Cilicia, but moved to Athens as a young man, where he became a pupil of Cleanthes in the Stoic school. When Cleanthes died, around 230 BC, Chrysippus became the third head of the school. A prolific writer, Chrysippus expanded the fundamental doctrines of Zeno of Citium, the founder of the school, which earned him the title of Second Founder of Stoicism. Chrysippus excelled in logic, the theory of knowledge, ethics and physics. He created an original system of propositional logic in order to better understand the workings of the universe and role of humanity within it. He adhered to a deterministic view of fate, but nevertheless sought a role for personal freedom in thought and action. Ethics, he taught, depended on understanding the nature of the universe, and he taught a therapy of extirpating the unruly passions which depress and crush the soul. He initiated the success of Stoicism as one of the most influential philosophical movements for centuries in the Greek and Roman world.   == Life == Chrysippus was the son of Apollonius of Tarsus but was himself born at Soli, Cilicia. He was slight in stature and is reputed to have trained as a long-distance runner. While still young, he lost his substantial inherited property when it was confiscated to the king's treasury. Chrysippus moved to Athens, where he became the disciple of Cleanthes, who was then the head (scholarch) of the Stoic school. It is said too that he attended the courses of Arcesilaus and his successor Lacydes, in the Platonic Academy. Chrysippus threw himself eagerly into the study of the Stoic system. His reputation for learning among his contemporaries was considerable. He was noted for intellectual audacity and self-confidence and his reliance on his own ability was shown, among other things, in the request he is supposed to have made to Cleanthes: "Give me the principles, and I will find the proofs myself." He succeeded Cleanthes as head of the Stoic school when Cleanthes died, in around 230 BC. Chrysippus was a prolific writer. He is said to rarely have gone without writing 500 lines a day and he composed more than 705 works. His desire to be comprehensive meant that he would take both sides of an argument and his opponents accused him of filling his books with the quotations of others. He was considered diffuse and obscure in his utterances and careless in his style, but his abilities were highly regarded, and he came to be seen as a preeminent authority for the school. He died during the 143rd Olympiad (208–204 BC) at the age of 73. Diogenes Laërtius gives two different accounts of his death. In the first account, Chrysippus was seized with dizziness having drunk undiluted wine at a feast, and died soon after. In the second account, he was watching a donkey eat some figs and cried out: "Now give the donkey a drink of pure wine to wash down the figs", whereupon he died in a fit of laughter. His nephew Aristocreon erected a statue in his honour in the Kerameikos. Chrysippus was succeeded as head of the Stoic school by his pupil Zeno of Tarsus. Of his written works, none have survived except as fragments quoted in the works of later authors like Cicero, Seneca, Galen, Plutarch, and others. Recently, segments from Logical Questions and On Providence were discovered among the Herculaneum papyri. A third work by Chrysippus may also be among them.   == Philosophy ==  Chrysippus had a long and successful career of resisting the attacks of the Academy and hoped not simply to defend Stoicism against the assaults of the past, but also against all possible attack in the future. He took the doctrines of Zeno and Cleanthes and crystallized them into what became the definitive system of Stoicism. He elaborated the physical doctrines of the Stoics and their theory of knowledge and he created much of their formal logic. In short, Chrysippus made the Stoic system what it was. It was said that "without Chrysippus, there would have been no Stoa".   == Logic == Chrysippus wrote much on the subject of logic and created a system of propositional logic. Aristotle's term logic had been concerned with the interrelations of terms such as "Socrates" or "man" ("all men are mortal, Socrates is a man, so Socrates is mortal"). Stoic logic, on the other hand, was concerned with the interrelations of propositions such as "it is day" ("if it is day, it is light: but it is day: so it is light"). Though the earlier Megarian dialecticians – Diodorus Cronus and Philo – had worked in this field and the pupils of Aristotle – Theophrastus and Eudemus – had investigated hypothetical syllogisms, it was Chrysippus who developed these principles into a coherent system of propositional logic.   === Propositions === Chrysippus defined a proposition as "that which is capable of being denied or affirmed as it is in itself" and gave examples of propositions such as "it is day" and "Dion is walking." He distinguished between simple and non-simple propositions, which in modern terminology are known as atomic and molecular propositions. A simple proposition is an elementary statement such as "it is day." Simple propositions are linked together to form non-simple propositions by the use of logical connectives. Chrysippus enumerated five kinds of molecular propositions according to the connective used: Thus several types of molecular propositions, familiar to modern logic, were listed by Chrysippus, including the conjunction, the disjunction, and the conditional, and Chrysippus studied their criteria of truth closely.   === Conditional propositions === The first logicians to debate conditional statements were Diodorus Cronus and his pupil Philo. Writing five-hundred years later, Sextus Empiricus refers to a debate between Diodorus and Philo. Philo regarded all conditionals as true except those which with a correct antecedent had an incorrect consequent, and this meant a proposition such as "if it is day, then I am talking," is true unless it is day and I fall silent. But Diodorus argued that a true conditional is one in which the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion – thus, because the proposition "if it is day, then I am talking" can be false, it is invalid. However, paradoxical propositions were still possible such as "if atomic elements of things do not exist, atomic elements exists." Chrysippus adopted a much stricter view regarding conditional propositions, which made such paradoxes impossible: to him, a conditional is true if denial of the consequent is logically incompatible with the antecedent. This corresponds to the modern-day strict conditional.   === Syllogistic === Chrysippus developed a syllogistic or system of deduction in which he made use of five types of basic arguments or argument forms called indemonstrable syllogisms, which played the role of axioms, and four inference rules, called themata by means of which complex syllogisms could be reduced to these axioms. The forms of the five indemonstrables were: Of the four inference rules, only two survived. One, the so-called first thema, was a rule of antilogism. The other, the third thema, was a cut rule by which chain syllogisms could be reduced to simple syllogisms. The purpose of Stoic syllogistic was not merely to create a formal system. It was also understood as the study of the operations of reason, the divine reason (logos) which governs the universe, of which human beings are a part. The goal was to find valid rules of inference and forms of proof to help people find their way in life.   === Other logical work === Chrysippus analyzed speech and the handling of names and terms. He also devoted much effort in refuting fallacies and paradoxes. According to Diogenes Laërtius, Chrysippus wrote twelve works in 23 books on the Liar paradox; seven works in 17 books on amphiboly; and another nine works in 26 books on other conundrums. In all, 28 works or 66 books were given over to puzzles or paradoxes. Chrysippus is the first Stoic for whom the third of the four Stoic categories, i.e. the category somehow disposed is attested. In the surviving evidence, Chrysippus frequently makes use of the categories of substance and quality, but makes little use of the other two Stoic categories (somehow disposed and somehow disposed in relation to something). It is not clear whether the categories had any special significance for Chrysippus, and a clear doctrine of categories may be the work of later Stoics.   === Later reception === Chrysippus came to be renowned as one of the foremost logicians of ancient Greece. When Clement of Alexandria wanted to mention one who was master among logicians, as Homer was master among poets, it was Chrysippus, not Aristotle, he chose. Diogenes Laërtius wrote: "If the gods use dialectic, they would use none other than that of Chrysippus." The logical work by Chrysippus came to be neglected and forgotten. Aristotle's logic prevailed, partly because it was seen as more practical, and partly because it was taken up by the Neoplatonists. As recently as the 19th century, Stoic logic was treated with contempt, a barren formulaic system, which was merely clothing the logic of Aristotle with new terminology. It was not until the 20th century, with the advances in logic, and the modern propositional calculus, that it became clear that Stoic logic constituted a significant achievement.   == Epistemology == For the Stoics, truth is distinguished from error by the sage who possesses right reason. Chrysippus's theory of knowledge was empirical. The senses transmit messages from the external world, and their reports are controlled not by referring them to innate ideas, but by comparing them to previous reports stored in the mind. Zeno had defined impressions of sense as "an impression in the soul" and this was interpreted literally by Cleanthes, who compared the impression on the soul to the impression made by a seal on wax. Chrysippus preferred to regard it as an alteration or change in the soul; that is, the soul receives a modification from every external object that acts upon it, just as the air receives countless strokes when many people are speaking at once. In the receipt of an impression, the soul is purely passive and the impression reveals not only its own existence, but that also of its cause—just as light displays itself and the elements that are in it. The power to name the object resides in the understanding. First must come the impression, and the understanding—having the power of utterance—expresses in speech the affection it receives from the object. True presentations are distinguished from those that are false by the use of memory, classification and comparison. If the sense organ and the mind are healthy—and provided that an external object can be really seen or heard—the presentation, due to its clearness and distinctness, has the power to extort the assent that always lies in our power, to give or to withhold. In a context in which people are understood to be rational beings, reason is developed out of these notions.   == Physics == Chrysippus insisted on the organic unity of the universe, as well as the correlation and mutual interdependence of all of its parts. He said, "the universe is its own soul and its own controlling mind." Following Zeno, Chrysippus determined fiery breath or aether to be the primitive substance of the universe. Objects are made up of inert formless matter and an informing soul, "pneuma", provides form to the undifferentiated matter. The pneuma pervades all of substance and maintains the unity of the universe and constitutes the soul—the incorporeal and, in many conceptions, immortal essence of a person or living thing—of the human being. The classical elements change into one another by a process of condensation and rarefaction. Fire first becomes solidified into air; then air into water; and lastly, water into earth. The process of dissolution takes place in the reverse order: earth being rarefied into water, water into air and air into fire. The human soul was divided by Chrysippus into eight faculties: the five senses, the power of reproduction, the power of speech, and the "ruling part" that is located in the chest rather than the head. Individual souls are perishable; but, according to the view originated by Chrysippus, the souls of wise people survive longer after their death. No individual soul can, however, survive beyond the periodic conflagration, when the universe is renewed.   === Fate === For Chrysippus, all things happen according to fate: what seems to be accidental has always some hidden cause. The unity of the world consists in the chain-like dependence of cause upon cause. Nothing can take place without a sufficient cause. According to Chrysippus, every proposition is either true or false, and this must apply to future events as well:  If any motion exists without a cause, then not every proposition will be either true or false. For that which has not efficient causes is neither true nor false. But every proposition is either true or false. Therefore, there is no motion without a cause. And if this is so, then all effects owe their existence to prior causes. And if this is so, all things happen by fate. It follows therefore that whatever happens, happens by fate.  The Stoic view of fate is entirely based on a view of the universe as a whole. Individual things and persons only come into consideration as dependent parts of this whole. Everything is, in every respect, determined by this relation, and is consequently subject to the general order of the world. If his opponents objected that, if everything is determined by destiny, there is no individual responsibility, since what has been once foreordained must happen, come what may, Chrysippus replied that there is a distinction to be made between simple and complex predestination. Becoming ill may be fated whatever happens but, if a person's recovery is linked to consulting a doctor, then consulting the doctor is fated to occur together with that person's recovery, and this becomes a complex fact. All human actions – in fact, our destiny – are decided by our relation to things, or as Chrysippus put it, events are "co-fated" to occur:  The non-destruction of one's coat, he says, is not fated simply, but co-fated with its being taken care of, and someone's being saved from his enemies is co-fated with his fleeing those enemies; and having children is co-fated with being willing to lie with a woman. ... For many things cannot occur without our being willing and indeed contributing a most strenuous eagerness and zeal for these things, since, he says, it was fated for these things to occur in conjunction with this personal effort. ... But it will be in our power, he says, with what is in our power being included in fate.  Thus our actions are predetermined, and are causally related to the overarching network of fate, but nevertheless the moral responsibility of how we respond to impressions remains our own. The one all-determining power is active everywhere, working in each particular being according to its nature, whether in rational or irrational creatures or in inorganic objects. Every action is brought about by the co-operation of causes depending on the nature of things and the character of the agent. Our actions would only be involuntary if they were produced by external causes alone, without any co-operation, on the part of our wills, with external causes. Virtue and vice are set down as things in our power, for which, consequently, we are responsible. Moral responsibility depends only on freedom of the will, and what emanates from our will is our own, no matter whether it is possible for us to act differently or not. This rather subtle position which attempts to reconcile determinism with human responsibility is known as soft-determinism, or compatibilism.   === Divination ===  Chrysippus also argued for the existence of fate based on divination, which he thought there was good evidence for. It would not be possible for diviners to predict the future if the future itself was accidental. Omens and portents, he believed, are the natural symptoms of certain occurrences. There must be countless indications of the course of providence, for the most part unobserved, the meaning of only a few having become known to humanity. To those who argued that divination was superfluous as all events are foreordained, he replied that both divination and our behaviour under the warnings which it affords are included in the chain of causation.   === God === The Stoics believed that the universe is God, and Chrysippus affirmed that "the universe itself is God and the universal outpouring of its soul." It is the guiding principle of the universe, "operating in mind and reason, together with the common nature of things and the totality which embraces all existence." Based on these beliefs, physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein identified Chrysippus as a Pandeist. Chrysippus sought to prove the existence of God, making use of a teleological argument:  If there is anything that humanity cannot produce, the being who produces it is better than humanity. But humanity cannot produce the things that are in the universe – the heavenly bodies, etc. The being, therefore, who produces them is superior to humanity. But who is there that is superior to humanity, except God? Therefore, God exists.  Chrysippus spoke of God and gods interchangeably. He interpreted the gods of traditional Greek religion by viewing them as different aspects of the one reality. Cicero tells us that "he further maintained that aether is that which people call Zeus, and that the air which permeates the seas is Poseidon, and that the earth is what is known by the name of Demeter, and he treated in similar style the names of the other gods." In addition, the universe exists for the benefit of the universal god:  We should infer in the case of a beautiful dwelling-place that it was built for its owners and not for mice; we ought, therefore, in the same way to regard the universe as the dwelling-place of the gods.   === Theodicy === In response to the question of how evil could exist in a good universe, Chrysippus replied "evil cannot be removed, nor is it well that it should be removed." Firstly, he argued, following Plato, that it was impossible for good to exist without evil, for justice could not be known without injustice, courage without cowardice, temperance without intemperance or wisdom without foolishness. Secondly, apparent evils exist as a consequent of nature's goodness, thus it was necessary for the human skull to be made from small and thin bones for reasons of utility, but this superior utility meant that the skull is vulnerable to blows. Thirdly, evils are distributed according to the rational will of Zeus, either to punish the wicked or because they are important to the world-order as a whole. Thus evil is good under disguise, and is ultimately conducive to the best. Chrysippus compared evil to the coarse jest in the comedy; for, just as the jest, though offensive in itself, improves the piece as a whole, "so too you may criticize evil regarded by itself, yet allow that, taken with all else, it has its use."   == Mathematics ==  Chrysippus regarded bodies, surfaces, lines, places, the void and time as all being infinitely divisible. He determined one of the principal features of the infinite set: since a man and a finger have an infinite number of parts as do the universe and a man, it cannot be said that a man has more parts than his finger, nor that the universe has more parts than a man. Chrysippus also responded to a problem first posed by Democritus. If a cone is divided by a plane parallel to its base, are the surfaces of the segments equal or unequal? If they are equal, then the cone becomes a cylinder; if they are unequal, then the surface of the cone must be stepped. The reply of Chrysippus was that the surfaces are both equal and unequal. Chrysippus was, in effect, negating the law of excluded middle with respect to the equal and unequal, and thus he may have anticipated an important principle of modern infinitesimal calculus, namely, the limit and the process of convergence towards a limit. Chrysippus was notable for claiming that "one" is a number. One was not always considered a number by the ancient Greeks since they viewed one as that by which things are measured. Aristotle in his Metaphysics wrote, "... a measure is not the things measured, but the measure or the One is the beginning of number." Chrysippus asserted that one had "magnitude one" (Greek: πλῆθος ἕν), although this was not generally accepted by the Greeks, and Iamblichus wrote that "magnitude one" was a contradiction in terms.   == Ethics ==  Chrysippus taught that ethics depended on physics. In his Physical Theses, he stated: "for there is no other or more appropriate way of approaching the subject of good and evil on the virtues or happiness than from the nature of all things and the administration of the universe." The goal of life, said Chrysippus, is to live in accordance with one's experience of the actual course of nature. A person's individual nature is part of the nature of the whole universe, and thus life should be lived in accordance with one's own human nature as well as that of the universe. Human nature is ethical, and humanity is akin to the Divine, emanating from the primal fire or aether, which, though material, is the embodiment of reason; and people should conduct themselves accordingly. People have freedom, and this freedom consists in emancipation from irrational desires (lust, riches, position in life, domination, etc.) and in subjecting the will to reason. Chrysippus laid the greatest stress on the worth and dignity of the individual, and on the power of will. The Stoics admitted between the good and the bad a third class of things – the indifferent (adiaphora). Of things morally indifferent, the best includes health, and riches, and honour, and the worst includes sickness and poverty. Chrysippus accepted that it was normal in ordinary usage to refer to the preferred indifferent things as "good", but the wise person, said Chrysippus, uses such things without requiring them. Practice and habit are necessary to render virtue perfect in the individual – in other words, there is such a thing as moral progress, and character has to be built up. The Stoics sought to be free of the unruly emotions, which they regarded as being contrary to nature. The passions or emotions (pathe) are the disturbing element in right judgment. Chrysippus wrote a whole book concerning the therapy of the emotions. The passions are like diseases which depress and crush the soul, thus he sought to eradicate them (apatheia). Wrong judgements turn into passions when they gather an impetus of their own, just as, when one has started running, it is difficult to stop. One cannot hope to eradicate the emotions when one is in the heat of love or anger: this can only be done when one is calm. Therefore, one should prepare in advance, and deal with the emotions in the mind as if they were present. By applying reason to emotions such as greed, pride, or lust, one can understand the harm which they cause.   == See also == Apocatastasis Deixis History of logic Lazy argument List of unusual deaths   == Notes ==   == References == Diogenes Laertius (1925), Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers. Loeb Classical Library (Book VII Lives of Zeno Cleanthes and Chrysippus) Barnes, Jonathan (1999), "The History of Hellenistic Logic", in Algra, Keimpe; Barnes, Jonathan; Mansfeld, Jaap; Schofield, Malcolm, The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-61670-0  Brunschwig, Jacques; Sedley, David (2003), "Hellenistic philosophy", in Sedley, David, The Cambridge Companion to Greek and Roman Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-77503-5  Davidson, William Leslie (1908), "Chrysippus", in Hastings, James, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics 3, T. & T. Clark  Dorandi, Tiziano (1999), "Chronology", in Algra, Keimpe; Barnes, Jonathan; Mansfeld, Jaap; Schofield, Malcolm, The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-61670-0  Fitzgerald, John T. (2004), "Philodemus and the Papyri from Herculaneum", in Fitzgerald, John T.; Obbink, Dirk; Holland, Glenn Stanfield, Philodemus and the New Testament world Philosophy, BRILL, ISBN 90-04-11460-2  Gould, Josiah (1970), The Philosophy of Chrysippus, SUNY, ISBN 0-87395-064-X  Green, Peter (1993), Alexander to Actium: the historical evolution of the Hellenistic age, University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-08349-0  Heath, Thomas Little (1921), A History of Greek Mathematics, Vol 1: From Thales to Euclid, Oxford  Hicks, Robert Drew (1910), Stoic and Epicurean, C. Scribner  Hicks, Robert Drew (1911), "Stoics", in Chisholm, Hugh, The Encyclopaedia Britannica 25  Inwood, Brad; Gerson, Lloyd P. (1997), Hellenistic Philosophy: Introductory Readings, Hackett, ISBN 0-87220-378-6  Johansen, Karsten Friis; Rosenmeier, Henrik (1998), A History of Ancient Philosophy: From the Beginnings to Augustine, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-12738-6  Kenny, Anthony (2006), Ancient Philosophy, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-875273-3  O'Toole, Robert R.; Jennings, Raymond E. (2004), "The Megarians and the Stoics", in Gabbay, Dov; Woods, John, Handbook of the History of Logic: Greek, Indian, and Arabic logic, North Holland, ISBN 0-444-50466-4  Sharples, R. W. (2014), Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics: An Introduction to Hellenistic Philosophy, Routledge, pp. 67–68, ISBN 978-1134836390  Stock, St. George William Joseph (1908), Stoicism, Constable  Zeller, Eduard (1880), The Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics, Longmans    == Further reading == Bobzien, Susanne (1998), Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-199-24767-6  Susanne Bobzien, (1999), Chrysippus' Theory of Causes. In K. Ierodiakonou (ed.), Topics in Stoic Philosophy, Oxford: OUP, 196-242. ISBN 0-19924-880-X Émile Bréhier, (1951), Chrysippe et l'ancien stoicisme. Paris. ISBN 2-903925-06-2 Richard Dufour, (2004), Chrysippe. Oeuvre philosophique. Textes traduits et commentés par Richard Dufour, Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2 volumes (logic and physics), ISBN 2-251-74203-4 D. E. Hahm, Chrysippus' solution to the Democritean dilemma of the cone, Isis 63 (217) (1972), 205–220. H. A. Ide, Chrysippus's response to Diodorus's Master Argument, History and Philosophy Logic 13 (2) (1992), 133–148. Christoph Jedan (2009) Stoic Virtues: Chrysippus and the Theological Foundations of Stoic Ethics. Continuum Studies in Ancient Philosophy. ISBN 1-4411-1252-9 Teun L. Tieleman (1996) Galen and Chrysippus on the Soul: Argument and Refutation in the "De Placitis" Books II–III. Philosophia Antiqua. Brill. ISBN 90-04-10520-4 Teun L. Tieleman (2003) Chrysippus' "on Affections": Reconstruction and Interpretation. Philosophia Antiqua. Brill. ISBN 90-04-12998-7   == External links ==  Diogenes Laërtius, Life of Chrysippus, translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925). Chrysippus entry by Jeremy Kirby in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Chrysippus", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Early Stoic Logic: Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes of Assos, Chrysippus of Soli an annotated bibliography on the logic of Chrysippus

Clarence Irving Lewis (April 12, 1883 – February 3, 1964), usually cited as C. I. Lewis, was an American academic philosopher and the founder of conceptual pragmatism. First a noted logician, he later branched into epistemology, and during the last 20 years of his life, he wrote much on ethics. The New York Times memorialized him as "a leading authority on symbolic logic and on the philosophic concepts of knowledge and value."   == Biography ==   === Early years === Lewis was born in Stoneham, Massachusetts. His father was a skilled worker in a shoe factory, and Lewis grew up in relatively humble circumstances. He discovered philosophy at age 13, when reading about the Greek pre-Socratics, Anaxagoras and Heraclitus in particular. The first work of philosophy Lewis recalled studying was a short history of Greek philosophy by Marshall. Immanuel Kant proved a major lifelong influence on Lewis's thinking. In his article "Logic and Pragmatism," Lewis wrote: "Nothing comparable in importance happened [in my life] until I became acquainted with Kant... Kant compelled me. He had, so I felt, followed scepticism to its inevitable last stage, and laid the foundations where they could not be disturbed." In 1905, Harvard College awarded Lewis the A.B. cum laude after a mere three years of study, during which time he supported himself with part-time jobs. He then taught English for one year in a Quincy MA high school, then two years at the University of Colorado. In 1906, he married Mable Maxwell Graves. In 1908, Lewis returned to Harvard and began a Ph.D in philosophy, which he completed in a mere two years. He then taught philosophy at the University of California, 1911–20, after which he returned again to Harvard, where he taught until his 1953 retirement, eventually filling the Edgar Pierce Chair of Philosophy. In 1929, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1933, he presided over the American Philosophical Association. For the academic year 1959-1960, he was a Fellow at the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University.   === Career ===   ==== Logic ==== Lewis studied logic under his eventual Ph.D. thesis supervisor, Josiah Royce, and is a principal architect of modern philosophical logic. In 1912, two years after the publication of the first volume of Principia Mathematica, Lewis began publishing articles taking exception to Principia' s pervasive use of material implication, more specifically, to Bertrand Russell's reading of a→b as "a implies b." Lewis restated this criticism in his reviews of both editions of PM. Lewis's reputation as a promising young logician was soon assured. Material implication allows a true consequent to follow from a false antecedent. Lewis proposed to replace material implication with strict implication, such that a false antecedent can never strictly imply a true consequent. This strict implication was not primitive, but defined in terms of negation, conjunction, and a prefixed unary intensional modal operator, . Let X be a formula with a classical bivalent truth value. Then X can be read as "X is possibly true" (or false, as the case may be). Lewis then defined "A strictly implies B" as "(AB)". Lewis's strict implication is now a historical curiosity, but the formal modal logic in which he grounded that notion is the ancestor of all modern work on the subject. Lewis's  notation is still standard, but current practice usually takes its dual,  ("necessity"), as primitive and  as defined, in which case "A strictly implies B" is simply written as (A→B). His first logic text, A Survey of Symbolic Logic (1918), went out of print after selling only several hundred copies. At the time of its publication, it included the only discussion in English of the logical writings of Charles Peirce and only the second, after Russell's monograph of 1900, on Leibniz. While the modal logic of A Survey was soon proved inconsistent, Lewis went on to devise the modal systems S1 to S5, and to set these out in Symbolic Logic (1932) as possible formal analyses of the alethic modalities. Lewis mildly preferred S2 over the others; the amended modal system of A Survey was S3. But it is S4 and S5 that have generated sustained interest, mathematical as well as philosophical, down to the present day. S4 and S5 are the beginning of what is now called normal modal logic. On Lewis's strict implication and his modal systems S1-S5, see Hughes and Cresswell (1996: chpt. 11).   ==== Pragmatist but no positivist ==== This section follows Dayton (2004) closely. Around 1930, American philosophy began to experience a turning point because of the arrival of logical empiricism, brought by European philosophers fleeing the Third Reich. This new doctrine challenged American philosophers of a naturalistic or pragmatic bent, such as Lewis. In any event, logical empiricism, with its emphasis on scientific models of knowledge and on the logical analysis of meaning, soon emerged as a, and perhaps the, dominant tendency in American philosophy. While many saw Lewis as kin to the logical empiricists, he was never truly comfortable in such company because he declined to divorce experience from cognition. Positivism rejected value as lacking cognitive significance, also rejecting the analysis of experience in favor of physicalism. Both rejections struck him as regrettable. Indeed, his growing awareness of the pragmatic tradition led him in the opposite direction. For Lewis, it is only within experience that anything can have significance for anything, and thus he came to see value as a way of representing the significance of knowledge for future conduct. These convictions led him to reflect on the differences between pragmatism and positivism, and on the cognitive structure of value experiences. Lewis agreed that pragmatism committed one to the Peircean pragmatic test. But in a 1930 essay, "Pragmatism and Current Thought," he maintained that this commitment can be taken in either of two directions. One direction emphasises the subjectivity of experience. The other direction, and the one he took in 'his (1929), began with the Peirce's limitation of meaning to that which makes a verifiable difference in experience. Hence concepts are abstractions in which "the immediate is precisely that element which must be left out." But this claim must be properly understood. An operational account of concepts mainly eliminates the ineffable: "If your hours are felt as twice as long as mine, your pounds twice as heavy, that makes no difference, which can be tested, in our assignment of physical properties to things." Hence a concept is but a relational pattern. But it does not follow that one ought to discard the world as it is experienced:  "In one sense, that of connotation, a concept strictly comprises nothing but an abstract configuration of relations. In another sense, its denotation or empirical application, this meaning is vested in a process which characteristically begins with something given and ends with something done in the operation which translates a presented datum into an instrument of prediction and control."  Thus knowledge begins and ends in experience, keeping in mind that the beginning and ending experiences differ. Knowledge of something requires that the verifying experience be actually experienced. Thus for the pragmatist, verifiability as an operational definition (or test) of the empirical meaning of a statement requires that the speaker know how to apply the statement, and when not to apply it, and be able to trace the consequences of the statement in situations both real and hypothetical. Lewis firmly objected to the positivist conception of value statements as devoid of cognitive content, as merely expressive. For a pragmatist, all judgements are implicitly value judgements. Lewis (1946) sets out both his conception of sense meaning, and his thesis that valuation is a form of empirical cognition. In his essay "Logical Positivism and Pragmatism," Lewis revealed his disagreement with verificationism by comparing it unfavorably with his preferred pragmatic conception of empirical meaning. From the outset, he saw both pragmatism and logical positivism as forms of empiricism. At first glance, it would seem that the pragmatic conception of meaning, despite its different formulation and its focus on action, very much resembles the logical positivist verification requirement. Nevertheless, Lewis argued that there is a deep difference between the two: pragmatism ultimately grounds meaning on conceivable experience, while positivism reduces the relation between meaning and experience to a matter of logical form. For Lewis, the positivist conception of meaning omits precisely what a pragmatist would count as empirical meaning. Specifying which observation sentences follow from a given sentence helps us determine the empirical meaning of the given sentence only if the observation sentences themselves have an already understood meaning in terms of the specific qualities of experience to which the predicates of the observation sentences refer. Thus Lewis saw the logical positivists as failing to distinguish between "linguistic" meaning, namely the logical relations among terms, and "empirical" meaning, namely the relation expressions have to experience. (In the well-known terminology of Carnap and Charles W. Morris, empirical meaning falls under pragmatics, linguistic meaning under semantics.) For Lewis, the logical positivist shuts his eyes to precisely that which properly confirms a sentence, namely the content of experience.   ==== Epistemology ==== Lewis (1929), Mind and the World Order, is now seen as one of the most important 20th century works in epistemology. Lewis is now included among the American pragmatists, a belated assessment that is the major theme of Murphey (2005).   ==== Ethics and aesthetics ==== Lewis's late writings on ethics include the monographs Lewis (1955, 1957) and the posthumous collection Lewis (1969). From 1950 until his death, he wrote many drafts of chapters of a proposed treatise on ethics, which he did not live to complete. These drafts are included in the Lewis papers held at Stanford University. Lewis (1947) contains two chapters on aesthetics and the philosophy of art. He was the first to employ the term "qualia", popularized by his student Nelson Goodman, in its generally agreed modern sense.   ==== Legacy ==== Lewis's work has been relatively neglected in recent years, even though he set out his ideas at length, can be understood as both a late pragmatist and an early analytic philosopher, and had students of the calibre of Brand Blanshard, Nelson Goodman, and Roderick Chisholm. Joel Isaac, in his contribution to the 2006 Transactions of the C. S. Peirce Society symposium referenced below, believes this neglect is justified. Lewis's reputation is benefiting from the growing interest in the historical aspects of pragmatism and of American philosophy generally. Lewis's papers are kept at Stanford University.   === Personal life === Lewis's life was not free of trials. His daughter died in 1930 and he suffered a heart attack in 1932. Nevertheless, the publications of Lewis (1929) and Lewis and Langford (1932) attest to this having been a highly productive period of his life. His Harvard course on Kant's first Critique was among the most famous in undergraduate philosophy in the U.S. until he retired in 1957. Lewis accepted a visiting professorship at Stanford during 1957-1958, where he presented his lectures for the last time. The move to Menlo Park enabled him and his wife to spend his final years near their grandchildren.   == Bibliography == 1918. A Survey of Symbolic Logic. (Internet Archive Eprint.) Republished in part by Dover in 1960. 1929. Mind and the World Order: Outline of a Theory of Knowledge. Dover reprint, 1956. 1932. Symbolic Logic (with Cooper H. Langford). Dover reprint, 1959. 1946. An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation. Open Court. [2] 1955. The Ground and Nature of the Right. Columbia Univ. Press. 1957. Our Social Inheritance. Indiana Univ. Press. 1969 (John Lange, ed.). Values and Imperatives: Studies in Ethics. Stanford Univ. Press. 1970 (Goheen, J. D., and Mothershead, J. L. Jr., eds.). Collected Papers. Stanford Univ. Press.   == See also == American philosophy Pragmatism Modal logic Interior algebra List of American philosophers   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Dayton, Eric, 2006, "Clarence Irving Lewis" in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Hunter, Bruce, 2007 "Clarence Irving Lewis" in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Univ. Press. Hughes, G. E., and M.J. Cresswell (1996) A New Introduction to Modal Logic. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-12599-5 Murphey, Murray G., 2005. C. I. Lewis: The Last Great Pragmatist. SUNY Press. 2006, "Symposium on M. G. Murphey's C. I. Lewis: The Last Great Pragmatist," Transactions of the C. S. Peirce Society 42: 1-77. With contributions by S. F. Barker, John Corcoran, Eric Dayton, John Greco, Joel Isaac, Murphey, Richard S. Robin, and Naomi Zack.  Schilpp, P. A., ed., 1968. The Philosophy of C. I. Lewis (The Library of Living Philosophers, vol. 13). Open Court. Includes an autobiographical essay.   == External links == "Clarence Irving Lewis" article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online bibliography.

Conimbricenses or Collegium Conimbricense is the name by which Jesuits of the University of Coimbra in Coimbra, Portugal were known. The Conimbricenses were Jesuits who, from the end of 16th century took over the intellectual leadership of the Roman Catholic world from the Dominicans. Among those Jesuits were Luis de Molina (1535–1600) and Francisco Suárez (1548–1617). In their stricter sense the Coimbra Commentaries, also known simply as Conimbricenses, are mainly a group of eleven books on Aristotle (of which only eight are really commentaries). On the register of the college at various times appeared the names of 200 Jesuits including professors and students. Toward the end of the 16th century and the beginning of the 17th, voluminous commentaries on the philosophical writings of Aristotle went forth from the university. These commentaries were dictations to the students by the professors and as such were not intended for publication. Still they were actually published, but fraudulently. In order to interpret and disown incorrect and unauthorized editions, Father Claudius Acquaviva, the General of the Society of Jesus, assigned Father Peter Fonseca, the provincial of the Portuguese province, the task of supervising the revision of these commentaries for publication. Father Fonseca was widely known as the Aristotle of Portugal. The treatises appeared in the following order: Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in octo libros Physicorum Aristotelis Stagyritæ (Coimbra, 1591, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1984); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in quattuor libros Physicorum Aristotelis de Cœlo (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Meteororum Aristotelis Stagyritæ (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Aristotelis qui Parva naturalia appelantur (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Ethicorum Aristotelis ad Nichomachum aliquot Cursus Conimbricensis disputationes in quibus præcipua quaedam Ethicæ disciplinæ capita continentur (Coimbra, 1595); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in duos libros Aristotelis De generatione et corruptione (Coimbra, 1595, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 2003); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in tres libros Aristotelis De Anima (Coimbra, 1592 reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 2006). This treatise was published after the death of Father Emmanuel Golz (whom Father Fonseca had commissioned to publish the earlier volumes) by Father Comas Maggalliano (Magalhaens). To it he added a treatise of Father Balthazaar Alvarez De Anima Separata and his own work Tractatio aliquot problematum ad quinque Sensus Spectantium; Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu In universam dialecticam nunc primum (ed. Venice, 1606, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1976) The works commented are: In Isagogem Porphyrii, In libros Categoriarium Aristotelis, In libros Aristotelis de Interpretatione, In libros Aristotelis Stagiritae de Priori Resolutione, In primum librum Posteriorum Aristotelis, In librum primum Topicorum Aristotelis and In duos libros Elenchorum Aristotelis. To this last treatise was prefixed a forward disowning any connection whatever with the work published at Frankfurt in 1604 and claiming to be the "Commentarii Conimbricenses". The portion of the preface referred to is substantially the following: "Before we could finish the task entrusted to us of editing our Logic, to which we were bound by many promises, certain German publishers fraudulently brought out a work professing to be from us, abounding in errors and inaccuracies which were really their own. They also substituted for our commentaries certain glosses gotten furtively. It is true these writings thirty years previously were the work of one of our professors not indeed intended for publication. They were the fruit of his zeal and he never dreamed they would appear in print." The last treatise was prepared for printing by Father Sebastian Couto. The entire eight parts formed five quarto volumes, enjoyed a wide circulation, and appeared in many editions, the best known being those of Lyon, Lisbon, and Cologne. The Commentaries are in flowing Latin and are supplemented by reliable explanations of the text and exhaustive discussion of the system of Aristotle. Karl Werner said that the Jesuits of Coimbra gave the world a masterpiece, whose equal is yet to be seen and which has received the admiration it deserves. Father de Backer gives an exact list of all the editions. The later ones have added the Greek text of Aristotle.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Cassidy, John (1908). "Conimbricenses". In Herbermann, Charles. Catholic Encyclopedia 4. Robert Appleton Company.    == See also == Pedro da Fonseca (philosopher) School of Salamanca   == Original Text == In libro de generatione et corruptione, In octo libros physicorum, In libros meteorum, In libro de anima in PDF or JPEG format at University of Coimbra’s site.   == Translations == The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press 2001 (Translation with introduction and notes by John P. Doyle of the commentary to the first chapter of Aristotle's De Interpretatione).   == External links == The Latin texts of the Commentaries (PDF) Introductory note to the Commentaires by António Manuel Martins Bibliography by Mário Santiago de Carvalho

Constantin Rădulescu-Motru (born Constantin Rădulescu, he added the surname Motru in 1892; February 15, 1868 – March 6, 1957) was a Romanian philosopher, psychologist, sociologist, logician, academic, dramatist, as well as centre-left nationalist politician with a noted anti-fascist discourse. A member of the Romanian Academy after 1923, he was its vice president in 1935–1938, 1941–1944, and its president between 1938 and 1941.   == Early life == Born in Butoieşti, Mehedinţi County, he was the son of Radu Poppescu, whose natural father was Eufrosin Poteca, and Judita Butoi. His mother died during childbirth, and Radu Poppescu married Ecaterina Cernăianu, who would gave birth to Constantin's nine siblings. During his childhood, Constantin fell ill with malaria. He also fractured a leg, resulting in a permanent physical impediment. Radu Poppescu, who worked as a secretary for Poteca for part of his life, inherited a certain sum after the death of his employer and father; this was to take the form of a scholarship for Constantin Rădulescu. He ultimately refused to make use of it, indicating that he would use instead revenue from his estate in Butoieşti; the scholarship was eventually awarded to Gheorghe Ţiţeica, the renowned mathematician. In 1885, he graduated from Carol I High School in Craiova, and subsequently entered the University of Bucharest, applying to both its Faculty of Law and Faculty of Letters. He was taught by Titu Maiorescu, who was to become his mentor, and attended lectures by Constantin Dumitrescu-Iaşi, V. A. Urechia, Grigore Tocilescu, and Bogdan Petriceicu Hasdeu. He was part of the last generation of intellectuals to participate in the activities of the Junimea literary society (where Maiorescu had endured as the major influence). Rădulescu-Motru was awarded a Law degree magna cum laude in 1888, and passed his Philosophy exam the following year.   == Studies abroad == In the summer of 1889, he accompanied Maiorescu on a trip to Austria-Hungary, Germany, and Switzerland, notably visiting the University of Vienna and the University of Munich, establishing contacts with German academics. This brought his inclusion into the last stage of a program initiated by Maiorescu as the Kingdom of Romania's Minister of Education: alongside other important cultural and scientific figures (such as Alexandru A. Philippide, Ştefan Zeletin, Ion Rădulescu-Pogoneanu, Iorgu Iordan, Simion Mehedinţi, Nicolae Bănescu, P. P. Negulescu, Teohari Antonescu, and Constantin Litzica), he was given official assistance in order complete his education abroad (in order to provide Romania with a new generation of academics). Initially, he directed his interest towards studies in France, attending Henry Beaunis' lectures in psychology at the University of Paris during the fall of 1899. Between 1890 and 1893, Rădulescu settled in Germany – he lived in Munich and studied at the university for one semester (as a student of Carl Stumpf), and then moved to Leipzig, where he began working in the laboratory of Wilhelm Wundt at the local university. While completing his training with Wundt, he attended classes in physics, physiology, chemistry, psychiatry, and mathematics, as well as Gustav Weigand's lectures in Romanian philology. He married a German woman, who later refused to accompany him back to Romania; they eventually divorced. He took his doctorate in 1893, with a thesis on Immanuel Kant's philosophy (Zur Entwickelung von Kant's Theorie der Naturkausalität), one notably quoted by Henri Bergson in his Introduction à la Métaphysique.   == Academic and political career == After 1897, Spiru Haret, he served on the editorial board of Spiru Haret's Albina popular science magazine. On January 1, 1900, he also founded and edited Noua Revistă Română (which published articles by, among others, Nicolae Iorga, Ion Luca Caragiale, George Coşbuc, Lazăr Şăineanu, Ioan Nădejde, Ovid Densusianu, H. Sanielevici, and Garabet Ibrăileanu). Appointed to the chair of Philosophy at the University of Bucharest in 1906 (after three years of employment at the cultural foundation created by King Carol I), he was also the founder of the review Studii filosofice (later renamed Revista de filosofie), and, in 1918, became head of the National Theatre Bucharest. In 1923, Rădulescu-Motru joined Virgil Madgearu, Constantin Costa-Foru, Victor Eftimiu, Grigore Iunian, Radu Rosetti, Dem I. Dobrescu, and the socialists Constantin Titel Petrescu, Nicolae L. Lupu, and Constantin Mille, in creating Liga Drepturilor Omului (the League for Human Rights), protesting against measures taken by the National Liberal cabinet of Ion I. C. Brătianu in dealing with left-wing opposition forces. In 1925, Rădulescu-Motru, Nicolae Basilescu, and Traian Bratu were part of a government-appointed committee investigating the roles of A. C. Cuza and Corneliu Şumuleanu in the anti-Semitic violence having occurred at the University of Iaşi in 1923-1925. Initially a conservative, he became active inside the newly created National Peasants' Party towards the end of the 1920s, and adapted the group's advocacy of a peasant state that would favour small-scale agricultural property (an echo of Poporanism), while taking a more centrist stand than his friend Madgearu. A member of the party's Study Circle, he took part in drafting a new party program (a 1935 initiative taken by Ion Mihalache and Mihai Ralea, it also involved the left-wingers Ernest Ene, Mihail Ghelmegeanu, and Petre Andrei). It was at this time that his ideas on ethnicity (Romanianism) came to be debated by various figures on the Right, and were the subject of virulent criticism from intellectuals sympathetic to the fascist Iron Guard, who notably rejected his commitment to secularism and Maiorescu's Junimea tradition (Mircea Vulcănescu spoke against "his hostile attitude, shared by his Junimist colleagues, against the penetration of a new, religious spirit, inside the University [of Bucharest]"), as well as from the nationalist modernist Lucian Blaga. According to a later assessment of his work by Vulcănescu, who had since become influenced by the centrist National Peasants' Party member Dimitrie Gusti, the latter's outlook on sociology was also in disagremeent with Rădulescu-Motru's adherence to Junimist guidelines. Toward the end of the 1930s, Rădulescu-Motru was involved in a dispute with the far right philosopher Nae Ionescu, who, although appointed his assistant at the Philosophy department, had begun to criticize his views in the pro-Iron Guard journal Cuvântul; writing to Mircea Eliade in 1938, he accused Ionescu of various unacademic practices, including using lectures on Logic to promote "a sort of dilettante mysticism". The President of the Academy at the moment when Carol II assumed dictatorial powers, he chose to support the new National Renaissance Front (FRN) regime, and moved away from party politics. He remained in office after Carol's fall from power of and the establishment of the Iron Guard's National Legionary State government; in the autumn of 1940, as Madgearu and Nicolae Iorga, who had been assassinated by the Guard's armed groups, were being buried, he led the delegation of Academy members who defied the policies of Horia Sima by attending the funeral. During World War II, he was supportive of the dictatorship of Ion Antonescu and Romania's alliance with Nazi Germany against the Soviet Union. As late as 1944 he abhorred the attempts of the Romanian opposition to negotiate the country's switch to the camp of the United Nations. Even after the war, in his personal journals he continued to adopt a position sympathetic to the Romanian and Nazi war criminals, dismissing the Nuremberg Trials and the People's Tribunals.   == Communist persecution == Critical of Romania's exit from the Axis Powers during World War II (see Romania during World War II), he was alarmed by the Soviet advances and the eventual occupation; in his private notes, he deplored the fact that Romania failed to adopt the Marshall Plan. In June 1948, six months after the establishment of a communist regime, Rădulescu-Motru was among the members of the Academy purged by the new authorities (he was reinstated post-mortem in 1990). Despite his protests, his entire work was dismissed by official Stalinist rhetoric as "idealism". He was denied employment in his field of expertise, until two years before his death, when he was admitted to the minor post of researcher at the Psychology Institute; according to his biographer N. Bagdasar, his final years were marked by extreme poverty. Granted assistance following the interventions of Miron Constantinescu and Constantin Ion Parhon, Rădulescu-Motru was hospitalized in a Bucharest clinic for much of his final years. He died while in there, and was buried in Bellu cemetery.   == Philosophy and politics ==   === Outlook === Influenced by Wilhelm Wundt's theories on introspection, Rădulescu-Motru moved away from Kantian philosophy and its tenet regarding the impossibility of transcending reality as perceived through the senses. He considered metaphysics to be open to objective scrutiny, and placed their knowledge at the summit of philosophical approaches. Stating that there was, in effect, a unity between person and material nature, Rădulescu-Motru developed his own version of Personalism, which thought of the human being and its personality as the goal of evolution in nature – a theory he called Energetic Personalism. He recognized the influence of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel's views on the relation between being and the whole, arguing that his idealist concept of externalization ("the belief that the world is being led by our ideal", which he deemed "transitory Personalism") had been the driving force behind all modern ideologies, from Socialism and Anarchism to Liberalism (see Right Hegelians and Left Hegelians). Owing to Wundt's Völkerpsychologie, Rădulescu-Motru dedicated much of his work to assessing and defining nationalism in Romanian social context. Concentrating his analysis on the impact of modernization and Westernization, he argued for a need to adapt forms to the Romanian ethnicity (which he defined through heredity), and represented as the true social fundament (the "community of spirit"). He supported the existence of human races and differences among them, as well as eugenics, even after the defeat of Nazi Germany led to the abandonment of such theories in the mainstream scientific world.   === Views on modernization === In his Cultura română şi politicianismul ("Romanian culture and petty politics"), he devised a hierarchy of cultures, placing Western civilization at the top of the scale, and the Far East at its bottom; he later confessed to Mircea Eliade his reticence in dealing with Hindu philosophy (conversations between the two centered instead on Indian nationalism in general and Satyagraha in particular). The system placed Romania in the margin of European progress, still subject to adopting cultural forms from Western societies:  "Nowhere have bourgeois institutions stemmed out of natural spiritual needs of the peoples, but rather out of the needs of capitalism; the complete harmonizing of these institutions with the popular psyche was a gradual, difficult enterprise, the more so in our country, where the dazzling development of capitalism has left the spiritual evolution, always more laborious, far behind."  Elsewhere, he argued that, despite a traditional pattern of individualism, Romanians lacked "initiative in economic and social life, the two characteristics traits of individualism as experienced by the cultured Western peoples and constituting bourgeois spirit"; according to him, the common folk relied on collective work, which had ensured the survival of village communities during "cursed centuries" (maintaining the mobility of villages "from plain to mountains", but preventing their actual breakup during the medieval period). In his chapters on the universal suffrage, the parliamentary system, and the Romanian Constitution of 1923, Rădulescu-Motru expanded on this fundamentally conservative thesis, arguing that such reforms had come too soon to be properly integrated. The main danger he saw in the process was the appearance of "petty politics" (politicianism), which, he argued, had a potential of destroying natural developments inside the nation. Taking in view the characteristics of this evolution towards petty politics, he vehemently rejected Mihai Eminescu's theory on the almost exclusively foreign origin of the bourgeoisie inside the post-Phanariote Old Kingdom. Instead, Rădulescu-Motru expanded on Titu Maiorescu's criticism of "forms without fundament" (in reference to the discrepancy between the Westernized facade and the underdeveloped economic and social setting), viewing the class of low-ranking boyars, increasingly attracted to Liberal currents during the 19th century, as the main agents of incoherent change – this attracted him the criticism of the Poporanist Garabet Ibrăileanu, who argued that Junimea was an exclusivist school of criticism that "has never said [of foreign models] what, how much, and when should be imported". In this context, Ibrăileanu emphasized the gestures of boyars before and during the Organic Regulation government, as indicative of a skeptical nationalist mood (rather than of a cosmopolitan ideology).   === Romanianism and secularism === With Învăţământul filosofic în România ("Philosophical education in Romania"), his 1931 essay first published in Convorbiri Literare, Rădulescu-Motru introduced a polemic that was to mark numerous other writings of his during the following period: reacting to the growth in appeal of far right magazines that claimed to follow a Romanian Orthodox philosophy – Cuvântul and Gândirea –, he made a difference between a "belletristic" trend in higher learning and a "scientific" one, arguing in favour of the latter, and presenting the former as the objective source of anti-intellectualist attitudes he observed inside the new political phenomenon (which emphasized the "human need for mystery"). In essence, the secularist Rădulescu-Motru followed the Junimea tradition of rejecting mysticism, viewing it as the unwanted characteristic of a working class mentality. He questioned the subjective approaches of Lucian Blaga, Nichifor Crainic, and Nae Ionescu: developing his Romanianism, Rădulescu-Motru stated his support for cultural and national dialogue ("and not the isolation of each people in its own ethnicity"), and for the ultimate integration of Romanian culture in the highest section of European culture. He even argued that principles supported by the Right in defining Romanian specificity were in fact being shared with other cultures (answering Blaga's emphasis on Romanian folklore, he pointed out that its themes were commonplace in neighbouring Balkan cultures; replying to Ionescu's views on allegedly particular tendencies toward theology and metaphysics inside national culture, he stated his belief that "the prestige of the metaphor, the attraction towards mystery and the ontology of the ethnos [...] only show themselves from the second quarter of the 20th century onwards, [and are under the influence of] foreign university circles [...]"; he also rejected Crainic's views on Orthodoxy as the source for specificity, arguing for Christian universalism in detriment of "nationalist spirituality" – an idea nevertheless interpreted by Crainic as evidence of "militant philosophical atheism").   === Peasant doctrine === After joining the National Peasants' Party, Rădulescu-Motru maintained a particular approach towards the group's doctrines and policies after 1935: adapting his criticism of individualism (a trait he associated with the National Liberals) to the Poporanist doctrine of the "peasant state", he defined the latter as necessarily "totalitarian":  "[It] differs from other totalitarian states in that it sets among its norms, first and foremost, the preeminence of the permanent interests of the peasant population. Unlike the Fascist, the National-Socialist, and the Soviet states, it believes that it can serve the totality of the population it is supposed to govern, not on the basis of a glorious imperialist tradition, or through the cultivation of a race relation, or through industrial structuring on the basis of a dictatorial plan, but through the creation of a healthy, moral, and labouring peasantry, ready to defend the country's borders as the geographical and historical conditions demand it."  A pro-authoritarian critic soon reproached that such an ideal, despite its aim to compete with purely nationalist trends, was in fact social class-based, and its "numerical, that is to say democratic" definition (around the argument that peasants formed the majority in Romania) was leading to "peasant anarchy". Rădulescu-Motru came to support Carol II's National Renaissance Front (FRN) and the single-party system in 1938, speaking out in favour of the kings' initiative to introduce uniforms for members of the Academy (clashing over the matter with his fellow academic Nicolae Iorga, in February 1939).   == Works == F. W. Nietzsche. Viaţa şi filosofia sa ("F. W. Nietzsche. His life and philosophy"), 1897 Problemele psihologiei ("Issues in psychology"), 1898 Ştiinţă şi energie ("Science and energy"), 1902 Cultura română şi politicianismul ("Romanian culture and petty politics"), 1904 Psihologia martorului ("The psychology of the witness"), 1906 Psihologia industriaşului ("The psychology of the industrialist"), 1907 Puterea sufletească ("Power of the spirit"), 1908 Psihologia ciocoismului ("The psychology of boyars"), 1908 Poporanismul politic şi democraţia conservatoare ("Political Poporanism and Conservative democracy), 1909 Naţionalismul cum se înţelege. Cum trebuie să se înţeleagă ("Nationalism as it is being understood. How it should be understood"), 1909 Sufletul neamului nostru. Calităţi bune şi defecte ("The spirit of our nation. Its good properties and its flaws"), 1910 Din psihologia revoluţionarului ("From the psychology of the revolutionary"), 1919 Rasa, cultura şi naţionalitatea în filosofia istoriei ("Race, culture and nationality in the philosophy of history"), 1922 Curs de psihologie ("Lectures in psychology"), 1923 Personalismul energetic ("The Energetic Personalism"), 1927 Ţărănismul. Un suflet şi o politică ("Peasant doctrine. A spirit and a policy"), 1927 Elemente de metafizică pe baza filosofiei kantiene ("Elements of metaphysics on the basis of Kantian philosophy"), 1928 Învăţământul filosofic în România ("Philosophical education in Romania"), 1931 Centenarul lui Hegel ("Hegel's centennial"), 1931 Psihologie practică ("Practical psychology"), 1931 Vocaţia, factor hotărâtor în cultura popoarelor ("Vocation - a determining factor in peoples' culture"), 1932 Ideologia statului român ("The ideology of the Romanian state"), 1934 Românismul. Catehismul unei noi spiritualităţi ("Romanianism. The Catechism of a new spirituality"), 1936 Psihologia poporului român ("Psychology of the Romanian people"), 1937 Timp şi destin ("Time and destiny"), 1940 Etnicul românesc. Comunitate de origine, limbă şi destin ("The Romanian ethnos. A community of origins, language, and destiny"), 1942   == Notes ==   == References == Texts by Rădulescu-Motru: (Romanian) Enciclopedia României article on the specificity of Romanian traits, in Ioan Scurtu, Theodora Stănescu-Stanciu, Georgiana Margareta Scurtu, Istoria românilor între anii 1918-1940 (Romanian) Excerpts from his Journal: 1947 - in Magazin Istoric (collected by Ioan Lăcustă) and 1949 - on Memoria.ro (collected by Gabriela Dumitrescu) (Romanian) Mircea Handoca, Corespondenţă Mircea Eliade – Constantin Rădulescu-Motru  (Romanian) Evreii în prima universitate din România at the Romanian Jewish community site (Romanian) Gheorghe Adamescu, Istoria literaturii române. IV: Literatura care se formează (1900-1910) (Romanian) Liviu Antonesei, Demagogie, populism şi realism politic, în strînsă legătură cu chestiunea educaţiei publice – învăţămintele istoriei (Romanian) S. M. Antonescu, Periodice româneşti de la începutul secolui al XX-lea consacrate popularizării ştiinţei Ovidiu Caraiani, National Identity and Political Legitimacy in Modern Romania (Romanian) Garabet Ibrăileanu, Spiritul critic în cultura românească: Evoluţia spiritului critic - Deosebirile dintre vechea şcoală critică moldovenească şi "Junimea"; Primul junimist: Costache Negruzzi (Romanian) Ionuţ Isac, Două paradigme filosofice în cultura românească: Kant şi Wittgenstein (Romanian) Lucian Nastasă, Universităţile germane şi formarea elitei intelectuale româneşti (1864-1944). Reflecţii memorialistice Vasile Niculae, Ion Ilincioiu, Stelian Neagoe, Doctrina ţărănistă în România. Antologie de texte, Editura Noua Alternativă, Social Theory Institute of the Romanian Academy, Bucharest, 1994 Z. Ornea, Anii treizeci. Extrema dreaptă românească, Ed. Fundaţiei Culturale Române, Bucharest, 1995 (Romanian) Z. Ornea, "C. Rădulescu-Motru în 1946-1947", in România literară, 24, 1999 (Romanian) Cristinel Pantelimon, Geopoliticianismul (Romanian) Constantin Schifirneţ, C.Rădulescu-Motru. Viaţa şi faptele sale, vol. I-III, 2003–2005 (Romanian) Henri H. Stahl, Gânditori şi curente de istorie socială românească. IV: Titu Maiorescu şi criza "formelor fără fond" (Romanian) Petre Ţurlea, "Vodă da, Iorga ba", in Magazin Istoric, February 2001 Tudor Vianu, Scriitori români, Vol. II, Ed. Minerva, Bucharest, 1971 (Romanian) Mircea Vulcănescu, Şcoala sociologică a lui Dimitrie Gusti. IX: Semnificaţia generală a învăţământului gustian ("The Sociology School of Dimitrie Gusti. IX: The General Significance of Gusti's Teaching") (Romanian) Constantin Titel Petrescu at social-democrati.ro   == External links == Unesco.org: short summary of Personalismul energetic

Dag Prawitz (born 1936, Stockholm) is a Swedish philosopher and logician. He is best known for his work on proof theory and the foundations of natural deduction. Prawitz is a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, of the Royal Swedish Academy of Letters and Antiquity and the Royal Swedish Academy of Science.   == References ==   == External links == Prawitz's web page at Stockholm University

Dana Stewart Scott (born October 11, 1932) is the emeritus Hillman University Professor of Computer Science, Philosophy, and Mathematical Logic at Carnegie Mellon University; he is now retired and lives in Berkeley, California. His research career involved computer science, mathematics, and philosophy. His work on automata theory earned him the ACM Turing Award in 1976, while his collaborative work with Christopher Strachey in the 1970s laid the foundations of modern approaches to the semantics of programming languages. He has worked also on modal logic, topology, and category theory.   == Early careerEdit == He received his BA in Mathematics from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1954. He wrote his Ph.D. thesis on Convergent Sequences of Complete Theories under the supervision of Alonzo Church while at Princeton, and defended his thesis in 1958. Solomon Feferman (2005) writes of this period:  Scott began his studies in logic at Berkeley in the early 50s while still an undergraduate. His unusual abilities were soon recognized and he quickly moved on to graduate classes and seminars with Tarski and became part of the group that surrounded him, including me and Richard Montague; so it was at that time that we became friends. Scott was clearly in line to do a Ph. D. with Tarski, but they had a falling out for reasons explained in our biography. Upset by that, Scott left for Princeton where he finished with a Ph. D. under Alonzo Church. But it was not long before the relationship between them was mended to the point that Tarski could say to him, "I hope I can call you my student."  After completing his Ph.D. studies, he moved to the University of Chicago, working as an instructor there until 1960. In 1959, he published a joint paper with Michael O. Rabin, a colleague from Princeton, entitled Finite Automata and Their Decision Problem, which introduced the idea of nondeterministic machines to automata theory. This work led to the joint bestowal of the Turing Award on the two, for the introduction of this fundamental concept of computational complexity theory.   == University of California, Berkeley, 1960–1963Edit == Scott took up a post as Assistant Professor of Mathematics, back at the University of California, Berkeley, and involved himself with classical issues in mathematical logic, especially set theory and Tarskian model theory. During this period he started supervising Ph.D. students, such as James Halpern (Contributions to the Study of the Independence of the Axiom of Choice) and Edgar Lopez-Escobar (Infinitely Long Formulas with Countable Quantifier Degrees).   === Modal and tense logicEdit === Scott also began working on modal logic in this period, beginning a collaboration with John Lemmon, who moved to Claremont, California, in 1963. Scott was especially interested in Arthur Prior's approach to tense logic and the connection to the treatment of time in natural-language semantics, and began collaborating with Richard Montague (Copeland 2004), whom he had known from his days as an undergraduate at Berkeley. Later, Scott and Montague independently discovered an important generalisation of Kripke semantics for modal and tense logic, called Scott-Montague semantics (Scott 1970). John Lemmon and Scott began work on a modal-logic textbook that was interrupted by Lemmon's death in 1966. Scott circulated the incomplete monograph amongst colleagues, introducing a number of important techniques in the semantics of model theory, most importantly presenting a refinement of canonical model that became standard, and introducing the technique of constructing models through filtrations, both of which are core concepts in modern Kripke semantics (Blackburn, de Rijke, and Venema, 2001). Scott eventually published the work as An Introduction to Modal Logic (Lemmon & Scott, 1977).   == Stanford, Amsterdam and Princeton, 1963–1972Edit == Following an initial observation of Robert Solovay, Scott formulated the concept of Boolean-valued model, as Solovay and Petr Vopěnka did likewise at around the same time. In 1967 Scott published a paper, A Proof of the Independence of the Continuum Hypothesis, in which he used Boolean-valued models to provide an alternate analysis of the independence of the continuum hypothesis to that provided by Paul Cohen. This work led to the award of the Leroy P. Steele Prize in 1972.   == Oxford University, 1972–1981Edit == Scott took up a post as Professor of Mathematical Logic on the Philosophy faculty of Oxford University in 1972. He was member of Merton College while at Oxford.   === Semantics of programming languagesEdit === This period saw Scott working with Christopher Strachey, and the two managed, despite administrative pressures, to do work on providing a mathematical foundation for the semantics of programming languages, the work for which Scott is best known. Together, their work constitutes the Scott-Strachey approach to denotational semantics; it constitutes one of the pieces of work in theoretical computer science and can perhaps be regarded as founding one of the schools of computer science. One of Scott's contributions is his formulation of domain theory, allowing programs involving recursive functions and looping-control constructs to be given denotational semantics. Additionally, he provided a foundation for the understanding of infinitary and continuous information through domain theory and his theory of information systems. Scott's work of this period led to the bestowal of: The 1990 Harold Pender Award for his application of concepts from logic and algebra to the development of mathematical semantics of programming languages; The 1997 Rolf Schock Prize in logic and philosophy from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences for his conceptually oriented logical works, especially the creation of domain theory, which has made it possible to extend Tarski's semantical paradigm to programming languages as well as to construct models of Curry's combinatory logic and Church's calculus of lambda conversion; and The 2001 Bolzano Prize for Merit in the Mathematical Sciences by the Czech Academy of Sciences. The 2007 EATCS Award for his contribution to theoretical computer science.   == Carnegie Mellon University 1981–2003Edit == At Carnegie Mellon University, Scott proposed the theory of equilogical spaces as a successor theory to domain theory; among its many advantages, the category of equilogical spaces is a cartesian closed category, whereas the category of domains is not. In 1994, he was inducted as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == See alsoEdit == Scott's trick Scott–Potter set theory   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Works by ScottEdit === With Michael O. Rabin, 1959. Finite Automata and Their Decision Problem. 1967. A proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis. Mathematical Systems Theory 1:89–111. 1970. 'Advice in modal logic'. In Philosophical Problems in Logic, ed. K. Lambert, pages 143–173. With John Lemmon, 1977. An Introduction to Modal Logic. Oxford: Blackwell. Gierz, G.; Hofmann, K. H.; Keimel, K.; Lawson, J. D.; Mislove, M. W.; Scott, D. S. (2003). Continuous Lattices and Domains. Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications 93. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521803381.    === Other worksEdit === Blackburn, de Rijke and Venema (2001). Modal logic. Cambridge University Press. Jack Copeland (2004). Arthur Prior. In the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Solomon Feferman and Anita Burdman Feferman (2004). Alfred Tarski: life and logic. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-80240-7, ISBN 978-0-521-80240-6. Solomon Feferman (2005). Tarski's influence on computer science. Proc. LICS'05. IEEE Press. Joseph E. Stoy (1977). Denotational Semantics: The Scott-Strachey Approach to Programming Language Theory. MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-19147-4   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Dana S. Scott home page DOMAIN 2002 Workshop on Domain Theory — held in honor of Scott's 70th birthday. Dana Scott at the Mathematics Genealogy Project List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search

David Hilbert (German: [ˈdaːvɪt ˈhɪlbɐt]; 23 January 1862 – 14 February 1943) was a German mathematician. He is recognized as one of the most influential and universal mathematicians of the 19th and early 20th centuries. Hilbert discovered and developed a broad range of fundamental ideas in many areas, including invariant theory and the axiomatization of geometry. He also formulated the theory of Hilbert spaces, one of the foundations of functional analysis. Hilbert adopted and warmly defended Georg Cantor's set theory and transfinite numbers. A famous example of his leadership in mathematics is his 1900 presentation of a collection of problems that set the course for much of the mathematical research of the 20th century. Hilbert and his students contributed significantly to establishing rigor and developed important tools used in modern mathematical physics. Hilbert is known as one of the founders of proof theory and mathematical logic, as well as for being among the first to distinguish between mathematics and metamathematics.   == LifeEdit ==   === Early life and educationEdit === Hilbert, the first of two children of Otto and Maria Therese (Erdtmann) Hilbert, was born in the Province of Prussia, either in Königsberg (according to Hilbert's own statement) or in Wehlau (known since 1946 as Znamensk) near Königsberg where his father worked at the time of his birth. In late 1872, Hilbert entered the Friedrichskolleg Gymnasium (Collegium fridericianum, the same school that Immanuel Kant had attended 140 years before); but, after an unhappy period, he transferred to (late 1879) and graduated from (early 1880) the more science-oriented Wilhelm Gymnasium. Upon graduation, in autumn 1880, Hilbert enrolled at the University of Königsberg, the "Albertina". In early 1882, Hermann Minkowski (two years younger than Hilbert and also a native of Königsberg but so talented he had graduated early from his gymnasium and gone to Berlin for three semesters), returned to Königsberg and entered the university. "Hilbert knew his luck when he saw it. In spite of his father's disapproval, he soon became friends with the shy, gifted Minkowski".   === CareerEdit === In 1884, Adolf Hurwitz arrived from Göttingen as an Extraordinarius (i.e., an associate professor). An intense and fruitful scientific exchange among the three began, and Minkowski and Hilbert especially would exercise a reciprocal influence over each other at various times in their scientific careers. Hilbert obtained his doctorate in 1885, with a dissertation, written under Ferdinand von Lindemann, titled Über invariante Eigenschaften spezieller binärer Formen, insbesondere der Kugelfunktionen ("On the invariant properties of special binary forms, in particular the spherical harmonic functions"). Hilbert remained at the University of Königsberg as a Privatdozent (senior lecturer) from 1886 to 1895. In 1895, as a result of intervention on his behalf by Felix Klein, he obtained the position of Professor of Mathematics at the University of Göttingen, at that time the best research center for mathematics in the world. He remained there for the rest of his life.   === The Göttingen schoolEdit === Among Hilbert's students were Hermann Weyl, chess champion Emanuel Lasker, Ernst Zermelo, and Carl Gustav Hempel. John von Neumann was his assistant. At the University of Göttingen, Hilbert was surrounded by a social circle of some of the most important mathematicians of the 20th century, such as Emmy Noether and Alonzo Church. Among his 69 Ph.D. students in Göttingen were many who later became famous mathematicians, including (with date of thesis): Otto Blumenthal (1898), Felix Bernstein (1901), Hermann Weyl (1908), Richard Courant (1910), Erich Hecke (1910), Hugo Steinhaus (1911), and Wilhelm Ackermann (1925). Between 1902 and 1939 Hilbert was editor of the Mathematische Annalen, the leading mathematical journal of the time.  "Good, he did not have enough imagination to become a mathematician".   === Later yearsEdit === Hilbert lived to see the Nazis purge many of the prominent faculty members at University of Göttingen in 1933. Those forced out included Hermann Weyl (who had taken Hilbert's chair when he retired in 1930), Emmy Noether and Edmund Landau. One who had to leave Germany, Paul Bernays, had collaborated with Hilbert in mathematical logic, and co-authored with him the important book Grundlagen der Mathematik (which eventually appeared in two volumes, in 1934 and 1939). This was a sequel to the Hilbert-Ackermann book Principles of Mathematical Logic from 1928. Hermann Weyl's successor was Helmut Hasse. About a year later, Hilbert attended a banquet and was seated next to the new Minister of Education, Bernhard Rust. Rust asked whether "the Mathematical Institute really suffered so much because of the departure of the Jews". Hilbert replied, "Suffered? It doesn't exist any longer, does it!"   By the time Hilbert died in 1943, the Nazis had nearly completely restaffed the university, as many of the former faculty had either been Jewish or married to Jews. Hilbert's funeral was attended by fewer than a dozen people, only two of whom were fellow academics, among them Arnold Sommerfeld, a theoretical physicist and also a native of Königsberg. News of his death only became known to the wider world six months after he had died. Hilbert was baptized and raised in the Reformed Protestant Church. He later on left the Church and became an agnostic. He also argued that mathematical truth was independent of the existence of God or other a priori assumptions. The epitaph on his tombstone in Göttingen consists of the famous lines he spoke at the conclusion of his retirement address to the Society of German Scientists and Physicians on 8 September 1930. The words were given in response to the Latin maxim: "Ignoramus et ignorabimus" or "We do not know, we shall not know": Wir müssen wissen. Wir werden wissen. In English: We must know. We will know. The day before Hilbert pronounced these phrases at the 1930 annual meeting of the Society of German Scientists and Physicians, Kurt Gödel—in a round table discussion during the Conference on Epistemology held jointly with the Society meetings—tentatively announced the first expression of his incompleteness theorem.   === Personal lifeEdit === In 1892, Hilbert married Käthe Jerosch (1864–1945), "the daughter of a Königsberg merchant, an outspoken young lady with an independence of mind that matched his own". While at Königsberg they had their one child, Franz Hilbert (1893–1969). Hilbert's son Franz suffered throughout his life from an undiagnosed mental illness. His inferior intellect was a terrible disappointment to his father and this misfortune was a matter of distress to the mathematicians and students at Göttingen. Minkowski — Hilbert's "best and truest friend" — died prematurely of a ruptured appendix in 1909.   == Hilbert solves Gordan's ProblemEdit == Hilbert's first work on invariant functions led him to the demonstration in 1888 of his famous finiteness theorem. Twenty years earlier, Paul Gordan had demonstrated the theorem of the finiteness of generators for binary forms using a complex computational approach. Attempts to generalize his method to functions with more than two variables failed because of the enormous difficulty of the calculations involved. In order to solve what had become known in some circles as Gordan's Problem, Hilbert realized that it was necessary to take a completely different path. As a result, he demonstrated Hilbert's basis theorem, showing the existence of a finite set of generators, for the invariants of quantics in any number of variables, but in an abstract form. That is, while demonstrating the existence of such a set, it was not a constructive proof — it did not display "an object" — but rather, it was an existence proof and relied on use of the law of excluded middle in an infinite extension. Hilbert sent his results to the Mathematische Annalen. Gordan, the house expert on the theory of invariants for the Mathematische Annalen, could not appreciate the revolutionary nature of Hilbert's theorem and rejected the article, criticizing the exposition because it was insufficiently comprehensive. His comment was: Das ist nicht Mathematik. Das ist Theologie. (This is not Mathematics. This is Theology.)  Klein, on the other hand, recognized the importance of the work, and guaranteed that it would be published without any alterations. Encouraged by Klein, Hilbert extended his method in a second article, providing estimations on the maximum degree of the minimum set of generators, and he sent it once more to the Annalen. After having read the manuscript, Klein wrote to him, saying: Without doubt this is the most important work on general algebra that the Annalen has ever published. Later, after the usefulness of Hilbert's method was universally recognized, Gordan himself would say: I have convinced myself that even theology has its merits. For all his successes, the nature of his proof stirred up more trouble than Hilbert could have imagined at the time. Although Kronecker had conceded, Hilbert would later respond to others' similar criticisms that "many different constructions are subsumed under one fundamental idea" — in other words (to quote Reid): "Through a proof of existence, Hilbert had been able to obtain a construction"; "the proof" (i.e. the symbols on the page) was "the object". Not all were convinced. While Kronecker would die soon afterwards, his constructivist philosophy would continue with the young Brouwer and his developing intuitionist "school", much to Hilbert's torment in his later years. Indeed Hilbert would lose his "gifted pupil" Weyl to intuitionism — "Hilbert was disturbed by his former student's fascination with the ideas of Brouwer, which aroused in Hilbert the memory of Kronecker". Brouwer the intuitionist in particular opposed the use of the Law of Excluded Middle over infinite sets (as Hilbert had used it). Hilbert would respond: Taking the Principle of the Excluded Middle from the mathematician ... is the same as ... prohibiting the boxer the use of his fists.   == Axiomatization of geometryEdit ==  The text Grundlagen der Geometrie (tr.: Foundations of Geometry) published by Hilbert in 1899 proposes a formal set, the Hilbert's axioms, substituting the traditional axioms of Euclid. They avoid weaknesses identified in those of Euclid, whose works at the time were still used textbook-fashion. It is difficult to specify the axioms used by Hilbert without referring to the publication history of the Grundlagen since Hilbert changed and modified them several times. The original monograph was quickly followed by a French translation, in which Hilbert added V.2, the Completeness Axiom. An English translation, authorized by Hilbert, was made by E.J. Townsend and copyrighted in 1902. This translation incorporated the changes made in the French translation and so is considered to be a translation of the 2nd edition. Hilbert continued to make changes in the text and several editions appeared in German. The 7th edition was the last to appear in Hilbert's lifetime. New editions followed the 7th, but the main text was essentially not revised. Hilbert's approach signaled the shift to the modern axiomatic method. In this, Hilbert was anticipated by Moritz Pasch's work from 1882. Axioms are not taken as self-evident truths. Geometry may treat things, about which we have powerful intuitions, but it is not necessary to assign any explicit meaning to the undefined concepts. The elements, such as point, line, plane, and others, could be substituted, as Hilbert is reported to have said to Schoenflies and Kötter, by tables, chairs, glasses of beer and other such objects. It is their defined relationships that are discussed. Hilbert first enumerates the undefined concepts: point, line, plane, lying on (a relation between points and lines, points and planes, and lines and planes), betweenness, congruence of pairs of points (line segments), and congruence of angles. The axioms unify both the plane geometry and solid geometry of Euclid in a single system.   == The 23 problemsEdit ==  Hilbert put forth a most influential list of 23 unsolved problems at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900. This is generally reckoned the most successful and deeply considered compilation of open problems ever to be produced by an individual mathematician. After re-working the foundations of classical geometry, Hilbert could have extrapolated to the rest of mathematics. His approach differed, however, from the later 'foundationalist' Russell-Whitehead or 'encyclopedist' Nicolas Bourbaki, and from his contemporary Giuseppe Peano. The mathematical community as a whole could enlist in problems, which he had identified as crucial aspects of the areas of mathematics he took to be key. The problem set was launched as a talk "The Problems of Mathematics" presented during the course of the Second International Congress of Mathematicians held in Paris. The introduction of the speech that Hilbert gave said: Who among us would not be happy to lift the veil behind which is hidden the future; to gaze at the coming developments of our science and at the secrets of its development in the centuries to come? What will be the ends toward which the spirit of future generations of mathematicians will tend? What methods, what new facts will the new century reveal in the vast and rich field of mathematical thought? He presented fewer than half the problems at the Congress, which were published in the acts of the Congress. In a subsequent publication, he extended the panorama, and arrived at the formulation of the now-canonical 23 Problems of Hilbert. The full text is important, since the exegesis of the questions still can be a matter of inevitable debate, whenever it is asked how many have been solved. Some of these were solved within a short time. Others have been discussed throughout the 20th century, with a few now taken to be unsuitably open-ended to come to closure. Some even continue to this day to remain a challenge for mathematicians.   == FormalismEdit == In an account that had become standard by the mid-century, Hilbert's problem set was also a kind of manifesto, that opened the way for the development of the formalist school, one of three major schools of mathematics of the 20th century. According to the formalist, mathematics is manipulation of symbols according to agreed upon formal rules. It is therefore an autonomous activity of thought. There is, however, room to doubt whether Hilbert's own views were simplistically formalist in this sense.   === Hilbert's programEdit ===  In 1920 he proposed explicitly a research project (in metamathematics, as it was then termed) that became known as Hilbert's program. He wanted mathematics to be formulated on a solid and complete logical foundation. He believed that in principle this could be done, by showing that: all of mathematics follows from a correctly chosen finite system of axioms; and that some such axiom system is provably consistent through some means such as the epsilon calculus. He seems to have had both technical and philosophical reasons for formulating this proposal. It affirmed his dislike of what had become known as the ignorabimus, still an active issue in his time in German thought, and traced back in that formulation to Emil du Bois-Reymond. This program is still recognizable in the most popular philosophy of mathematics, where it is usually called formalism. For example, the Bourbaki group adopted a watered-down and selective version of it as adequate to the requirements of their twin projects of (a) writing encyclopedic foundational works, and (b) supporting the axiomatic method as a research tool. This approach has been successful and influential in relation with Hilbert's work in algebra and functional analysis, but has failed to engage in the same way with his interests in physics and logic. Hilbert wrote in 1919: We are not speaking here of arbitrariness in any sense. Mathematics is not like a game whose tasks are determined by arbitrarily stipulated rules. Rather, it is a conceptual system possessing internal necessity that can only be so and by no means otherwise. Hilbert published his views on the foundations of mathematics in the 2-volume work Grundlagen der Mathematik.   === Gödel's workEdit === Hilbert and the mathematicians who worked with him in his enterprise were committed to the project. His attempt to support axiomatized mathematics with definitive principles, which could banish theoretical uncertainties, ended in failure. Gödel demonstrated that any non-contradictory formal system, which was comprehensive enough to include at least arithmetic, cannot demonstrate its completeness by way of its own axioms. In 1931 his incompleteness theorem showed that Hilbert's grand plan was impossible as stated. The second point cannot in any reasonable way be combined with the first point, as long as the axiom system is genuinely finitary. Nevertheless, the subsequent achievements of proof theory at the very least clarified consistency as it relates to theories of central concern to mathematicians. Hilbert's work had started logic on this course of clarification; the need to understand Gödel's work then led to the development of recursion theory and then mathematical logic as an autonomous discipline in the 1930s. The basis for later theoretical computer science, in Alonzo Church and Alan Turing, also grew directly out of this 'debate'.   == Functional analysisEdit == Around 1909, Hilbert dedicated himself to the study of differential and integral equations; his work had direct consequences for important parts of modern functional analysis. In order to carry out these studies, Hilbert introduced the concept of an infinite dimensional Euclidean space, later called Hilbert space. His work in this part of analysis provided the basis for important contributions to the mathematics of physics in the next two decades, though from an unanticipated direction. Later on, Stefan Banach amplified the concept, defining Banach spaces. Hilbert spaces are an important class of objects in the area of functional analysis, particularly of the spectral theory of self-adjoint linear operators, that grew up around it during the 20th century.   == PhysicsEdit == Until 1912, Hilbert was almost exclusively a "pure" mathematician. When planning a visit from Bonn, where he was immersed in studying physics, his fellow mathematician and friend Hermann Minkowski joked he had to spend 10 days in quarantine before being able to visit Hilbert. In fact, Minkowski seems responsible for most of Hilbert's physics investigations prior to 1912, including their joint seminar in the subject in 1905. In 1912, three years after his friend's death, Hilbert turned his focus to the subject almost exclusively. He arranged to have a "physics tutor" for himself. He started studying kinetic gas theory and moved on to elementary radiation theory and the molecular theory of matter. Even after the war started in 1914, he continued seminars and classes where the works of Albert Einstein and others were followed closely. By 1907 Einstein had framed the fundamentals of the theory of gravity, but then struggled for nearly 8 years with a confounding problem of putting the theory into final form. By early summer 1915, Hilbert's interest in physics had focused on general relativity, and he invited Einstein to Göttingen to deliver a week of lectures on the subject. Einstein received an enthusiastic reception at Göttingen. Over the summer Einstein learned that Hilbert was also working on the field equations and redoubled his own efforts. During November 1915 Einstein published several papers culminating in "The Field Equations of Gravitation" (see Einstein field equations). Nearly simultaneously David Hilbert published "The Foundations of Physics", an axiomatic derivation of the field equations (see Einstein–Hilbert action). Hilbert fully credited Einstein as the originator of the theory, and no public priority dispute concerning the field equations ever arose between the two men during their lives. See more at priority. Additionally, Hilbert's work anticipated and assisted several advances in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. His work was a key aspect of Hermann Weyl and John von Neumann's work on the mathematical equivalence of Werner Heisenberg's matrix mechanics and Erwin Schrödinger's wave equation and his namesake Hilbert space plays an important part in quantum theory. In 1926 von Neumann showed that if atomic states were understood as vectors in Hilbert space, then they would correspond with both Schrödinger's wave function theory and Heisenberg's matrices. Throughout this immersion in physics, Hilbert worked on putting rigor into the mathematics of physics. While highly dependent on higher math, physicists tended to be "sloppy" with it. To a "pure" mathematician like Hilbert, this was both "ugly" and difficult to understand. As he began to understand physics and how physicists were using mathematics, he developed a coherent mathematical theory for what he found, most importantly in the area of integral equations. When his colleague Richard Courant wrote the now classic Methoden der mathematischen Physik (Methods of Mathematical Physics) including some of Hilbert's ideas, he added Hilbert's name as author even though Hilbert had not directly contributed to the writing. Hilbert said "Physics is too hard for physicists", implying that the necessary mathematics was generally beyond them; the Courant-Hilbert book made it easier for them.   == Number theoryEdit == Hilbert unified the field of algebraic number theory with his 1897 treatise Zahlbericht (literally "report on numbers"). He also resolved a significant number-theory problem formulated by Waring in 1770. As with the finiteness theorem, he used an existence proof that shows there must be solutions for the problem rather than providing a mechanism to produce the answers. He then had little more to publish on the subject; but the emergence of Hilbert modular forms in the dissertation of a student means his name is further attached to a major area. He made a series of conjectures on class field theory. The concepts were highly influential, and his own contribution lives on in the names of the Hilbert class field and of the Hilbert symbol of local class field theory. Results were mostly proved by 1930, after work by Teiji Takagi. Hilbert did not work in the central areas of analytic number theory, but his name has become known for the Hilbert–Pólya conjecture, for reasons that are anecdotal.   == Miscellaneous talks, essays, and contributionsEdit == Hilbert's paradox of the Grand Hotel, a meditation on strange properties of the infinite, is often used in popular accounts of infinite cardinal numbers. He was a Foreign member of the Royal Society. He received the second Bolyai Prize in 1910. His collected works (Gesammelte Abhandlungen) have been published several times. The original versions of his papers contained "many technical errors of varying degree"; when the collection was first published, the errors were corrected and it was found that this could be done without major changes in the statements of the theorems, with one exception—a claimed proof of the Continuum hypothesis. The errors were nonetheless so numerous and significant that it took Olga Taussky-Todd three years to make the corrections.   == See alsoEdit ==   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   === Primary literature in English translationEdit === Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press. 1918. "Axiomatic thought," 1115–14. 1922. "The new grounding of mathematics: First report," 1115–33. 1923. "The logical foundations of mathematics," 1134–47. 1930. "Logic and the knowledge of nature," 1157–65. 1931. "The grounding of elementary number theory," 1148–56. 1904. "On the foundations of logic and arithmetic," 129–38. 1925. "On the infinite," 367–92. 1927. "The foundations of mathematics," with comment by Weyl and Appendix by Bernays, 464–89.  Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. Hilbert, David (1950) [first published 1902], The Foundations of Geometry [Grundlagen der Geometrie] (PDF), English translation by E.J. Townsend (2nd ed.), La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing  Hilbert, David (1990) [1971], Foundations of Geometry [Grundlagen der Geometrie], translated by Leo Unger from the 10th German edition (2nd English ed.), La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing, ISBN 0-87548-164-7  David Hilbert; Stephan Cohn-Vossen (1999), Geometry and Imagination, American Mathematical Society, ISBN 0-8218-1998-4  - an accessible set of lectures originally for the citizens of Göttingen. David Hilbert (2004), Michael Hallett and Ulrich Majer, ed., David Hilbert's Lectures on the foundations of Mathematics and Physics, 1891–1933, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, ISBN 3-540-64373-7    === Secondary literatureEdit === Bertrand, Gabriel (20 December 1943b), "Allocution", Comptes rendus hebdomadaires des séances de l'Académie des sciences (in French) (Paris) 217: 625–640 , available at Gallica. The "Address" of Gabriel Bertrand of December 20, 1943 at the French Academy: he gives biographical sketches of the lives of recently deceased members, including Pieter Zeeman, David Hilbert and Georges Giraud. Bottazzini Umberto, 2003. Il flauto di Hilbert. Storia della matematica. UTET, ISBN 88-7750-852-3 Corry, L., Renn, J., and Stachel, J., 1997, "Belated Decision in the Hilbert-Einstein Priority Dispute," Science 278: nn-nn. Dawson, John W. Jr 1997. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel. Wellesley MA: A. K. Peters. ISBN 1-56881-256-6. Folsing, Albrecht, 1998. Albert Einstein. Penguin. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Univ. Press. Gray, Jeremy, 2000. The Hilbert Challenge. ISBN 0-19-850651-1 Mancosu, Paolo (1998). From Brouwer to Hilbert, The Debate on the Foundations of Mathematics in 1920s. Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0-19-509631-2.  Mehra, Jagdish, 1974. Einstein, Hilbert, and the Theory of Gravitation. Reidel. Piergiorgio Odifreddi, 2003. Divertimento Geometrico - Da Euclide ad Hilbert. Bollati Boringhieri, ISBN 88-339-5714-4. A clear exposition of the "errors" of Euclid and of the solutions presented in the Grundlagen der Geometrie, with reference to non-Euclidean geometry. Reid, Constance, 1996. Hilbert, Springer, ISBN 0-387-94674-8. The definitive English-language biography of Hilbert. Rowe, D. E. (1989). "Klein, Hilbert, and the Gottingen Mathematical Tradition". Osiris 5: 186–213. doi:10.1086/368687.  Sauer, Tilman, 1999, "The relativity of discovery: Hilbert's first note on the foundations of physics," Arch. Hist. Exact Sci. 53: 529-75. Sieg, Wilfried, and Ravaglia, Mark, 2005, "Grundlagen der Mathematik" in Grattan-Guinness, I., ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 981-99. (in English) Thorne, Kip, 1995. Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy, W. W. Norton & Company; Reprint edition. ISBN 0-393-31276-3.   == External linksEdit == David Hilbert at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Hilbert Bernays Project Hilbert's 23 Problems Address ICMM 2014 dedicated to the memory of D.Hilbert Works by David Hilbert at Project Gutenberg Works by or about David Hilbert at Internet Archive Works by David Hilbert at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Hilbert's radio speech recorded in Königsberg 1930 (in German), with English translation Wolfram MathWorld – Hilbert'Constant O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "David Hilbert", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . 'From Hilbert's Problems to the Future', lecture by Professor Robin Wilson, Gresham College, 27 February 2008 (available in text, audio and video formats).

David Kaplan may refer to: David Kaplan (filmmaker), American film director Dave Kaplan (born 1979), American mixed martial artist David Kaplan (philosopher) (born 1933), American philosopher David Kaplan (producer) (c. 1947–1992), ABC television news producer killed in Yugoslavia David Kaplan (author) (born 1955), journalist and author David Kaplan (radio) (born 1960), American radio host David B. Kaplan (born 1958), particle physicist David E. Kaplan, theoretical particle physicist David L. Kaplan (born 1923), Canadian music professor and conductor David L. Kaplan (biomedical engineer), Tufts University professor, co-inventor of the first soft-bodied robot David A. Kaplan, American writer and journalist Dave Kaplan (talent manager) (born 1959), American talent manager Dovid Kaplan, senior lecturer at Ohr Somayach, Jerusalem, popular author and speaker



David Clement Makinson, D.Phil, (born 27 August 1941), is an Australian mathematical logician living in London, England.   == Career == Makinson began his studies at Sydney University in 1958 and was an associate of the Libertarian Society and Sydney Push. He is a Visiting Professor in the London School of Economics, University of London, and an associate member of the Centre de Recherche en Epistémologie Appliquée (CREA), École Polytechnique, Paris. He has held professorial rank positions in King's College London, University of London and in the American University of Beirut, Lebanon. From 1980 till 2001 he worked for UNESCO, Paris.   == Contribution == David Makinson is highly regarded for his work on belief revision, uncertain reasoning, and modal logic. While studying in Oxford University (Worcester College) for his D.Phil under the supervision of Michael Dummett, he identified the preface paradox. In belief revision he created the AGM account of theory change with Carlos Alchourrón and Peter Gärdenfors. In modal logic and other non-classical logics, he showed how to establish completeness results by adapting the method of maximal consistent set. In 1969 Makinson discovered the first simple and natural propositional logic lacking the finite model property.   == External links == David Makinson's website CREA, École Polytechnique, Paris

Dharmakīrti (fl. c. 7th century) was a Buddhist scholar of India. He was one of the Buddhist founders of Indian philosophical logic. He was one of the primary theorists of Buddhist atomism, according to which the only items considered to exist are momentary states of consciousness.   == History == Born around the turn of the 7th century in Sumatra, Dharmakirti was a Sailendran prince. He became a revered scholar and poet in Srivijaya and moved to India to become a teacher at the famed Buddhist monastic university of Nalanda. He built on and reinterpreted the work of Dignāga, the pioneer of Buddhist logic, and was very influential among Brahman logicians as well as Buddhists. His theories became normative in Tibet and are studied to this day as a part of the basic monastic curriculum. Collins colourfully contextualised Dharmakirti and his experience of disaffection and collegiate misunderstanding at Nalanda:  Dharmakirti's synthesis is the apex of Buddhist philosophy, at the moment when it was institutionally fading. Nalanda was still bustling, buoyed by cosmopolitan incursions of Brahmans and lay students, but the weeds were growing around the deserted stupas not just in the south but in northern India as well. Dharmakirti is the last flaming of the torch before it blows out, the owl of Minerva taking wing at dusk: the creativity of synthesis as a fading institutional base goes on the defensive. Dharmakirti himself was a lay Buddhist, not a devout monk, and his personal tone sounds like secular ambition rather than a quest for salvation. The closing stanza of his great work laments the dearth of capable intellectuals to follow his philosophy: "My work will find no one in this world who would easily grasp its deep sayings. It will be absorbed and perish in my own person, just as a river in the ocean." A Tibetan historian says that when he finished the work, his pupils showed no appreciation, and his enemies "tied up the leaves [of the palm-leaf manuscript] to the tail of a dog and let him run through the streets where the leaves became scattered" (Stcherbatsky, 1962: 1:35–36). In fact, Dharmakirti did end up dominating the leading philosophers of the last generations of Indian Buddhism. But his pessimism was prescient. Leaving Nalanda, he retired to his home in the south, where he founded a monastery. The next successful Brahman student from the south was to be Shankara, and when he came north, it would be to plunder the carcass of a dying [Indian] Buddhism.   == Writings == The Seven Treatises on Valid Cognition: Saṃbandhaparikṣhāvrtti (Analysis of Relations) Pramāṇaviniścaya (Ascertainment of Valid Cognition) Pramāṇavārttikakārika (Commentary on Dignaga's 'Compendium of Valid Cognition') Nyāyabinduprakaraṇa (Drop of Reasoning) Hetubindunāmaprakaraṇa (Drop of Reasons) Saṃtānāntarasiddhināmaprakaraṇa (Proof of Others' Continuums) Vādanyāyanāmaprakaraṇa (Reasoning for Debate)   == Philosophy == Dharmakirti presents most of his ideas in the guise of commentary on Dignaga's works, even if his theories go beyond what was presented by his predecessor. Some of his ideas, like his proof for the authority of the Buddha's words, are innovations, for Dignaga considered language just as fallible as inference. There has long been disagreement among Indian and Tibetan doxographers as to how to categorise Dharmakirti's thought. The Gelug school asserts that he expressed Yogacara views, most non-Gelug Tibetan commentators assert that he expressed Sautrāntika views and, according to one Tibetan source, a number of renowned later Indian Madhyamikas asserted that he expressed Madhyamaka views. Stcherbatsky relates Dharmakirti to his own understanding of Kant. He compares Dharmakirti's 'point-instant' to Kant's thing in itself.  The fundamental difference between the Kantian Thing-in-Itself and Dharmakirti's 'Own essence' consists in the clear identification of the latter with a single point instant of reality which corresponds to a moment of sensation".   === Mindstream ===  Dharmakīrti wrote a treatise on the nature of the mindstream in his Substantiation of Other Mindstreams (Saṃtānāntarasiddhi). Ratnakīrti (fl. c7–8th century), a disciple of Dharmakīrti, wrote a work that further developed and refined the themes therein, entitled: 'Refutation of Other mindstreams' (Saṃtãnãntaradusana). He did not refute the tenets of the Saṃtãnãntarasiddhi but further developed the topic from an empirical one, that is, where there are manifold minds cognised by one's experience of others' mental processes attributed through the perceived actions of other sentient beings to an absolutist view, where there is only "one mindstream" (ekacitta). Ratnakīrti's argument is that the valid cognition (pramāna) of another's mindstream is an inference (anumāna), not a direct perception (pratyakṣa). Moreover, Ratnakīrti introduced the two truths doctrine as key to the nature of the discussion as inference is trafficking with illusiory universals (samanya), the proof of the mindstreams of others, whilst empirically valid in relative truth (saṃvṛtisatya), does not hold ultimate metaphysical certainty in absolute truth (paramārthasatya). Dharmakirti held the mindstream to be beginningless yet also described the mindstream as a temporal sequence, and that as there are no true beginnings, there are no true endings, hence, the "beginningless time" motif that is frequently used to describe the concept of mindstream, as Dunne relates:  Buddhist philosophers often speak of beginninglessness. It is claimed that the minds of living beings, for example, have no beginning, and that our current [U]niverse is only one in a beginningless cycle of expansion and decay. Some Buddhist thinkers would claim that even the most mundane task can have no true beginning. That is, if a beginning occurs, there must be some moment, some "now", in which it occurs. For the present to exist, however, there must be a past and a future, for what would "now" mean if there were no time other than now? And of course, if there is a past, then how could now be a beginning? Now should instead be the end of the past. Each beginning in short, must itself have a beginning.   == See also == Buddhist atomism Critical Buddhism Dignāga William of Ockham   == Notes == ^ "The conception of Ultimate Reality as it is established in the critical school of Buddhism implies that it represents 1) the absolute particular, 2) pure existence, 3) a point instant in the stream of existence, 3) it is unique and unrelated, 5) it is dynamic, not extended and not enduring, 6) it possesses the faculty of stimulating the intellect for the production of a corresponding image, 7) it imparts vividness to the image, 8) it constitutes the assertive force of judgements, 9) it is the Thing-in-Itself, unutterable and incognizable." Stcherbatsky vol I p198 ^ P. 487 Buddhism: art, architecture, literature & philosophy, Volume 1 ^ Collins, Randall (2000). The sociology of philosophies: a global theory of intellectual change. Volume 30, Issue 2 of Philosophy of the social sciences. Harvard University Press. p. 240. ISBN 978-0-674-00187-9.  ^ Ngawang Palden in the Sautrantika chapter of his Explanation of the Conventional and the Ultimate in the Four Systems of Tenets (Grub mtha' bzhi'i lugs kyi kun rdzob dang don dam pa'i don rnam par bshad pa legs bshad dpyid kyi dpal mo'i glu dbyangs, New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1972, 39.5–39.6) says that some such as Prajñakaragupta, Suryagupta, Shantarakshita, Kamalashila, and Jetari interpret Dharmakirti’s Commentary on [Dignaga’s] Compendium of Valid Cognition (Tshad ma rnam 'grel, Pramanavarttika) as a Madhyamika treatise. Dependent-Arising and Emptiness: A Tibetan Buddhist Interpretation of Madhyamika Philosophy Emphasizing the Compatibility of Emptiness and Conventional Phenomena Napper, Elizabeth. Boston: Wisdom Publications. p. 685, note 142 ^ Stcherbatsky vol I p201 ^ Source: [1] (accessed: Wednesday 28 October 2009). There is an English translation of this work by Gupta (1969: pp.81–121) which is a rendering of Stcherbatsky's work from the Russian: Gupta, Harish C. (1969). Papers of Th. Stcherbatsky. Calcutta: Indian Studies Past and Present. (translated from Russian by Harish C. Gupta). ^ Dunne, John D. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakīrti's philosophy. Studies in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism. Wisdom Publications. ISBN 978-0-86171-184-0. Source: [2] (accessed: Monday May 4, 2010), p.1   == Sources == Buddhist Logic (1932) by Fyodor Shcherbatskoy introduced the West to Buddhist logic, and more specifically to Dignaga. Although pioneering, this work is now regarded as outdated by some Buddhist scholars. — David Loy complains about viewing Buddhist philosophy "through the categories of another system – Stcherbatsky's Kant, Murti's Vedānta, Gudmundsen's Wittgenstein – which (as with earlier interpretations of nirvāṇa) reveals more about the interpreter than the interpreted." (Loy, David (1984). "How not to criticize Nāgārjuna". Philosophy East and West 34 (4): 437–445. ). Dunne, John D. (2004). Foundations of Dharmakirti's Philosophy. Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom Publications. ISBN 978-0-86171-184-0.  Dreyfus, Georges (1997). Recognizing Reality: Dharmakirti's Philosophy and Its Tibetan Interpretations. New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-3098-9.  extensive discussion of the Dharmakirti's Tibetan reception Tillemans, T. J. F. (1999). Scripture, Logic, Language: Essays on Dharmakirti and His Tibetan Successors. Somerville, Mass.: Wisdom Publications. ISBN 978-0-86171-156-7.    == External links == Dharmakirti entry by Tom Tillemans in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Dick Herman Jacobus de Jongh (born 19 October 1939, Enschede) is a Dutch logician and mathematician and a retired professor at the University of Amsterdam. He received his PhD degree in 1968 from the University of Wisconsin–Madison under supervision of Stephen Kleene with a dissertation entitled Investigations on the Intuitionistic Propositional Calculus. De Jongh is mostly known for his work on proof theory, provability logic and intuitionistic logic. De Jongh is a member of the group collectively publishing under the pseudonym L. T. F. Gamut. In 2004, on the occasion of his retirement, the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation at the University of Amsterdam published a festschrift in his honor.   == References ==  Curriculum vitae   == External links == Web page at the University of Amsterdam

Dignāga (c. 480 – c. 540 CE) was an Indian scholar and one of the Buddhist founders of Indian logic. He was born into a South Indian Brahmin family in Simhavakta near Kanchipuram and very little is known of his early years, except that he took as his spiritual preceptor Nagadatta of the Pudgalavada school before being expelled and becoming a student of Vasubandhu. This branch of Buddhist thought defended the view that there exists a kind of real personality independent of the elements or aggregates composing it. Among Dignaga's works there is Hetucakra (The wheel of reason), considered his first work on formal logic, advancing a new form of deductive reasoning. It may be regarded as a bridge between the older doctrine of trairūpya and Dignaga's own later theory of vyapti which is a concept related to the Western notion of implication. Other works include The Treatise on the Objects of Cognition (Alambana-parīkṣā), Pramāṇa-samuccaya), and The Treatise on the Correct Principles of Logic, produced in an effort to establish what were the valid sources of knowledge.   == Contribution to Buddhist logicEdit == During Dignāga's time, the Nyaya school of Hinduism had begun to hold debates using their five-step approach to making and evaluating arguments with logic. Buddhist debaters such as Dignāga wanted to engage in these debates, and also have a way to logically evaluate arguments, but a premise such as "all dogs are mammals" proved problematic for his idealist Yogacara philosophy. Dignāga was a student of Vasubandhu, and therefore believed that "the dharmas are empty." In other words, there are not universal qualities such as "dog-ness" or "mammal-ness." Such universals would have to be unchanging, and since all things are subject to change and are lacking in essential essence according to his school of philosophy, Dignāga attempted to find a way to engage in argument within the Nyaya structure without positing through the arguments that there is an essential "dog-ness," or what have you. To do this he employed what is referred to in formal logic in the West as contraposition, or in Sanskrit, Apoha, where one switches the terms and swaps them for their term complement. Therefore the example premise above, "all dogs are mammals" becomes "all non-mammals are non-dogs." These two statements are logically equivalent. Once this had been done, Dignāga could make arguments about non-mammals without explicitly positing that mammals have an essential nature. While this move gets off the ground towards his goal, reflection shows that making universal statements about non-mammals still implies that there are mammals who share an essential nature, and everything else, which lacks this "mammal-ness." Still, using this method Dignāga and other Buddhist logicians were able to further their logical discourse and felt more comfortable engaging in Nyaya structured debates.   == See alsoEdit == Buddhist logic Critical Buddhism Dharmakirti Epistemology Nyaya   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Chu, Junjie (2006).On Dignāga's theory of the object of cognition as presented in PS (V) 1, Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 29 (2), 211–254 Frauwallner, Erich, Dignāga, sein Werk und seine Entwicklung. (Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Süd- und Ostasiens 2:83–164, 1959) Hattori Masaaki, Dignāga, On Perception, being the Pratyakṣapariccheda of Dignāga's Pramāṇasamuccaya from the Sanskrit fragments and the Tibetan Versions (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968) Hayes, Richard, Dignāga on the Interpretation of Signs (Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing Company, 1982) Katsura Shoryu, Dignāga and Dharmakīrti on apoha in E. Steinkellner ed., Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition (Vienna, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1991), pp. 129–146 Mookerjee, S. The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux, an Exposition of the Philosophy of Critical Realism as expounded by the School of Dignāga (Calcutta, 1935) Sastri, N. Aiyaswami, Diṅnāga's Ālambanaparīkṣā and Vṛtti. Restored with the commentary of Dharmapāla into Sanskrit from the Tibetan and Chinese versions and edited with English translations and notes with extracts from Vinītadeva's commentary. (Madras: The Adyar Library. 1942)[1] Tucci, G The Nyāyamukha of Dignāga, the oldest Buddhist Text on Logic after Chinese and Tibetan Materials (Materialien zur Kunde des Buddhismus, 15 Heft, Heidelberg, 1930) Vidyabhusana, S.C. A History of Indian Logic – Ancient, Mediaeval and Modern Schools (Calcutta, 1921)   == External linksEdit == Dignaga's Logic of Invention, by Volker Peckhaus Das Rad der Gründe, German translation of The Wheel of Reason Vidhabhusana, Satis Chandra (1907). History of the Mediaeval School of Indian Logic. Calcutta University. 佛家因明的理性思考 蔡禮德 Hetu－Vidyā Of Rational Thinking, Choy L.T.(2008) 逻辑学(Logic)及简单枚举归纳法(Induction by Simple Enumeration) 科学方法(Scientific Method)及假设演绎法(Hypothetico-Deductive Method)  佛家因明的理性思考再探 蔡禮德 Hetu－Vidyā Of Rational Thinking(II), Choy L.T.(2009) 因明的辨义理(Meaning & Argument Analysis)方法，具有语理分析(Linguistic – conceptual Analysis)及谬误剖析(Fallacy Analysis)的元素。  佛家因明的理性思考三探 蔡禮德 Hetu－Vidyā Of Rational Thinking(III), Choy L.T.(2010) 「现量」及「比量」意谓真 「似现量」及「似比量」意谓非真。  因明邏輯真值量化的探索 李潤生、 蔡禮德 (2006) 「因明逻辑真值的量化公式」与贝尔斯学派统计学 蔡禮德 Quantification Formula Of Hetu－Vidyā Logical Truth－Value And Bayesian School Statistics, Choy L.T.(2008) 佛家因明提綱 蔡禮德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework, Choy L.T.(2013) 因明與菩薩行五明  佛家因明的概念功能與分類 蔡禮德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework(II), Choy L.T. (2013) 唯識宗的世界概念：由假說我法(一) 蔡禮德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework(III), Choy L.T.(2014) 佛家「因明」指导「内明」 蔡礼德 A Hetu－Vidyā Framework(IV), Choy L.T. (2014)

Dimiter Skordev (born 1936 in Sofia) is a professor in the Department of Mathematical Logic and Applications, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science at the St. Kliment Ohridski University of Sofia. Chairman of the department in 1972-2000. Doyen and pioneer of mathematical logic research in Bulgaria who developed a Bulgarian school in the theory of computability, namely the algebraic (or axiomatic) recursion theory. Skordev's field of scientific interests include computability and complexity in analysis, mathematical logic, generalized recursion theory, and theory of programs and computation. Skordev has more than 45 years of lecturing experience in calculus, mathematical logic, logic programming, discrete mathematics, and computer science. He authored about 90 scientific publications including two monographs, and was one of the authors of the new Bulgarian phonetic keyboard layout proposed (but rejected) to become a state standard in 2006.   == References == Dimiter Skordev Historical notes on the development of mathematical logic in Sofia

Diodorus Cronus (Greek: Διόδωρος Κρόνος; died c. 284 BCE) was a Greek philosopher and dialectician connected to the Megarian school. He was most notable for logic innovations, including his master argument formulated in response to Aristotle's discussion of future contingents.   == Life == Diodorus was a son of Ameinias of Iasus in Caria. He lived at the court of Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy I Soter, who is said to have given him the surname of Cronus ("old fogey") on account of his inability to solve at once some dialectic problem proposed by Stilpo, when the two philosophers were dining with the king. Diodorus is said to have taken that disgrace so much to heart that after his return from the meal, and writing a treatise on the problem, he died in despair. However, according to Strabo, Diodorus himself adopted the surname of Cronus from his teacher, Apollonius Cronus. Diodorus is thought to have died around 284 BCE; his date of birth is unknown. It was once thought that he was old enough to have influenced Aristotle (384–322 BCE), but there is no strong evidence for this. Diodorus was particularly celebrated for his great dialectic skill, for which he was called The Dialectician. This effectively became his surname, and descended even to his five daughters, Menexene, Argia, Theognis, Artemesia, and Pantaclea, who were likewise distinguished as dialecticians. His pupils included Philo the Dialectician, and Zeno of Citium — the founder of the Stoic school. Although influenced by the Megarian school it is not clear how closely Diodorus and his fellow dialecticians were connected to that particular philosophical school.   == Philosophy == On the doctrines of Diodorus we possess only fragmentary information, and not even the titles of his works are known. He seems to have fully developed the dialectic art of the Megarian school. He was much occupied with the theory of proof and of hypothetical propositions. In the same manner as he rejected in logic the divisibility of the fundamental notion, he also maintained, in his physical doctrines, that space was indivisible, and consequently that motion was impossible. He further denied the coming into existence and all multiplicity both in time and in space; but he considered the things that fill up space as one whole composed of an infinite number of indivisible particles. Diodorus made use of the Sorites paradox, and is said to have invented two others of the same kind, viz. The Masked Man and The Horns, which are, however, also ascribed to Eubulides. He also rejected the view that words are ambiguous, any uncertainty in understanding was always due to speakers expressing themselves obscurely.   === Master Argument ===  Aristotle, in his work On Interpretation, had wrestled with the problem of future contingents. In particular whether one can meaningfully regard future contingents as true or false now, if the future is open, and if so, how? In response, Diodorus maintained that possible was identical with necessary (e.g., not contingent); so that the future is as certain and defined as the past. Alexander of Aphrodisias tells us that Diodorus believed that that alone is possible which either is happening now, or will happen at some future time. When speaking about facts of an unrecorded past, we know well that a given fact either occurred or did not occur, yet without knowing which of the two is true — and therefore we affirm only that the fact may have occurred: so also about the future, either the assertion that a given fact will at some time occur, is positively true, or the assertion that it will never occur, is positively true: the assertion that it may or may not occur some time or other, represents only our ignorance, which of the two is true. That which will never at any time occur, is impossible. Diodorus went on to formulate an argument that became known as the Master Argument (or Ruling Argument: ho kurieuôn logos). The most succinct description of it is provided by Epictetus:  The argument called the Master Argument appears to have been proposed from such principles as these: there is in fact a common contradiction between one another in these three propositions, each two being in contradiction to the third. The propositions are: (1) every past truth must be necessary; (2) that an impossibility does not follow a possibility; (3) something is possible which neither is nor will be true. Diodorus observing this contradiction employed the probative force of the first two for the demonstration of this proposition: That nothing is possible which is not true and never will be.  Epictetus' description of the Master Argument is not in the form as it would have been presented by Diodorus, which makes it difficult to know the precise nature of his argument. To modern logicians, it is not obvious why these three premises are inconsistent, or why the first two should lead to the rejection of the third. Modern interpretations therefore assume that there must have been extra premises in the argument tacitly assumed by Diodorus and his contemporaries. One possible reconstruction is as follows: For Diodorus, if a future event is not going to happen, then it was true in the past that it would not happen. Since every past truth is necessary (proposition 1), it was necessary that in the past it would not happen. Since the impossible cannot follow from the possible (proposition 2), it must have always been impossible for the event to occur. Therefore if something will not be true, it will never be possible for it to be true, and thus proposition 3 is shown to be false. Epictetus goes on to point out that Panthoides, Cleanthes, and Antipater of Tarsus made use of the second and third proposition to demonstrate that the first proposition was false. Chrysippus, on the other hand, agreed with Diodorus that everything true as an event in the past is necessary, but attacked Diodorus' view that the possible must be either what is true or what will be true. He thus made use of the first and third proposition to demonstrate that the second proposition was false.   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Gaskin, Richard, The Sea-Battle and the Master Argument. Aristotle and Diodorus Cronus on the Metaphysics of the Future. Berlin, Walter de Gruyter, 1995. Sedley, David. Diodorus Cronus and Hellenistic Philosophy. Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society 203, N.S. 23 (1977), P. 74-120. Vuillemin, Jules. Nécessité ou contingence. L'aporie de Diodore et les systèmes philosophiques. Paris 1984. (English translation: Necessity or Contingency. The Master Argument, Stanford: CSLI Publications, 1996. ISBN 1-881526-86-0, paperback ISBN 1-881526-85-2).   == External links == Diodorus Cronus entry by David Sedley in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Dialectical School entry by Susanne Bobzien in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Selected Bibliography on the "Master Argument", Diodorus Cronus, Philo the Dialectician with a bibliography on the problem of future contingents

Dirk van Dalen (born 20 December 1932, Amsterdam) is a Dutch mathematician and historian of science. Van Dalen studied mathematics and physics and astronomy at the University of Amsterdam. Inspired by the work of LEJ Brouwer and Arend Heyting, he received his Ph.D. in 1963 from the University of Amsterdam for the thesis Extension problems in intuitionistic plane Projective geometry. From 1964 to 1966 Van Dalen taught logic and mathematics at MIT, and later Oxford. From 1967 he was professor at the University of Utrecht. In 2003 Dirk van Dalen was awarded the Academy Medal 2003 of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences for bringing the works of Brouwer to international attention.   == Works == Foundations of Set Theory, in samenwerking met Yehoshua Bar-Hillel en Azriel Levy, uitgeverij North Holland Amsterdam, 1958. Extension problems in intuitionistic plane projective geometry, 1963. Structure and Logic, Springer Universitext, 1980. ISBN 3-540-20879-8 Brouwer's Cambridge Lectures on Intuitionism, Dirk van Dalen (redactie), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1981. Troelstra, Anne; van Dalen, Dirk (1988). Constructivism in Mathematics, Vol. 2. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. ISBN 0-444-70358-6.  Zermelo and the Skolem Paradox, Dirk van Dalen en Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus in: The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, Volume 6, Nr 2, Juni 2000. Intuitionistic Logic, in: The Blackwell Guide to Philosophical Logic, Lou Goble (redactie), Blackwell New York, 2001. L.E.J. Brouwer - Topologist, Institionalist, Philosopher, Dirk van Dalen, Springer-Verlag, London, 2013.   == References == The article was originally created as a translation (Google) of the corresponding article in Dutch Wikipedia.   == Further reading == Dirk van Dalen Festschrift, Henk Barendregt en anderen (redactie), University of Utrecht, Department of Philosophy, 1993 Special issue: a tribute to Dirk van Dalen, Yuri Gurevich (redactie), uitgeverij North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1995.   == External links == Koninklijke bibliotheek over Dirk van Dalen Homepage aan de Universiteit van Utrecht Persbericht KNAW 2003 Dirk van Dalen at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Donald A. (Tony) Martin (born December 24, 1940) is an American set theorist and philosopher of mathematics at UCLA, where he is a member of the faculty of mathematics and philosophy. Among Martin's most notable work are the proofs of analytic determinacy (from the existence of a measurable cardinal), Borel determinacy (from ZFC alone), the proof (with John R. Steel) of projective determinacy (from suitable large cardinal axioms), and his work on Martin's axiom. Martin measure on Turing degrees is also named after Martin. Martin is a Harvard junior fellow. In 2014, he became a Fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == List of publications UCLA Logic center

Dov M. Gabbay is Augustus De Morgan Professor Emeritus of Logic at the Group of Logic, Language and Computation, Department of Computer Science, King's College London. He has authored over four hundred and fifty research papers and over thirty research monographs. He is editor of several international Journals, and many reference works and Handbooks of Logic, including the Handbook of Philosophical Logic, the Handbook of Logic in Computer Science (with Samson Abramsky and T. S. E. Maibaum), and the Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming. He is Chairman and founder of several international conferences, executive of the European Foundation of Logic, Language and Information and President of the International IGPL Logic Group. He is founder, and joint President of the International Federation of Computational Logic, (UK Charity, Number 1112512). He is also one of the four founders and council member for many years of FoLLI, the Association of Logic, Language and Information, from which he is now retired. He remains a life member. He is co-founder with Jane Spurr of College Publications, a not-for-profit, start-up academic publisher, intended to compete with major expensive publishers at affordable prices, and not requiring copyright assignment from authors.   == Regular positions == 1968–1970 Instructor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem 1970–1973 Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Stanford University 1973–1975 Associate Professor of Philosophy, Stanford University 1975–1977 Associate Professor, Bar-Ilan University 1977–1983 Lady Davis Professor of Logic, Bar-Ilan University 1983–1998 Professor of Computing, Imperial College, London 1998–present Professor of Computing, Professor of Philosophy, Augustus De Morgan Professor of Logic, King's College, London 2009–present Special Professor Bar Ilan University 2015-present Professor of Logics, Ashkelon Academic College   == See also == Gabbay's separation theorem   == References ==   == External links == Home page

H. Dugald Macpherson is a mathematician and logician. He is Professor of Pure Mathematics at the University of Leeds. He obtained his DPhil from the University of Oxford in 1983 for his thesis entitled "Enumeration of Orbits of Infinite Permutation Groups" under the supervision of Peter Cameron. In 1997 he was awarded the Junior Berwick Prize by the London Mathematical Society. He continues to research into permutation groups and model theory. He is scientist in charge of the MODNET team at the University of Leeds. He co-authored the book "Notes on Infinite Permutation Groups"   == References ==   == External links == Prof. Macpherson's homepage

Edward Nelson (May 4, 1932 – September 10, 2014) was a professor in the Mathematics Department at Princeton University. He was known for his work on mathematical physics and mathematical logic. In mathematical logic, he was noted especially for his internal set theory, and his controversial views on ultrafinitism and the consistency of arithmetic. He also wrote on the relationship between religion and mathematics.   == CareerEdit == Nelson was born in Decatur, Georgia. He received his Ph.D. in 1955 from the University of Chicago, where he worked with Irving Segal. He was a member of the Institute for Advanced Study from 1956 to 1959. He held a position at Princeton University starting in 1959, attaining the rank of professor there in 1964 and retiring in 2013. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. He died in Princeton, New Jersey on September 10, 2014.   == Early workEdit == Nelson made contributions to the theory of infinite-dimensional group representations, the mathematical treatment of quantum field theory, the use of stochastic processes in quantum mechanics, and the reformulation of probability theory in terms of non-standard analysis. For many years he worked on mathematical physics and probability theory, and he retained a residual interest in these fields, particularly in connection with possible extensions of stochastic mechanics to field theory. In 1950, Nelson formulated a popular variant of the four color problem: What is the chromatic number, denoted , of the plane? In more detail, what is the smallest number of colors sufficient for coloring the points of the Euclidean plane in such a way that no two points of the same color are unit distance apart? We know by simple arguments that 4 ≤ χ ≤ 7. The problem was introduced to a wide mathematical audience by Martin Gardner in his October 1960 Mathematical Games column. The chromatic number problem, also now known as the Hadwiger–Nelson problem, was a favorite of Paul Erdős, who mentioned it frequently in his problems lectures.   == Work on foundationsEdit == In the later part of his career, he worked on mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics. One of his goals was to extend IST (Internal Set Theory—a version of a portion of Abraham Robinson's non-standard analysis) in a natural way to include external functions and sets, in a way that provides an external function with specified properties unless there is a finitary obstacle to its existence. Other work centered on fragments of arithmetic, studying the divide between those theories interpretable in Raphael Robinson's Arithmetic and those that are not; computational complexity, including the problem of whether P is equal to NP or not; and automated proof checking. In September 2011, Nelson announced that he had proved that Peano arithmetic was logically inconsistent. An error was found in the proof, and he retracted the claim.   == PublicationsEdit == Dynamical theory of Brownian motion. Princeton University Press 1967 Topics in Dynamics 1: Flows. Princeton University Press 1969 Tensor analysis. Princeton University Press 1967 Quantum Fluctuations. Princeton University Press, 1985 Predicative Arithmetic. Princeton University Press, 1986 Radically elementary probability theory. Annals of Mathematical Studies, Princeton 1987   == NotesEdit ==   == See alsoEdit == Influence of non-standard analysis   == ReferencesEdit == Curriculum Vitae Mathematics and Faith (PDF) "Professor Emeritus Edward Nelson Passed Away September 10th". Princeton University.  Obituary: Katz, Mikhail; Kutateladze, Semen (2015), "Edward Nelson (1932-2014)", Review of Symbolic Logic: 886–904, doi:10.1017/S1755020315000015 .   == External linksEdit == Edward Nelson's Homepage

Ehud Hrushovski (Hebrew: אהוד הרושובסקי‎; born 1959) is a mathematical logician. He is a Professor of Mathematics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He earned his PhD from the University of California, Berkeley in 1986 under Leo Harrington He was Professor of Mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology until 1998 before he went to Jerusalem. His father, Benjamin Harshav (né Hruszowski; 1928-2015), was a literary theorist, a Yiddish and Hebrew poet and a translator, Professor at Yale University and Tel Aviv University in comparative literature. Hrushovski is well known for many fundamental and important contributions to model theory, in particular in the branch that has become known as geometric model theory, and its applications. His PhD thesis revolutionized stable model theory (a part of model theory arising from the stability theory introduced by Saharon Shelah). Shortly afterwards he found counterexamples to the Trichotomy Conjecture of Boris Zilber and his method of proof has become well known as Hrushovski constructions and found many other applications since. In 1996, Hrushovski found a proof the geometric Mordell–Lang conjecture in all characteristics using model theory. This deep proof was a landmark in logic and geometry. He has had many other famous results in model theory and applications to Diophantine geometry. He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2007), and Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities (2008).   == See also == Zariski geometry   == References ==   == External links == Ehud Hrushovski at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem

Emil Leon Post (February 11, 1897 – April 21, 1954) was a Polish-born American mathematician and logician. He is best known for his work in the field that eventually became known as computability theory.   == Early work == Post was born in Augustów, Suwałki Governorate, Russian Empire (now Poland) into a Polish-Jewish family that immigrated to America when he was a child. His parents were Arnold and Pearl Post. He attended the Townsend Harris High School and continued on to graduate from City College of New York in 1917 with a B.S. in Mathematics. After completing his Ph.D. in mathematics at Columbia University, he did a post-doctorate at Princeton University. While at Princeton, he came very close to discovering the incompleteness of Principia Mathematica, which Kurt Gödel proved in 1931. Post then became a high school mathematics teacher in New York City. In his doctoral thesis, Post proved, among other things, that the propositional calculus of Principia Mathematica was complete: all tautologies are theorems, given the Principia axioms and the rules of substitution and modus ponens. Post also devised truth tables independently of Wittgenstein and C.S. Peirce and put them to good mathematical use. Jean Van Heijenoort's well-known source book on mathematical logic (1966) reprinted Post's classic article setting out these results. In 1936, he was appointed to the mathematics department at the City College of New York. He died in 1954 of a heart attack following electroshock treatment for depression; he was 57.   == Recursion theory == In 1936, Post developed, independently of Alan Turing, a mathematical model of computation that was essentially equivalent to the Turing machine model. Intending this as the first of a series of models of equivalent power but increasing complexity, he titled his paper Formulation 1. This model is sometimes called "Post's machine" or a Post-Turing machine, but is not to be confused with Post's tag machines or other special kinds of Post canonical system, a computational model using string rewriting and developed by Post in the 1920s but first published in 1943. Post's rewrite technique is now ubiquitous in programming language specification and design, and so with Church's lambda-calculus is a salient influence of classical modern logic on practical computing. Post devised a method of 'auxiliary symbols' by which he could canonically represent any Post-generative language, and indeed any computable function or set at all. The unsolvability of his Post correspondence problem turned out to be exactly what was needed to obtain unsolvability results in the theory of formal languages. In an influential address to the American Mathematical Society in 1944, he raised the question of the existence of an uncomputable recursively enumerable set whose Turing degree is less than that of the halting problem. This question, which became known as Post's problem, stimulated much research. It was solved in the affirmative in the 1950s by the introduction of the powerful priority method in recursion theory.   == Polyadic groups == Post made a fundamental and still influential contribution to the theory of polyadic, or n-ary, groups in a long paper published in 1940. His major theorem showed that a polyadic group is the iterated multiplication of elements of a normal subgroup of a group, such that the quotient group is cyclic of order n − 1. He also demonstrated that a polyadic group operation on a set can be expressed in terms of a group operation on the same set. The paper contains many other important results.   == Selected papers == Post, Emil Leon (1936). "Finite Combinatory Processes - Formulation 1". Journal of Symbolic Logic 1: 103–105.  Post, Emil Leon (1940). "Polyadic groups". Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 48: 208–350.  Post, Emil Leon (1943). "Formal Reductions of the General Combinatorial Decision Problem". American Journal of Mathematics 65: 197–215.  Post, Emil Leon (1944). "Recursively enumerable sets of positive integers and their decision problems". Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 50: 284–316.  Introduces the important concept of many-one reduction.   == See also == Arithmetical hierarchy Functional completeness List of multiple discoveries Post's inversion formula Post's lattice Post's theorem   == Notes ==   == References == Urquhart, Alasdair (2008). "Emil Post" (PDF). In Gabbay, Dov M.; Woods, John Woods. Logic from Russell to Church. Handbook of the History of Logic 5. Elsevier BV.    == Further reading == Anshel, Iris Lee; Anshel, Michael (November 1993). "From the Post-Markov Theorem Through Decision Problems to Public-Key Cryptography". The American Mathematical Monthly (Mathematical Association of America) 100 (9): 835–844.  Dedicated to Emil Post and contains special material on Post. This includes "Post's Relation to the Cryptology and Cryptographists of his Era: ... Steven Brams, the noted game theorist and political scientist, has remarked to us that the life and legacy of Emil Post represents one aspect of New York intellectual life during the first half of the twentieth century that is very much in need of deeper exploration. The authors hope that this paper serves to further this pursuit". (pp. 842–843)  Davis, Martin, ed. (1993). The Undecidable. Dover. pp. 288–406. ISBN 0-486-43228-9.  Reprints several papers by Post.  Davis, Martin (1994). "Emil L. Post: His Life and Work". Solvability, Provability, Definability: The Collected Works of Emil L. Post. Birkhäuser. pp. xi—xxviii.  A biographical essay.  Jackson, Allyn (May 2008). "An interview with Martin Davis". Notices of the AMS 55 (5): 560–571.  Much material on Emil Post from his first-hand recollections.   == External links == Emil Leon Post at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Emil Leon Post Papers 1927-1991, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

English may refer to: English, an adjective referring to something of, from, or related to England English language English studies, the study of English language and literature English language in England, a variant of the English language List of dialects of the English language  English people, a nation and ethnic group English national identity, an identity and common culture  English, Indiana, town in USA English, Kentucky, an unincorporated community English (surname), a list of notable people with the surname English English (film), a 2013 Indian Malayalam film English (cue sports term) English, a query language developed by Microdata Corporation English, an Amish term for non-Amish, regardless of ethnicity   == See also == Terminology of the British Isles Englisc Englisch British (disambiguation) England (disambiguation) All pages beginning with "English" All pages with titles containing "English"

For the actor, see Ernst Schröder (actor). Friedrich Wilhelm Karl Ernst Schröder (25 November 1841 in Mannheim, Baden, Germany – 16 June 1902 in Karlsruhe, Germany) was a German mathematician mainly known for his work on algebraic logic. He is a major figure in the history of mathematical logic (a term he may have invented), by virtue of summarizing and extending the work of George Boole, Augustus De Morgan, Hugh MacColl, and especially Charles Peirce. He is best known for his monumental Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Lectures on the algebra of logic), in 3 volumes, which prepared the way for the emergence of mathematical logic as a separate discipline in the twentieth century by systematizing the various systems of formal logic of the day.   == LifeEdit == Schröder learned mathematics at Heidelberg, Königsberg, and Zürich, under Otto Hesse, Gustav Kirchhoff, and Franz Neumann. After teaching school for a few years, he moved to the Technische Hochschule Darmstadt in 1874. Two years later, he took up a chair in mathematics at the Polytechnische Schule in Karlsruhe, where he spent the remainder of his life. He never married.   == WorkEdit == Schröder's early work on formal algebra and logic was written in ignorance of the British logicians George Boole and Augustus De Morgan. Instead, his sources were texts by Ohm, Hankel, Hermann Grassmann, and Robert Grassmann (Peckhaus 1997: 233–296). In 1873, Schröder learned of Boole's and De Morgan's work on logic. To their work he subsequently added several important concepts due to Charles Sanders Peirce, including subsumption and quantification. Schröder also made original contributions to algebra, set theory, lattice theory, ordered sets and ordinal numbers. Along with Georg Cantor, he codiscovered the Cantor–Bernstein–Schröder theorem, although Schröder's proof (1898) is flawed. Felix Bernstein (1878–1956) subsequently corrected the proof as part of his Ph.D. dissertation.  Schröder (1877) was a concise exposition of Boole's ideas on algebra and logic, which did much to introduce Boole's work to continental readers. The influence of the Grassmanns, especially Robert's little-known Formenlehre, is clear. Unlike Boole, Schröder fully appreciated duality. John Venn and Christine Ladd-Franklin both warmly cited this short book of Schröder's, and Charles Sanders Peirce used it as a text while teaching at Johns Hopkins University. Schröder's masterwork, his Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik, was published in three volumes between 1890 and 1905, at the author's expense. Vol. 2 is in two parts, the second published posthumously, edited by Eugen Müller. The Vorlesungen was a comprehensive and scholarly survey of "algebraic" (today we would say "symbolic") logic up to the end of the 19th century, one that had a considerable influence on the emergence of mathematical logic in the 20th century. The Vorlesungen is a prolix affair, only a small part of which has been translated into English. That part, along with an extended discussion of the entire Vorlesungen, is in Brady (2000). Also see Grattan-Guinness (2000: 159–76). Schröder said his aim was:   == InfluenceEdit == Schröder's influence on the early development of the predicate calculus, mainly by popularising C. S. Peirce's work on quantification, is at least as great as that of Frege or Peano. For an example of the influence of Schröder's work on English-speaking logicians of the early 20th century, see Clarence Irving Lewis (1918). The relational concepts that pervade Principia Mathematica are very much owed to the Vorlesungen, cited in Principia's Preface and in Bertrand Russell's Principles of Mathematics. Frege (1960) dismissed Schröder's work, and admiration for Frege's pioneering role has dominated subsequent historical discussion. Contrasting Frege with Schröder and C. S. Peirce, however, Hilary Putnam (1982) writes:   == See alsoEdit == Schröder's equation Schröder number   == ReferencesEdit == Primary Schröder, E., 1877. Der Operationskreis des Logikkalküls. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. Schröder, E., 1890–1905. Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik, 3 vols. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. Reprints: 1966, Chelsea; 2000, Thoemmes Press. Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik) Volume 1, Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik) Volume 2, Abt. 1 Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik) Volume 2, Abt. 2 Algebra und Logik der Relative, der Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik 3 Volume 3, Abt. 1  Schröder, E., 1898. "Über zwei Definitionen der Endlichkeit und G. Cantor'sche Sätze", Abh. Kaiserl. Leop.-Car. Akad. Naturf 71: 301–362.  Both Primary and Secondary Brady, Geraldine, 2000. From Peirce to Skolem. North Holland. Includes an English translation of parts of the Vorlesungen.  Secondary Anellis, I. H., 1990–91, "Schröder Materials at the Russell Archives," Modern Logic 1: 237–247. Dipert, R. R., 1990/91. "The life and work of Ernst Schröder," Modern Logic 1: 117–139. Frege, G., 1960, "A critical elucidation of some points in E. Schröder's Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik", translated by Geach, in Geach & Black, Translations from the philosophical writings of Gottlob Frege. Blackwell: 86–106. Original: 1895, Archiv fur systematische Philosophie 1: 433–456. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Clarence Irving Lewis, 1960 (1918). A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Dover. Peckhaus, V., 1997. Logik, Mathesis universalis und allgemeine Wissenschaft. Leibniz und die Wiederentdeckung der formalen Logik im 19. Jahrhundert. Akademie-Verlag. Peckhaus, V., 1999, "19th Century Logic between Philosophy and Mathematics," Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5: 433–450. Reprinted in Glen van Brummelen and Michael Kinyon, eds., 2005. Mathematics and the Historian's Craft. The Kenneth O. May Lectures. Springer: 203–220. Online here or here. Peckhaus, V., 2004. "Schröder's Logic" in Gabbay, Dov M., and John Woods, eds., Handbook of the History of Logic. Vol. 3: The Rise of Modern Logic: From Leibniz to Frege. North Holland: 557–609. Hilary Putnam, 1982, "Peirce the Logician," Historia Mathematica 9: 290–301. Reprinted in his 1990 Realism with a Human Face. Harvard University Press: 252–260. Online fragment. Thiel, C., 1981. "A portrait, or, how to tell Frege from Schröder," History and Philosophy of Logic 2: 21–23.   == External linksEdit == http://intranet.woodvillehs.sa.edu.au/pages/resources/maths/History/Schrdr.htm (requires login, unprovided) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Ernst Schröder", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Ernst Schröder at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Ernst Friedrich Ferdinand Zermelo (German: [ʦɛrˈmeːlo]; 27 July 1871 – 21 May 1953) was a German logician and mathematician, whose work has major implications for the foundations of mathematics. He is known for his role in developing Zermelo–Fraenkel axiomatic set theory and his proof of the well-ordering theorem.   == Life ==  Ernst Zermelo graduated from Berlin's Luisenstädtisches Gymnasium in 1889. He then studied mathematics, physics and philosophy at the universities of Berlin, Halle and Freiburg. He finished his doctorate in 1894 at the University of Berlin, awarded for a dissertation on the calculus of variations (Untersuchungen zur Variationsrechnung). Zermelo remained at the University of Berlin, where he was appointed assistant to Planck, under whose guidance he began to study hydrodynamics. In 1897, Zermelo went to Göttingen, at that time the leading centre for mathematical research in the world, where he completed his habilitation thesis in 1899. In 1910, Zermelo left Göttingen upon being appointed to the chair of mathematics at Zurich University, which he resigned in 1916. He was appointed to an honorary chair at Freiburg im Breisgau in 1926, which he resigned in 1935 because he disapproved of Adolf Hitler's regime. At the end of World War II and at his request, Zermelo was reinstated to his honorary position in Freiburg.   == Research in set theory == In 1900, in the Paris conference of the International Congress of Mathematicians, David Hilbert challenged the mathematical community with his famous Hilbert's problems, a list of 23 unsolved fundamental questions which mathematicians should attack during the coming century. The first of these, a problem of set theory, was the continuum hypothesis introduced by Cantor in 1878, and in the course of its statement Hilbert mentioned also the need to prove the well-ordering theorem. Zermelo began to work on the problems of set theory under Hilbert's influence and in 1902 published his first work concerning the addition of transfinite cardinals. By that time he had also discovered the so-called Russell paradox. In 1904, he succeeded in taking the first step suggested by Hilbert towards the continuum hypothesis when he proved the well-ordering theorem (every set can be well ordered). This result brought fame to Zermelo, who was appointed Professor in Göttingen, in 1905. His proof of the well-ordering theorem, based on the powerset axiom and the axiom of choice, was not accepted by all mathematicians, mostly because the axiom of choice was a paradigm of non-constructive mathematics. In 1908, Zermelo succeeded in producing an improved proof making use of Dedekind's notion of the "chain" of a set, which became more widely accepted; this was mainly because that same year he also offered an axiomatization of set theory. Zermelo began to axiomatize set theory in 1905; in 1908, he published his results despite his failure to prove the consistency of his axiomatic system. See the article on Zermelo set theory for an outline of this paper, together with the original axioms, with the original numbering. In 1922, Adolf Fraenkel and Thoralf Skolem independently improved Zermelo's axiom system. The resulting 8 axiom system, now called Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms (ZF), is now the most commonly used system for axiomatic set theory.   == Zermelo's navigation problem == Proposed in 1931, the Zermelo's navigation problem is a classic optimal control problem. The problem deals with a boat navigating on a body of water, originating from a point O to a destination point D. The boat is capable of a certain maximum speed, and we want to derive the best possible control to reach D in the least possible time. Without considering external forces such as current and wind, the optimal control is to follow a straight line segment from O to D. With consideration of current and wind, the shortest path from O to D is in fact, not the optimal solution.   == Bibliography == Primary literature in English translation: Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. 1904. "Proof that every set can be well-ordered," 139−41. 1908. "A new proof of the possibility of well-ordering," 183–98. 1908. "Investigations in the foundations of set theory I," 199–215.  1913. "On an Application of Set Theory to the Theory of the Game of Chess" in Rasmusen E., ed., 2001. Readings in Games and Information, Wiley-Blackwell: 79–82. 1930. "On boundary numbers and domains of sets: new investigations in the foundations of set theory" in Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 vols. Oxford University Press: 1219–33. Other books: Zermelo's Axiom of Choice, Its Origins, Development, & Influence, Volume 8 of Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences, Springer Verlag, New York, 1982.   == See also == Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory Zermelo set theory Well-ordering theorem Zermelo's theorem (game theory) 14990 Zermelo, asteroid   == References == Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (2000) The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Kanamori, Akihiro (2004). "Zermelo and set theory". The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 10 (4): 487–553. doi:10.2178/bsl/1102083759. MR 2136635.  Schwalbe, Ulrich; Walker, Paul (2001). Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory (PDF). Games and Economic Behavior 34 (1). pp. 123–137. doi:10.1006/game.2000.0794.  Ebbinghaus, Heinz-Dieter (2007) Ernst Zermelo: An Approach to His Life and Work. Springer. ISBN 3-642-08050-2   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Ernst Zermelo", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Ernst Zermelo at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Zermelo Navigation

Evert Willem Beth (7 July 1908 – 12 April 1964) was a Dutch philosopher and logician, whose work principally concerned the foundations of mathematics.   == Biography == Beth was born in Almelo, a small town in the eastern Netherlands. His father had studied mathematics and physics at the University of Amsterdam, where he had been awarded a Ph.D. Evert Beth studied the same subjects at Utrecht University, but then also studied philosophy and psychology. His 1935 Ph.D. was in philosophy. In 1946, he became professor of logic and the foundations of mathematics in Amsterdam. Apart from two brief interruptions – a stint in 1951 as a research assistant to Alfred Tarski, and in 1957 as a visiting professor at Johns Hopkins University – he held the post in Amsterdam continuously until his death in 1964. His was the first academic post in his country in logic and the foundations of mathematics, and during this time he contributed actively to international cooperation in establishing logic as an academic discipline. In 1953 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He died in Amsterdam.   == Contributions to logic ==   === Definition theorem === The definition theorem states that a predicate (or function or constant) is implicitly definable if and only if it is explicitly definable. Further explanation is provided under Beth definability   === Semantic tableaux === Semantic tableaux are a proof method for formal systems. Cf. Gentzen's natural deduction and sequent calculus, or even J. Alan Robinson's resolution and Hilbert's axiomatic systems. It is considered by many to be intuitively simple, particularly for students not acquainted with the study of logic (Wilfrid Hodges for example presents semantic tableaux in his introductory textbook, Logic, and Melvin Fitting does the same in his presentation of first-order logic for computer scientists, First-order logic and automated theorem proving). One starts out with the intention of proving that a certain set  of formulae imply another formula , given a set of rules determined by the semantics of the formulae's connectives (and quantifiers, in first-order logic). The method is to assume the concurrent truth of every member of  and of  (the negation of ), and then to apply the rules to branch this list into a tree-like structure of (simpler) formulae until every possible branch contains a contradiction. At this point it will have been established that  is inconsistent, and thus that the formulae of  together imply .   === Beth models === These are a class of relational models for non-classical logic (cf. Kripke semantics).   == See also == Gerrit Mannoury Method of analytic tableaux   == Books == Evert W. Beth, The foundations of mathematics. A study in the philosophy of science. XXVΊ + 722 pp. Amsterdam, North-Holland 1959. Evert W. Beth, Epistemologie mathematique et psychologie (with J. Piaget). 352 pp. Paris P.U.F. 1961. Evert W. Beth, Formal Methods: An introduction to symbolic logic and to the study of effective operations in arithmetic and logic. D. Reidel Publishing Company / Dordecht-Holland, 1962. Evert W. Beth, Aspects of Modern Logic. D. Reidel Publishing Company / Dordecht-Holland, 1971.   == References ==   == External links == Beth Prize 2013 Evert Willem Beth Foundation

Franco Petri Burgersdijk or Franciscus Burgersdicius, born Franck Pieterszoon Burgersdijk (3 May 1590 – 19 February 1635), was a Dutch logician.   == Life == Burgersdijk was born in De Lier. He was a student of Jacchaeus (Gilbert Jack). Burgersdijk finished his studies at the University of Leiden in 1610. He left to further study theology at the University of Saumur, where he became professor of philosophy in 1614. After five years he returned to Leiden, where he accepted the chair of logic and moral philosophy, and afterwards that of natural philosophy. He died in Leiden.   == Works == Institutionum logicarum libri duo (Leiden 1626, 1635, 1646) (at one time widely used) Institutionum metaphysicarum libri duo (Leiden 1647, 1653, 1657) Idea philosophiae moralis (in Latin). Bonaventura Elzevier, Abraham Elzevier. 1644.  Idea philosophiae naturalis, sive Methodus definitionum et controversiarum phisicarum (in Latin). Bonaventura Elzevier, Abraham Elzevier. 1652.    == References == Egbert P. Bos, Franco Burgersdijk (1590-1635) Neo-aristotelian in Leiden, Editions Rodopi 1993, ISBN 90-5183-374-1. Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Burgersdyk, Francis". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == Notes ==   == External links == Works by Franco Burgersdijk at Post-Reformation Digital Library



Frederick Rowbottom (16 January 1938 – 12 October 2009) was a British logician and mathematician. The large cardinal notion of Rowbottom cardinals is named after him.   == Biography == After graduating from Cambridge University, Rowbottom studied under Howard Jerome Keisler at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, earning his Ph.D. degree in 1964, with a thesis entitled Large Cardinals and Small Constructible Sets, under the supervision of Jerome Keisler. With a recommendation from Georg Kreisel, he took a position at the University of Bristol in 1965, where he spent the rest of his professional career. He published a paper called "Some strong axioms of infinity incompatible with the axiom of constructibility" in the Annals of Mathematical Logic, 3 1971. This paper, together with his thesis, "showed that Ramsey cardinals were weaker than measurable cardinals, and that their existence implied the constructible real continuum was countable; he further proved that this followed also from weaker partition and two cardinal properties." The large cardinal notion of Rowbottom cardinals is named after him, as is the notion of a Rowbottom ultrafilter. Keith Devlin studied set theory under Rowbottom. In 1992 he and a student, Jonathan Chapman, wrote a textbook on topos theory, Relative Category Theory and Geometric Morphisms: A Logical Approach, published in Oxford Logic Guides, No. 16. Rowbottom retired in 1993 at the age of 55. Rowbottom died of heart failure in Hadfield, England, on 12 October 2009, aged 71.   == References ==

Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (November 30, 1802 – January 24, 1872) was a German philosopher and philologist.   == Early life == He was born at Eutin, near Lübeck. He was educated at the universities of Kiel, Leipzig, and Berlin. He became more and more attracted to the study of Plato and Aristotle, and his doctoral dissertation (1826) was an attempt to reach through Aristotle's criticisms a more accurate knowledge of the Platonic philosophy (Platonis de ideis et numeris doctrina ex Aristotele illustrata). He declined the offer of a classical chair at Kiel, and accepted a post as tutor to the son of an intimate friend of Karl vom Stein zum Altenstein, the Prussian minister of education. He held this position for seven years (1826–1833), occupying his leisure time with the preparation of a critical edition of Aristotle's De anima (1833; 2nd ed. by Christian Belger, 1877). In 1833 Altenstein appointed Trendelenburg extraordinary professor in Berlin, and four years later he was advanced to an ordinary professorship.   == Teaching == For nearly 40 years, he proved himself markedly successful as a teacher, during the greater part of which time he had to examine in philosophy and pedagogics all candidates for the scholastic profession in Prussia. His teaching method was highly regarded by Søren Kierkegaard who called him "one of the most sober philosophical philologists I know." In 1865 he became involved in an acrimonious controversy on the interpretation of Kant's doctrine of space with Kuno Fischer, whom he attacked in Kuno Fischer und sein Kant (1869), which drew forth the reply Anti-Trendelenburg (1870). He died at age 69. His son, Friedrich Trendelenburg, was a prominent surgeon; several medical techniques and matters are named for him.   == As philosopher == Trendelenburg's philosophizing is conditioned throughout by his loving study of Plato and Aristotle, whom he regards not as opponents but as building jointly on the broad basis of idealism. His own standpoint may be called a modern version of Aristotelianism. While denying the possibility of an absolute method and an absolute philosophy, as contended for by Hegel and others, Trendelenburg was emphatically an idealist in the ancient or Platonic sense; his whole work was devoted to the demonstration of the ideal in the real. But he maintained that the procedure of philosophy must be analytic, rising from the particular facts to the universal in which we find them explained. We divine the system of the whole from the part we know, but the process of reconstruction must remain approximative. Our position forbids the possibility of a final system. Instead, therefore, of constantly beginning afresh in speculation, it should be our duty to attach ourselves to what may be considered the permanent results of historic developments. The classical expression of these results Trendelenburg finds mainly in the Platonico-Aristotelian system. The philosophical question is stated thus: How are thought and being united in knowledge? How does thought get at being? And how does being enter into thought? Proceeding on the principle that like can only be known by like, Trendelenburg next reaches a doctrine peculiar to himself (though based upon Aristotle) that plays a central part in his speculations. Motion is the fundamental fact common to being and thought; the actual motion of the external world has its counterpart in the constructive motion involved in every instance of perception or thought. From motion he proceeds to deduce time, space and the categories of mechanics and natural science. These, being thus derived, are at once subjective and objective in their scope. It is true that matter can never be completely resolved into motion, but the irreducible remainder may be treated, like Aristotle, as an abstraction we asymptotically approach but never reach. The facts of existence, however, are not adequately explained by the mechanical categories. The ultimate interpretation of the universe can only be found in the higher category of End or final cause. Here Trendelenburg finds the dividing line, between philosophical systems. On the one side stand those that acknowledge none but efficient causes, which make force prior to thought, and explain the universe, as it were, a tergo [from the back]. This may be called, typically, Democritism. On the other side stands the organic or teleological view of the world, which interprets the parts through the idea of the whole, and sees in the efficient causes only the vehicle of ideal ends. This may be called in a wide sense Platonism. Systems like Spinozism, which seem to form a third class, neither sacrificing force to thought nor thought to force, yet by their denial of final causes inevitably fall back into the Democritic or essentially materialistic standpoint, leaving us with the great antagonism of the mechanical and the organic systems of philosophy. The latter view, which receives its first support in the facts of life, or organic nature as such, finds its culmination and ultimate verification in the ethical world, which essentially consists in the realization of ends. Trendelenburg's Naturrecht [The right of nature] may, therefore, be taken as in a manner the completion of his system, his working out of the ideal as present in the real. The ethical end is taken to be the idea of humanity, not in the abstract as formulated by Kant, but in the context of the state and of history. Law is treated throughout as the vehicle of ethical requirements. In Trendelenburg's treatment of the state, as the ethical organism in which the individual (the potential man) may be said first to emerge into actuality, we may trace his nurture on the best ideas of Hellenic antiquity.   == Works == Trendelenburg was also the author of the following: Elementa Logices Aristotelicae (1836; 9th ed., 1892; Eng. trans., 1881), a selection of passages from the Organon with Latin translation and notes, containing the substance of Aristotle's logical doctrine, supplemented by Erlauterungen zu den Elementen der Aristotelischen Logik (1842; 3rd ed. 1876). Logische Untersuchungen (1840; 3rd ed. 1870), and Die logische Frage in Hegels System (1843), important factors in the reaction against Hegel. Historische Beitrage zur Philosophie (1846–1867), in three volumes, the first of which (Geschichte der Kategorienlehre) contains a history of the doctrine of the Categories. Geschichte der Kategorienlehre I: Aristotle Kategorienlehre; II: Die Kategorienlehre in der Geschichte der Philosophie, (1846, reprint: Hildesheim, Olms, 1979). Des Naturrecht aufdem Grunde der Ethik (1860). Lücken im Völkerrecht (1870), a treatise on the defects of international law, occasioned by the war of 1870. Kleine Schriften (1871), papers dealing with non-philosophical, chiefly national and educational subjects.   == Notes ==   == References == Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg, A Contribution to the History of the Word Person: A Posthumous Treatise, Open Court Pub. Co., 1910 Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg, Outlines of Logic: An English Translation of Trendelenburg's Elementa ... (1898) Archive.org Frederick Beiser Late German Idealism: Trendelenburg and Lotze, Oxford University Press, 2013: is currently the most complete discussion of Trendelenburg's philosophy Graham Bird A Companion to Kant, John Wiley and Sons, 2009 p. 486ff has an article about Trendelenburg's dipute with Fisher over Kant's definition of space Hermann Bonitz, Zur Erinnering an Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg (Berlin, 1872) Buchholtz, Georg (1904). Die ethischen Grundgedanken Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburgs. Blankenhain: Schlimper.  Ernst Bratuschek, Adolf Trendelenburg (Berlin, 1873) George Sylvester Morris in the New Englander (1874), xxxiii. Paul Kleinert, Grabrede (Berlin, 1872) Carl von Prantl, Gedächtnisrede (Munich, 1873)  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Fyodor Ippolitovich Shcherbatskoy or Stcherbatsky (Фёдор Ипполи́тович Щербатско́й) (1 October 1866 – 18 March 1942), often referred to in the literature as F. Th. Stcherbatsky, was a Russian Indologist who, in large part, was responsible for laying the foundations in the Western world for the scholarly study of Buddhism and Buddhist philosophy. He was born in Kielce, Poland (Russian Empire), and died at the Borovoye Resort in northern Kazakhstan. Stcherbatsky studied in the famous Tsarskoye Selo Lyceum (graduating in 1884), and later in the Historico-Philological Faculty of Saint Petersburg University (graduating in 1889), where Ivan Minayeff and Serge Oldenburg were his teachers. Subsequently sent abroad, he studied Indian poetry with Georg Bühler in Vienna, and Buddhist philosophy with Hermann Jacobi in Bonn. In 1897, he and Oldenburg inaugurated Bibliotheca Buddhica, a library of rare Buddhist texts. Returning from a trip to India and Mongolia, in 1903 Stcherbatsky published (in Russian) the first volume of Theory of Knowledge and Logic of the Doctrine of Later Buddhists ( 2 vols., St. Petersburg, 1903-1909 ). In 1928 he established the Institute of Buddhist Culture in Leningrad. His The Conception of Buddhist Nirvana (Leningrad, 1927), written in English, caused a sensation in the West. He followed suit with his main work in English, Buddhist Logic (2 vols., 1930–32), which has exerted an immense influence on Buddhology. Although Stcherbatsky remained less well known in his own country, his extraordinary fluency in Sanskrit and Tibetan languages won him the admiration of Jawaharlal Nehru and Rabindranath Tagore. According to Debiprasad Chattopadhyaya, "Stcherbatsky did help us – the Indians – to discover our own past and to restore the right perspective of our own philosophical heritage." The Encyclopædia Britannica (2004 edition) acclaimed Stcherbatsky as "the foremost Western authority on Buddhist philosophy".   == References ==   == Bibliography == Bapat, P. V. (1943), Fedore Ippolitorich Stcherbatsky, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 24 (3/4), 284-285  – via JSTOR (subscription required) Ruegg, D. Seyfort (1971, Dedication to Th. Stcherbatsky, Journal of Indian Philosophy 1 (3), 213-216  – via JSTOR (subscription required)   == External links == The Scholarly Activity of Fyodor Stcherbatsky – an Epoch in World Buddhology (in English) Bibliotheca Buddhica (in English) Stcherbatsky's biography (in Russian)

Gaisi Takeuti (竹内 外史, Takeuchi Gaishi, born January 25, 1926) is a Japanese mathematician, known for his work in proof theory. After graduating from Tokyo University, he went to Princeton to study under Kurt Gödel. He later became a professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Takeuti was president (2003-2009) of the Kurt Gödel Society, having worked on the respected book Memoirs of a Proof Theorist: Godel and Other Logicians. His goal was to prove the consistency of the real numbers. To this end, Takeuti's conjecture speculates that a sequent formalisation of second-order logic has cut-elimination. He is also known for his work on ordinal diagrams with Akiko Kino.   == Notes == ^ Takeuti 2013. ^ Takeuti 1953. An erratum to this article was published in the same journal (24:149–156, 1954).   == References == Takeuti, Gaisi (1953). "On a generalized logic calculus". Japanese Journal of Mathematics 23: 39–96. ISSN 0075-3432.  Takeuti, Gaisi (2013) [1975]. Proof theory (Second ed.). Mineola, New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-49073-1.    == External links ==  Presidents of the Kurt Gödel Society Takeuti Symposium (contains relevant birthdate information) Google Books preview of Memoirs of a Proof Theorist: Godel and Other Logicians Logic Colloqium ’98 Proceedings (contains biography) at the Wayback Machine (archived September 26, 2006) Gaisi Takeuti at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Garlandus Compotista also known as Garland the Computist was an early medieval logician of the eleventh-century school of Liège. Little is known of his life; the Dialectica published under his name by L. M. de Rijk is now commonly attributed to Gerlandus of Besançon (early 12th century): see John Marenbon, Medieval Philosophy. An Historical and Philosophical Introduction, NY: Routledge, 2007, p. 133.   == Works == Dialectica, ed. L .M. De Rijk, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1959.   == References == Henry, D. P., That Most Subtle Question Manchester 1984 William Kneale and Martha Kneale, The Development of Logic (1962), pp. 199–200

Gary R. Mar is an American philosopher specializing in Logic, the Philosophy of Mathematics, contemporary analytic philosophy, Asian American Philosophy and the Philosophy of Religion . He was the last dissertation student of the 20th century logician Alonzo Church and currently teaches at Stony Brook University. Gary Mar is co-author with Donald Kalish and Richard Montague of Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning (second edition). He is also co-author of The Philosophical Computer with Patrick Grim and Paul St. Denis. An article on the fractal images in the semantics of paradox is contained in Logic, Meaning and Computation: Essays in Memory of Alonzo Church. This work has been discussed by Ian Stewart ('A Partly True Story,' in Scientific American(Feb. 1993),110-112). This research was also presented at the Kurt Gödel Centenary Symposium, Horizons of Truth at the University of Vienna in April 2006. Gary Mar is the founding director of the Stony Brook Philosophy Department Logic Lab at Stony Brook and the founding director of the Asian American Center at Stony Brook, after being the catalyst for the donation of the Charles B. Wang Asian American Center at Stony Brook University, which at that time was the largest donation in the history of the public education system in New York State. In 2003 he co-taught a graduate seminar with Noam Chomsky through the President's Rotating Stars Program, and in 2005 he was instrumental in the awarding of an honorary doctorate awarded the documentary filmmaker Loni Ding, whose landmark series Ancestors in the Americas [1] is the only in-depth documentary on the history of Asians in the Americas. Gary Mar has been the recipient of the Chancellor’s and President’s Award for Excellence in Teaching (1993), the Alumni Association Outstanding Professor Award (1995), a Pew Foundation Research Fellowship (1995-1996), and Stony Brook’s Academy of Scholar-Teachers (1996).   == Publications == Books Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning(second edition), co-authored with Donald Kalish and Richard Montague (HBJ, 1980, republished by Oxford University Press, 2000) The Philosophical Computer: Exploratory Essays in Philosophical Computer Modeling co-authored with Patrick Grim and Paul St. Denis (M.I.T. Press, 1998) Selected articles on logic, philosophical logic and game theory 'Gödel Incompleteness, Complexity and Chaos', proceedings from the Kurt Gödel Centenary Symposium, Senate Hall, University of Vienna, April 28-29th, 2006, Collegium Logicum of the Kurt Gödel Society. 'Church’s Theorem and Randomness, Logic, Meaning and Computation: Essays In Memory of Alonzo Church,' edited by C. Anthony Anderson and Mikhail Zeleny, Kluwer Academic Publishers: Netherlands, 2001, 479-90. 'Evolutionary Game Theory, Morality and Darwinism,' a commentary on Brian Skyrm’s paper in Evolutionary Origins of Morality: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives, edited by Leonard D. Katz, Imprint Academic, 2000. 'What the Liar Taught Achilles,' The Journal of Philosophical Logic, vol. 28, 1999, 29-46. 'Chaos in Cooperation: Continuous-Valued Prisoner’s Dilemmas in Infinite-Valued Logic,' in the International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, no. 4 (1994), 943-958. 'Real Life' in the International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, vol. 6, no. 11, 1996, 2077-2086. 'Pattern and Chaos: New Images in the Semantics of Paradox,' in Noûs. vol. XXV (Dec. 1991), 659-693. Selected articles on Asian American philosophy Editor, 'Approaching the Tenth Anniversary of 9/11 Through Asian American Eyes', American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 10, no. 2, Spring 2011, with articles by George Lipsitz, “Affinities, Affiliations, and Alliances: Why Asian American Perspectives Matter Now”, Mary Watkins, “The Shame of Forcibly Displacing Others: 9/11 and the Criminalization of Immigration”, and Gary Okihiro, “The Alien: Reflections on the Border Ten Years After 9/11”. 'Angel Island Reflections,' American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 10, no. 1, Fall 2010. 'New Media and New Pedagogy in Asian American Studies: Strategies for Transforming Knowledge into a Pedagogy of Empowerment', American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 3, no. 1, Fall 2003, 19-32. 'What Does Asian American Studies Have to Do With Philosophy?', American Philosophical Association Newsletter, Committee on the Status of Asian and Asian-American Philosophers and Philosophies, vol. 2, no. 2, Spring 2003, 27-30. Selected articles in the philosophy of religion 'The Modal Unity of Anselm’s Proslogion,' in Faith and Philosophy, vol. 13, no. 1 (Jan. 1996), 50-67. 'Why ‘Cantorian’ Arguments Against the Existence of God Do Not Work', in the International Philosophical Quarterly, vol. XXXIII (Dec. 1993), 429-442. 'What Euthyphro Couldn’t Have Said,' in Faith and Philosophy no. 4 (July 1987), 241-261.   == External links == Faculty Page


Georg Henrik von Wright (Swedish: [ˈjeːɔrj ˈhɛnːrɪk fɔnˈvrɪkːt], 14 June 1916 – 16 June 2003) was a Finnish philosopher, who succeeded Ludwig Wittgenstein as professor at the University of Cambridge. He published in English, Finnish, German, and in Swedish, having belonged to the Swedish-speaking minority of Finland. Von Wright was of both Finnish and 17th-century Scottish ancestry. Von Wright's writings come under two broad categories. The first is analytic philosophy and philosophical logic in the Anglo-American vein. His 1951 books, An Essay in Modal Logic and Deontic Logic, were landmarks in the postwar rise of formal modal logic and its deontic version. He was an authority on Wittgenstein, editing his later works. He was the leading figure in the Finnish philosophy of his time, specializing in philosophical logic, philosophical analysis, philosophy of action, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, and the close study of Charles Sanders Peirce. The other vein in von Wright's writings is moralist and pessimist. During the last twenty years of his life, under the influence of Oswald Spengler, Jürgen Habermas and the Frankfurt School's reflections about modern Rationality, he wrote prolifically. His best known article from this period is entitled The Myth of Progress, and it questions whether our apparent material and technological progress can really be considered "progress". In the last year of his life, among his other honorary degrees, he held an honorary degree at the University of Bergen.   == Works ==  The Logical Problem of Induction, PhD thesis, 31 May 1941 Den logiska empirismen (Logical Empirism), in Swedish, 1945 Über Wahrscheinlichkeit (On Chance), in German, 1945 An Essay in Modal Logic, 1951 A Treatise on Induction and Probability, 1951 Deontic Logic, 1951 Tanke och förkunnelse (Thought and Preaching), in Swedish, 1955 Logical Studies, 1957 Logik, filosofi och språk (Logic, philosophy and language), in Swedish, 1957 The Varieties of Goodness, 1963. (1958-60 Gifford Lectures in the University of St. Andrews, online) He considered this his best and most personal work. Norm and Action, 1963 (1958-60 Gifford Lectures, St. Andrews, online) The Logic of Preference, 1963 Essay om naturen, människan och den vetenskaplig-tekniska revolutionen (Essay on Nature, Man and the Scientific-Technological Revolution), in Swedish, 1963 An Essay in Deontic Logic, 1968 Time, Change and Contradiction, 1969 Tieteen filosofian kaksi perinnettä (The Two Traditions of the Philosophy of Science), in Finnish, 1970 Explanation and Understanding, 1971 Causality and Determinism, 1974 Handlung, Norm und Intention (Action, Norm and Intention), in German, 1977 Humanismen som livshållning (Humanism as an approach to Life), in Swedish, 1978 Freedom and Determination, 1980 Wittgenstein, 1982 Philosophical Papers I-III, 1983–1984 Of Human Freedom, 1984. (1984 Tanner Lectures at the University of Helsinki, online) Filosofisia tutkielmia (Philosophical Dissertations), in Finnish, 1985 Vetenskapen och förnuftet (Science and Reason), in Swedish, 1986 Minervan Pöllö (The Owl of Minerva), in Finnish, 1991 Myten om framsteget (The Myth of Progress), in Swedish, 1993 The Tree of Knowledge, 1993 Att förstå sin samtid (To Understand one's own Time), in Swedish, 1994 Six Essays in Philosophical Logic, 1996 Viimeisistä ajoista. Ajatusleikki (On the End Times. A Thought Experiment.), in Finnish, 1997 Logiikka ja humanismi (Logic and Humanism), in Finnish, 1998 In the Shadow of Descartes, 1998 Mitt liv som jag minns det (My Life as I Remember it), in Swedish, 2001 Von Wright edited posthumous publications by Wittgenstein, which were published by Blackwell (unless otherwise stated): 1961. Notebooks 1914-1916. 1967. Zettel (Translated into English as Culture and Value). 1969. On Certainty. 1971. ProtoTractatus—An Early Version of Tractatus Logico- Philosophicus. Cornell University Press. 1973. Letters to C.K. Ogden with Comments on the English Translation of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. 1974. Letters to Russell, Keynes and Moore. 1978 (1956). Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. 1980. Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology. Vols 1,2. 1980. Culture and Value (English translation of Zettel). 1982. Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology, Vol. 1. Vol. 2, 1992.   == References ==   == See also == Georg Henrik von Wright in 375 humanists – 13 May 2015. Faculty of Arts, University of Helsinki.

Georg Kreisel FRS (September 15, 1923 – March 1, 2015) was an Austrian-born mathematical logician who studied and worked in Great Britain and America. Kreisel was born in Graz and came from a Jewish background; his family sent him to the United Kingdom before the Anschluss, where he studied mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, and then, during World War II, worked on military subjects. After the war he returned to Cambridge and received his doctorate. He taught at the University of Reading until 1954 and then worked at the Institute for Advanced Study from 1955 to 1957. Subsequently he taught at Stanford University and the University of Paris. Kreisel was appointed a professor at Stanford University in 1962 and remained on the faculty there until he retired in 1985. Kreisel worked in various areas of logic, and especially in proof theory, where he is known for his so-called "unwinding" program, whose aim was to extract constructive content from superficially non-constructive proofs. Kreisel was elected to the Royal Society in 1966; Kreisel remained a close friend of Francis Crick whom he had met in the Royal Navy during WWII. While a student at Cambridge, Kreisel was the student most respected by Ludwig Wittgenstein. Ray Monk writes, "In 1944--when Kreisel was still only twenty-one--Wittgenstein shocked Rush Rhees by declaring Kreisel to be the most able philosopher he had ever met who was also a mathematician." Kreisel was also a close friend of the Anglo-Irish philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch. They met at Cambridge in 1947 during Murdoch's year of study there. Peter Conradi reports that Murdoch transcribed Kreisel's letters into her journals over the next fifty years. According to Conradi, "For half a century she nonetheless records variously Kreisel's brilliance, wit and sheer 'dotty' solipsistic strangeness, his amoralism, cruelty, ambiguous vanity and obscenity." Murdoch dedicated her 1971 novel An Accidental Man to Kreisel and he became a (partial) model for several characters in other novels, including Marcus Vallar in The Message to the Planet and Guy Openshaw in Nuns and Soldiers.* After retirement Kreisel lived in Salzburg, Austria. He wrote several biographies of mathematicians including Kurt Gödel, Bertrand Russell and Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer. He died in Salzburg, aged 91.   == Anecdotes == While teaching at The University of Reading, he would frequently take the train into London. There was a particularly fast train that was timed just right for the shows in London, and he would go to the station at that time. He checked the timetable one day, and that train was canceled. But out of habit one day he showed up at the station at the usual time and the train was there. It seems that it was going from Bristol to London, stopping at Reading only to get water. He got on the train anyway, and from then on took that train regularly. One day he was accosted by the conductor after he got on. "The train doesn't stop here sir!" "In that case I didn't get on here."    == References ==   == External links and further reading == Kreiseliana: About and Around George Kreisel, Piergiorgio Odifreddi, ed., Wellesley, Massachusetts: A. K. Peters, 1996. ISBN 1-56881-061-X. Kreisel, lambda calculus, a windmill and a castle Contains personal recollections about Kreisel by his student Henk Barendregt. Georg Kreisel at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (/ˈheɪɡəl/; German: [ˈɡeɔɐ̯k ˈvɪlhɛlm ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈheːɡəl]; August 27, 1770 – November 14, 1831) was a German philosopher of the late Enlightenment. He achieved wide renown in his day and, while primarily influential within the continental tradition of philosophy, has become increasingly influential in the analytic tradition as well. Although he remains a divisive figure, his canonical stature within Western philosophy is universally recognized. Hegel's principal achievement is his development of a distinctive articulation of idealism sometimes termed "absolute idealism," in which the dualisms of, for instance, mind and nature and subject and object are overcome. His philosophy of spirit conceptually integrates psychology, the state, history, art, religion, and philosophy. His account of the master–slave dialectic has been highly influential, especially in 20th-century France. Of special importance is his concept of spirit (Geist: sometimes also translated as "mind") as the historical manifestation of the logical concept and the "sublation" (Aufhebung: integration without elimination or reduction) of seemingly contradictory or opposing factors; examples include the apparent opposition between nature and freedom and between immanence and transcendence. Hegel has been seen in the 21st century as the originator of the thesis, antithesis, synthesis triad; however this originated with Johann Fichte.  Hegel has influenced many thinkers and writers whose own positions vary widely. Karl Barth described Hegel as a "Protestant Aquinas," while Maurice Merleau-Ponty wrote that "All the great philosophical ideas of the past century—the philosophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existentialism, and psychoanalysis—had their beginnings in Hegel."   == Life ==   === Early years ===   ==== Childhood ==== Hegel was born on August 27, 1770 in Stuttgart, in the Duchy of Württemberg in southwestern Germany. Christened Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, he was known as Wilhelm to his close family. His father, Georg Ludwig, was Rentkammersekretär (secretary to the revenue office) at the court of Karl Eugen, Duke of Württemberg. Hegel's mother, Maria Magdalena Louisa (née Fromm), was the daughter of a lawyer at the High Court of Justice at the Württemberg court. She died of a "bilious fever" (Gallenfieber) when Hegel was thirteen. Hegel and his father also caught the disease but narrowly survived. Hegel had a sister, Christiane Luise (1773–1832), and a brother, Georg Ludwig (1776–1812), who was to perish as an officer in Napoleon's Russian campaign of 1812. At the age of three Hegel went to the "German School." When he entered the "Latin School" two years later, he already knew the first declension, having been taught it by his mother. In 1776, Hegel entered Stuttgart's Gymnasium Illustre. During his adolescence Hegel read voraciously, copying lengthy extracts in his diary. Authors he read include the poet Klopstock and writers associated with the Enlightenment, such as Christian Garve and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. Hegel's studies at the Gymnasium were concluded with his Abiturrede ("graduation speech") entitled "The abortive state of art and scholarship in Turkey."   ==== Tübingen (1788–93) ==== At the age of eighteen Hegel entered the Tübinger Stift (a Protestant seminary attached to the University of Tübingen), where two fellow students were to become vital to his development - poet Friedrich Hölderlin, and philosopher-to-be Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling. Sharing a dislike for what they regarded as the restrictive environment of the Seminary, the three became close friends and mutually influenced each other's ideas. All greatly admired Hellenic civilization, and Hegel additionally steeped himself in Rousseau and Lessing during this time. They watched the unfolding of the French Revolution with shared enthusiasm. Schelling and Hölderlin immersed themselves in theoretical debates on Kantian philosophy, from which Hegel remained aloof. Hegel at this time envisaged his future as that of a Popularphilosoph, i.e., a "man of letters" who serves to make the abstruse ideas of philosophers accessible to a wider public; his own felt need to engage critically with the central ideas of Kantianism did not come until 1800.   ==== Bern (1793–96) and Frankfurt (1797–1801) ==== Having received his theological certificate (Konsistorialexamen) from the Tübingen Seminary, Hegel became Hofmeister (house tutor) to an aristocratic family in Bern (1793–96). During this period he composed the text which has become known as the "Life of Jesus" and a book-length manuscript titled "The Positivity of the Christian Religion." His relations with his employers becoming strained, Hegel accepted an offer mediated by Hölderlin to take up a similar position with a wine merchant's family in Frankfurt, where he moved in 1797. Here Hölderlin exerted an important influence on Hegel's thought. While in Frankfurt Hegel composed the essay "Fragments on Religion and Love." In 1799, he wrote another essay entitled "The Spirit of Christianity and Its Fate," unpublished during his lifetime. Also in 1797, the unpublished and unsigned manuscript of "The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism" was written. It was written in Hegel's hand but thought to have been authored by Hegel, Schelling, Hölderlin, or by all three.   === Career years ===   ==== Jena, Bamberg and Nuremberg: 1801–1816 ==== In 1801, Hegel came to Jena with the encouragement of his old friend Schelling, who held the position of Extraordinary Professor at the University there. Hegel secured a position at the University as a Privatdozent (unsalaried lecturer) after submitting a Habilitationsschrift (dissertation) on the orbits of the planets. Later in the year Hegel's first book, The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy, was completed. He lectured on "Logic and Metaphysics" and gave joint lectures with Schelling on an "Introduction to the Idea and Limits of True Philosophy" and held a "Philosophical Disputorium." In 1802, Schelling and Hegel founded a journal, the Kritische Journal der Philosophie ("Critical Journal of Philosophy"), to which they each contributed pieces until the collaboration was ended when Schelling left for Würzburg in 1803. In 1805, the University promoted Hegel to the position of Extraordinary Professor (unsalaried), after Hegel wrote a letter to the poet and minister of culture Johann Wolfgang Goethe protesting at the promotion of his philosophical adversary Jakob Friedrich Fries ahead of him. Hegel attempted to enlist the help of the poet and translator Johann Heinrich Voß to obtain a post at the newly renascent University of Heidelberg, but failed; to his chagrin, Fries was later in the same year made Ordinary Professor (salaried) there.  His finances drying up quickly, Hegel was now under great pressure to deliver his book, the long-promised introduction to his System. Hegel was putting the finishing touches to this book, the Phenomenology of Spirit, as Napoleon engaged Prussian troops on October 14, 1806, in the Battle of Jena on a plateau outside the city. On the day before the battle, Napoleon entered the city of Jena. Hegel recounted his impressions in a letter to his friend Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer:  I saw the Emperor – this world-soul – riding out of the city on reconnaissance. It is indeed a wonderful sensation to see such an individual, who, concentrated here at a single point, astride a horse, reaches out over the world and masters it ... this extraordinary man, whom it is impossible not to admire.  Although Napoleon chose not to close down Jena as he had other universities, the city was devastated and students deserted the university in droves, making Hegel's financial prospects even worse. The following February Hegel's landlady Christiana Burkhardt (who had been abandoned by her husband) gave birth to their son Georg Ludwig Friedrich Fischer (1807–31). In March 1807, aged 37, Hegel moved to Bamberg, where Niethammer had declined and passed on to Hegel an offer to become editor of a newspaper, the Bamberger Zeitung. Hegel, unable to find more suitable employment, reluctantly accepted. Ludwig Fischer and his mother (whom Hegel may have offered to marry following the death of her husband) stayed behind in Jena. He was then, in November 1808, again through Niethammer, appointed headmaster of a Gymnasium in Nuremberg, a post he held until 1816. While in Nuremberg Hegel adapted his recently published Phenomenology of Spirit for use in the classroom. Part of his remit being to teach a class called "Introduction to Knowledge of the Universal Coherence of the Sciences," Hegel developed the idea of an encyclopedia of the philosophical sciences, falling into three parts (logic, philosophy of nature, and philosophy of spirit). Hegel married Marie Helena Susanna von Tucher (1791–1855), the eldest daughter of a Senator, in 1811. This period saw the publication of his second major work, the Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik; 3 vols., 1812, 1813, 1816), and the birth of his two legitimate sons, Karl Friedrich Wilhelm (1813–1901) and Immanuel Thomas Christian (1814–1891).   ==== Heidelberg and Berlin: 1816–1831 ==== Having received offers of a post from the Universities of Erlangen, Berlin, and Heidelberg, Hegel chose Heidelberg, where he moved in 1816. Soon after, in April 1817, his illegitimate son Ludwig Fischer (now ten years old) joined the Hegel household, having thus far spent his childhood in an orphanage. (Ludwig's mother had died in the meantime.) Hegel published The Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline (1817) as a summary of his philosophy for students attending his lectures at Heidelberg.  In 1818, Hegel accepted the renewed offer of the chair of philosophy at the University of Berlin, which had remained vacant since Johann Gottlieb Fichte's death in 1814. Here he published his Philosophy of Right (1821). Hegel devoted himself primarily to delivering his lectures; his lecture courses on aesthetics, the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of history, and the history of philosophy were published posthumously from lecture notes taken by his students. His fame spread and his lectures attracted students from all over Germany and beyond. Hegel was appointed Rector of the University in 1830, when he was 60. He was deeply disturbed by the riots for reform in Berlin in that year. In 1831, Frederick William III decorated him for his service to the Prussian state. In August 1831 a cholera epidemic reached Berlin and Hegel left the city, taking up lodgings in Kreuzberg. Now in a weak state of health, Hegel seldom went out. As the new semester began in October, Hegel returned to Berlin, with the (mistaken) impression that the epidemic had largely subsided. By November 14 Hegel was dead. The physicians pronounced the cause of death as cholera, but it is likely he died from a different gastrointestinal disease. He is said to have uttered the last words "And he didn't understand me" before expiring. In accordance with his wishes, Hegel was buried on November 16 in the Dorotheenstadt cemetery next to Fichte and Solger. Hegel's son Ludwig Fischer had died shortly before while serving with the Dutch army in Batavia; the news of his death never reached his father. Early the following year Hegel's sister Christiane committed suicide by drowning. Hegel's remaining two sons - Karl, who became a historian, and Immanuel, who followed a theological path - lived long and safeguarded their father's Nachlaß and produced editions of his works.   == Thought ==   === Freedom === Hegel's thinking can be understood as a constructive development within the broad tradition that includes Plato and Immanuel Kant. To this list one could add Proclus, Meister Eckhart, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Plotinus, Jakob Böhme, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. What all these thinkers share, which distinguishes them from materialists like Epicurus, the Stoics, and Thomas Hobbes, and from empiricists like David Hume, is that they regard freedom or self-determination both as real and as having important ontological implications, for soul or mind or divinity. This focus on freedom is what generates Plato's notion (in the Phaedo, Republic, and Timaeus) of the soul as having a higher or fuller kind of reality than inanimate objects possess. While Aristotle criticizes Plato's "Forms," he preserves Plato's cornerstones of the ontological implications for self-determination: ethical reasoning, the soul's pinnacle in the hierarchy of nature, the order of the cosmos, and an assumption with reasoned arguments for a prime mover. Kant imports Plato's high esteem of individual sovereignty to his considerations of moral and noumenal freedom, as well as to God. All three find common ground on the unique position of humans in the scheme of things, known by the discussed categorical differences from animals and inanimate objects. In his discussion of "Spirit" in his Encyclopedia, Hegel praises Aristotle's On the Soul as "by far the most admirable, perhaps even the sole, work of philosophical value on this topic." In his Phenomenology of Spirit and his Science of Logic, Hegel's concern with Kantian topics such as freedom and morality, and with their ontological implications, is pervasive. Rather than simply rejecting Kant's dualism of freedom versus nature, Hegel aims to subsume it within "true infinity," the "Concept" (or "Notion:" Begriff), "Spirit," and "ethical life" in such a way that the Kantian duality is rendered intelligible, rather than remaining a brute "given." The reason why this subsumption takes place in a series of concepts is that Hegel's method, in his Science of Logic and his Encyclopedia, is to begin with basic concepts like Being and Nothing, and to develop these through a long sequence of elaborations, including those already mentioned. In this manner, a solution that is reached, in principle, in the account of "true infinity" in the Science of Logic's chapter on "Quality," is repeated in new guises at later stages, all the way to "Spirit" and "ethical life," in the third volume of the Encyclopedia. In this way, Hegel intends to defend the germ of truth in Kantian dualism against reductive or eliminative programs like those of materialism and empiricism. Like Plato, with his dualism of soul versus bodily appetites, Kant pursues the mind's ability to question its felt inclinations or appetites and to come up with a standard of "duty" (or, in Plato's case, "good") which transcends bodily restrictiveness. Hegel preserves this essential Platonic and Kantian concern in the form of infinity going beyond the finite (a process that Hegel in fact relates to "freedom" and the "ought"), the universal going beyond the particular (in the Concept), and Spirit going beyond Nature. And Hegel renders these dualities intelligible by (ultimately) his argument in the "Quality" chapter of the "Science of Logic." The finite has to become infinite in order to achieve reality. The idea of the absolute excludes multiplicity so the subjective and objective must achieve synthesis to become whole. This is because, as Hegel suggests by his introduction of the concept of "reality," what determines itself—rather than depending on its relations to other things for its essential character—is more fully "real" (following the Latin etymology of "real:" more "thing-like") than what does not. Finite things don't determine themselves, because, as "finite" things, their essential character is determined by their boundaries, over against other finite things. So, in order to become "real," they must go beyond their finitude ("finitude is only as a transcending of itself" The result of this argument is that finite and infinite—and, by extension, particular and universal, nature and freedom—don't face one another as two independent realities, but instead the latter (in each case) is the self-transcending of the former. Rather than stress the distinct singularity of each factor that complements and conflicts with others—without explanation—the relationship between finite and infinite (and particular and universal, and nature and freedom) becomes intelligible as a progressively developing and self-perfecting whole.   === Progress === The obscure writings of Böhme had a strong effect on Hegel. Böhme had written that the Fall of Man was a necessary stage in the evolution of the universe. This evolution was, itself, the result of God's desire for complete self-awareness. Hegel was fascinated by the works of Kant, Rousseau, and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, and by the French Revolution. Modern philosophy, culture, and society seemed to Hegel fraught with contradictions and tensions, such as those between the subject and object of knowledge, mind and nature, self and Other, freedom and authority, knowledge and faith, the Enlightenment and Romanticism. Hegel's main philosophical project was to take these contradictions and tensions and interpret them as part of a comprehensive, evolving, rational unity that, in different contexts, he called "the absolute idea" or absolute knowledge. According to Hegel, the main characteristic of this unity was that it evolved through and manifested itself in contradiction and negation. Contradiction and negation have a dynamic quality that at every point in each domain of reality—consciousness, history, philosophy, art, nature, society—leads to further development until a rational unity is reached that preserves the contradictions as phases and sub-parts by lifting them up (Aufhebung) to a higher unity. This whole is mental because it is mind that can comprehend all of these phases and sub-parts as steps in its own process of comprehension. It is rational because the same, underlying, logical, developmental order underlies every domain of reality and is ultimately the order of self-conscious rational thought, although only in the later stages of development does it come to full self-consciousness. The rational, self-conscious whole is not a thing or being that lies outside of other existing things or minds. Rather, it comes to completion only in the philosophical comprehension of individual existing human minds who, through their own understanding, bring this developmental process to an understanding of itself. Hegel's thought is revolutionary to the extent that it is a philosophy of absolute negation: as long as absolute negation is at the center, systematization remains open, and makes it possible for human beings to become subjects. "Mind" and "Spirit" are the common English translations of Hegel's use of the German "Geist." Some have argued that either of these terms overly "psychologize" Hegel, implying a kind of disembodied, solipsistic consciousness like ghost or "soul." Geist combines the meaning of spirit—as in god, ghost or mind—with an intentional force. In Hegel's early philosophy of nature (draft manuscripts written during his time at the University of Jena), Hegel's notion of "Geist" was tightly bound to the notion of "Aether" from which Hegel also derived the concepts of space and time; however in his later works (after Jena) Hegel did not explicitly use his old notion of "Aether" any more. Central to Hegel's conception of knowledge and mind (and therefore also of reality) was the notion of identity in difference, that is that mind externalizes itself in various forms and objects that stand outside of it or opposed to it, and that, through recognizing itself in them, is "with itself" in these external manifestations, so that they are at one and the same time mind and other-than-mind. This notion of identity in difference, which is intimately bound up with his conception of contradiction and negativity, is a principal feature differentiating Hegel's thought from that of other philosophers.   === Civil society ===  Hegel made the distinction between civil society and state in his Elements of the Philosophy of Right. In this work, civil society (Hegel used the term "bürgerliche Gesellschaft" though it is now referred to as Zivilgesellschaft in German to emphasize a more inclusive community) was a stage in the dialectical relationship that occurs between Hegel's perceived opposites, the macro-community of the state and the micro-community of the family. Broadly speaking, the term was split, like Hegel's followers, to the political left and right. On the left, it became the foundation for Karl Marx's civil society as an economic base; to the right, it became a description for all non-state aspects of society, including culture, society and politics. This liberal distinction between political society and civil society was followed by Alexis de Tocqueville. In fact, Hegel's distinctions as to what he meant by civil society are often unclear. For example, while it seems to be the case that he felt that a civil-society such as the German society in which he lived was an inevitable movement of the dialectic, he made way for the crushing of other types of "lesser" and not fully realized types of civil society, as these societies were not fully conscious or aware, as it were, as to the lack of progress in their societies. Thus, it was perfectly legitimate in the eyes of Hegel for a conqueror, such as Napoleon, to come along and destroy that which was not fully realized.   === Heraclitus === According to Hegel, "Heraclitus is the one who first declared the nature of the infinite and first grasped nature as in itself infinite, that is, its essence as process. The origin of philosophy is to be dated from Heraclitus. His is the persistent Idea that is the same in all philosophers up to the present day, as it was the Idea of Plato and Aristotle." For Hegel, Heraclitus's great achievements were to have understood the nature of the infinite, which for Hegel includes understanding the inherent contradictoriness and negativity of reality, and to have grasped that reality is becoming or process, and that "being" and "nothingness" are mere empty abstractions. According to Hegel, Heraclitus's "obscurity" comes from his being a true (in Hegel's terms "speculative") philosopher who grasped the ultimate philosophical truth and therefore expressed himself in a way that goes beyond the abstract and limited nature of common sense and is difficult to grasp by those who operate within common sense. Hegel asserted that in Heraclitus he had an antecedent for his logic: "... there is no proposition of Heraclitus which I have not adopted in my logic." Hegel cites a number of fragments of Heraclitus in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy. One to which he attributes great significance is the fragment he translates as "Being is not more than Non-being," which he interprets to mean  Sein und Nichts sei dasselbe Being and non-being are the same.  Heraclitus does not form any abstract nouns from his ordinary use of "to be" and "to become" and in that fragment seems to be opposing any identity A to any other identity B, C, etc., which is not-A. Hegel, however, interprets not-A as not existing at all, not nothing at all, which cannot be conceived, but indeterminate or "pure" being without particularity or specificity. Pure being and pure non-being or nothingness are for Hegel pure abstractions from the reality of becoming, and this is also how he interprets Heraclitus. This interpretation of Heraclitus cannot be ruled out, but even if present is not the main gist of his thought. For Hegel, the inner movement of reality is the process of God thinking, as manifested in the evolution of the universe of nature and thought; that is, Hegel argued that, when fully and properly understood, reality is being thought by God as manifested in a person's comprehension of this process in and through philosophy. Since human thought is the image and fulfillment of God's thought, God is not ineffable (so incomprehensible as to be unutterable) but can be understood by an analysis of thought and reality. Just as humans continually correct their concepts of reality through a dialectical process, so God himself becomes more fully manifested through the dialectical process of becoming. For his god Hegel does not take the logos of Heraclitus but refers rather to the nous of Anaxagoras, although he may well have regarded them the same, as he continues to refer to god's plan, which is identical to God. Whatever the nous thinks at any time is actual substance and is identical to limited being, but more remains to be thought in the substrate of non-being, which is identical to pure or unlimited thought. The universe as becoming is therefore a combination of being and non-being. The particular is never complete in itself but to find completion is continually transformed into more comprehensive, complex, self-relating particulars. The essential nature of being-for-itself is that it is free "in itself;" that is, it does not depend on anything else, such as matter, for its being. The limitations represent fetters, which it must constantly be casting off as it becomes freer and more self-determining. Although Hegel began his philosophizing with commentary on the Christian religion and often expresses the view that he is a Christian, his ideas of God are not acceptable to some Christians, although he has had a major influence on 19th- and 20th-century theology. At the same time, an atheistic version of his thought was adopted instead by some Marxists, who, stripping away the concepts of divinity, styled what was left dialectical materialism, which some saw as originating in Heraclitus.   === Religion === As a graduate of a Protestant seminary, Hegel's theological concerns were reflected in many of his writings and lectures. Hegel's thoughts on the person of Jesus Christ stood out from the theologies of the Enlightenment. In his posthumously published, Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Part 3, Hegel is shown as being particularly interested with the demonstrations of God's existence and the ontological proof. He espouses that, "God is not an abstraction but a concrete God ... God, considered in terms of his eternal Idea, has to generate the Son, has to distinguish himself from himself; he is the process of differentiating, namely, love and Spirit." This means that Jesus as the Son of God is posited by God over against himself as other. Hegel sees both a relational unity and a metaphysical unity between Jesus and God the Father. To Hegel, Jesus is both divine and Human. Hegel further attests that God (as Jesus) not only died, but "... rather, a reversal takes place: God, that is to say, maintains himself in the process, and the latter is only the death of death. God rises again to life, and thus things are reversed." Walter Kaufmann has argued that there was great stress on the sharp criticisms of traditional Christianity appearing in Hegel's so-called early theological writings. Kaufmann admits that Hegel treated many distinctively Christian themes, and "sometimes could not resist equating" his conception of spirit (Geist) "with God, instead of saying clearly: in God I do not believe; spirit suffices me." Kaufmann also points out that Hegel's references to God or to the divine—and also to spirit—drew on classical Greek as well as Christian connotations of the terms. Kaufmann goes on:  "In addition to his beloved Greeks, Hegel saw before him the example of Spinoza and, in his own time, the poetry of Goethe, Schiller, and Hölderlin, who also liked to speak of gods and the divine. So he, too, sometimes spoke of God and, more often, of the divine; and because he occasionally took pleasure in insisting that he was really closer to this or that Christian tradition than some of the theologians of his time, he has sometimes been understood to have been a Christian"  According to Hegel himself, his philosophy was consistent with Christianity. This led Hegelian Carl Friedrich Göschel to prepare a treatise to demonstrate the presence of the doctrine of immortality in Hegel's philosophy.   == Works == Hegel published four books during his lifetime: the Phenomenology of Spirit (or Phenomenology of Mind), his account of the evolution of consciousness from sense-perception to absolute knowledge, published in 1807; the Science of Logic, the logical and metaphysical core of his philosophy, in three volumes, published in 1812, 1813, and 1816 (with a revised Book One published in 1831); Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, a summary of his entire philosophical system, which was originally published in 1816 and revised in 1827 and 1830; and the Elements of the Philosophy of Right, his political philosophy, published in 1820. During the last ten years of his life, he did not publish another book but thoroughly revised the Encyclopedia (second edition, 1827; third, 1830). In his political philosophy, he criticized Karl Ludwig von Haller's reactionary work, which claimed that laws were not necessary. He also published some articles early in his career and during his Berlin period. A number of other works on the philosophy of history, religion, aesthetics, and the history of philosophy were compiled from the lecture notes of his students and published posthumously.   == Legacy ==  There are views of Hegel's thought as a representation of the summit of early 19th-century Germany's movement of philosophical idealism. It would come to have a profound impact on many future philosophical schools, including schools that opposed Hegel's specific dialectical idealism, such as Existentialism, the historical materialism of Marx, historism, and British Idealism. Hegel's influence was immense both within philosophy and in the other sciences. Throughout the 19th century many chairs of philosophy around Europe were held by Hegelians, and Søren Kierkegaard, Ludwig Feuerbach, Marx, and Friedrich Engels—among many others—were all deeply influenced by, but also strongly opposed to, many of the central themes of Hegel's philosophy. Scholars continue to find and point out Hegelian influences and approaches in a wide range of theoretical and/or learned works, such as Carl von Clausewitz's magnum opus on strategic thought, On War (1831). After less than a generation, Hegel's philosophy was suppressed and even banned by the Prussian right-wing, and was firmly rejected by the left-wing in multiple official writings. After the period of Bruno Bauer, Hegel's influence did not make itself felt again until the philosophy of British Idealism and the 20th century Hegelian Western Marxism that began with György Lukács. The more recent movement of communitarianism has a strong Hegelian influence.   === Reading Hegel === Some of Hegel's writing were intended for those with advanced knowledge of philosophy, although his Encyclopedia was intended as a textbook in a university course. Nevertheless, Hegel assumes that his readers are well-versed in Western philosophy. Especially crucial are Aristotle, Kant, and Kant's immediate successors, most prominently Fichte, and Schelling. Those without this background would be well-advised to begin with one of the many general introductions to his thought. As is always the case, difficulties are magnified for those reading him in translation. In fact, Hegel himself argues in his Science of Logic that the German language was particularly conducive to philosophical thought. One especially difficult aspect of Hegel's work is his innovation in logic. In response to Immanuel Kant's challenge to the limits of pure reason, Hegel develops a radically new form of logic, which he called speculative. The difficulty in reading Hegel was perceived in Hegel's own day, and persists into the 21st century. To understand Hegel fully requires paying attention to his critique of standard logic, such as the law of contradiction and the law of the excluded middle. Many philosophers who came after Hegel and were influenced by him, whether adopting or rejecting his ideas, did so without fully absorbing his new speculative or dialectical logic. According to Walter Kaufmann, the basic idea of Hegel's works, especially the Phenomenology of the Spirit is that a philosopher should not "confine him or herself to views that have been held but penetrate these to the human reality they reflect." In other words, it is not enough to consider propositions, or even the content of consciousness; "it is worthwhile to ask in every instance what kind of spirit would entertain such propositions, hold such views, and have such a consciousness. Every outlook in other words, is to be studied not merely as an academic possibility but as an existential reality."   === Left and Right Hegelianism === Some historians have spoken of Hegel's influence as represented by two opposing camps. The Right Hegelians, the allegedly direct disciples of Hegel at the Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, advocated a Protestant orthodoxy and the political conservatism of the post-Napoleon Restoration period. The Left Hegelians, also known as the Young Hegelians, interpreted Hegel in a revolutionary sense, leading to an advocation of atheism in religion and liberal democracy in politics. In more recent studies, however, this paradigm has been questioned. No Hegelians of the period ever referred to themselves as "Right Hegelians;" that was a term of insult originated by David Strauss, a self-styled Left Hegelian. Critiques of Hegel offered from the Left Hegelians radically diverted Hegel's thinking into new directions and eventually came to form a disproportionately large part of the literature on and about Hegel. The Left Hegelians also spawned Marxism, which inspired global movements, encompassing the Russian Revolution, the Chinese Revolution, and myriad revolutionary practices up until the present moment. Twentieth-century interpretations of Hegel were mostly shaped by British Idealism, logical positivism, Marxism, and Fascism. The Italian Fascist Giovanni Gentile, according to Benedetto Croce, "... holds the honor of having been the most rigorous neo-Hegelian in the entire history of Western philosophy and the dishonor of having been the official philosopher of Fascism in Italy." However, since the fall of the USSR, a new wave of Hegel scholarship arose in the West, without the preconceptions of the prior schools of thought. Walter Jaeschke and Otto Pöggeler in Germany, as well as Peter Hodgson and Howard Kainz in America are notable for their recent contributions to post-USSR thinking about Hegel.   === Triads ===  In previous modern accounts of Hegelianism (to undergraduate classes, for example), especially those formed prior to the Hegel renaissance, Hegel's dialectic was most often characterized as a three-step process, "thesis, antithesis, synthesis;" namely, that a "thesis" (e.g. the French Revolution) would cause the creation of its "antithesis" (e.g. the Reign of Terror that followed), and would eventually result in a "synthesis" (e.g. the constitutional state of free citizens). However, Hegel used this classification only once, and he attributed the terminology to Kant. The terminology was largely developed earlier by Fichte. It was spread by Heinrich Moritz Chalybäus in accounts of Hegelian philosophy, and since then the terms have been used as descriptive of this type of framework. The "thesis-antithesis-synthesis" approach gives the sense that things or ideas are contradicted or opposed by things that come from outside them. To the contrary, the fundamental notion of Hegel's dialectic is that things or ideas have internal contradictions. From Hegel's point of view, analysis or comprehension of a thing or idea reveals that underneath its apparently simple identity or unity is an underlying inner contradiction. This contradiction leads to the dissolution of the thing or idea in the simple form in which it presented itself and to a higher-level, more complex thing or idea that more adequately incorporates the contradiction. The triadic form that appears in many places in Hegel (e.g. being-nothingness-becoming, immediate-mediate-concrete, abstract-negative-concrete) is about this movement from inner contradiction to higher-level integration or unification. For Hegel, reason is but "speculative," not "dialectical." Believing that the traditional description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of thesis-antithesis-synthesis was mistaken, a few scholars, like Raya Dunayevskaya, have attempted to discard the triadic approach altogether. According to their argument, although Hegel refers to "the two elemental considerations: first, the idea of freedom as the absolute and final aim; secondly, the means for realising it, i.e. the subjective side of knowledge and will, with its life, movement, and activity" (thesis and antithesis) he doesn't use "synthesis" but instead speaks of the "Whole": "We then recognised the State as the moral Whole and the Reality of Freedom, and consequently as the objective unity of these two elements." Furthermore, in Hegel's language, the "dialectical" aspect or "moment" of thought and reality, by which things or thoughts turn into their opposites or have their inner contradictions brought to the surface, what he called "Aufhebung," is only preliminary to the "speculative" (and not "synthesizing") aspect or "moment," which grasps the unity of these opposites or contradiction. It is widely admitted today that the old-fashioned description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of "thesis-antithesis-synthesis" is inaccurate. Nevertheless, such is the persistence of this misnomer that the model and terminology survive in a number of scholarly works.   === Renaissance === In the last half of the 20th century, Hegel's philosophy underwent a major renaissance. This was due to (a) the rediscovery and reevaluation of Hegel as a possible philosophical progenitor of Marxism by philosophically oriented Marxists, (b) a resurgence of the historical perspective that Hegel brought to everything, and (c) an increasing recognition of the importance of his dialectical method. Lukács' History and Class Consciousness (1923) helped to reintroduce Hegel into the Marxist canon. This sparked a renewed interest in Hegel reflected in the work of Herbert Marcuse, Adorno, Ernst Bloch, Dunayevskaya, Alexandre Kojève and Gotthard Günther among others. Marcuse, in Reason and Revolution (1941), made the case for Hegel as a revolutionary and criticized Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse's thesis that Hegel was a totalitarian. The Hegel renaissance also highlighted the significance of Hegel's early works, i.e., those written before the Phenomenology of Spirit. The direct and indirect influence of Kojève's lectures and writings (on the Phenomenology of Spirit, in particular) mean that it is not possible to understand most French philosophers from Jean-Paul Sartre to Jacques Derrida without understanding Hegel. U.S. neoconservative political theorist Francis Fukuyama's controversial book The End of History and the Last Man (1992) was heavily influenced by Kojève. The Swiss theologian Hans Küng has also advanced contemporary scholarship in Hegel studies. Beginning in the 1960s, Anglo-American Hegel scholarship has attempted to challenge the traditional interpretation of Hegel as offering a metaphysical system: this has also been the approach of Z.A. Pelczynski and Shlomo Avineri. This view, sometimes referred to as the 'non-metaphysical option', has had a decided influence on many major English language studies of Hegel in the past 40 years. Late 20th-century literature in Western Theology that is friendly to Hegel includes works by such writers as Walter Kaufmann (1966), Dale M. Schlitt (1984), Theodore Geraets (1985), Philip M. Merklinger (1991), Stephen Rocker (1995), and Cyril O'Regan (1995). Recently, two prominent American philosophers, John McDowell and Robert Brandom (sometimes referred to as the Pittsburgh Hegelians), have produced philosophical works exhibiting a marked Hegelian influence. Each is avowedly influenced by the late Wilfred Sellars, also of Pittsburgh, who referred to his seminal work, Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind (1956) as a series of "incipient Méditations Hegeliennes" (in homage to Edmund Husserl's 1931 treatise, Meditations Cartesiennes). Beginning in the 1990s, after the fall of the USSR, a fresh reading of Hegel took place in the West. For these scholars, fairly well represented by the Hegel Society of America and in cooperation with German scholars such as Otto Pöggeler and Walter Jaeschke, Hegel's works should be read without preconceptions. Marx plays little-to-no role in these new readings. Some American philosophers associated with this movement include Lawrence Stepelevich, Rudolf Siebert, Richard Dien Winfield, and Theodore Geraets.   === Criticism === Criticism of Hegel has been widespread in the 19th and the 20th centuries; a diverse range of individuals including Arthur Schopenhauer, Marx, Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Bertrand Russell, G. E. Moore, Eric Voegelin and A. J. Ayer have challenged Hegelian philosophy from a variety of perspectives. Among the first to take a critical view of Hegel's system was the 19th Century German group known as the Young Hegelians, which included Feuerbach, Marx, Engels, and their followers. In Britain, the Hegelian British Idealism school (members of which included Francis Herbert Bradley, Bernard Bosanquet, and, in the United States, Josiah Royce) was challenged and rejected by analytic philosophers Moore and Russell; Russell, in particular, considered "almost all" of Hegel's doctrines to be false. Regarding Hegel's interpretation of history, Russell commented, "Like other historical theories, it required, if it was to be made plausible, some distortion of facts and considerable ignorance." Logical positivists such as Ayer and the Vienna Circle criticized both Hegelian philosophy and its supporters, such as Bradley. Hegel's contemporary Schopenhauer was particularly critical, and wrote of Hegel's philosophy as "a pseudo-philosophy paralyzing all mental powers, stifling all real thinking." Kierkegaard criticized Hegel's 'absolute knowledge' unity. Scientist Ludwig Boltzmann also criticized the obscure complexity of Hegel's works, referring to Hegel's writing as an "unclear thoughtless flow of words." In a similar vein, Robert Pippin wrote that Hegel had "the ugliest prose style in the history of the German language." Russell stated in his Unpopular Essays (1950) and A History of Western Philosophy (1945) that Hegel was "the hardest to understand of all the great philosophers." Karl Popper wrote that "there is so much philosophical writing (especially in the Hegelian school) which may justly be criticized as meaningless verbiage." Popper also makes the claim in the second volume of The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) that Hegel's system formed a thinly veiled justification for the absolute rule of Frederick William III, and that Hegel's idea of the ultimate goal of history was to reach a state approximating that of 1830s Prussia. Popper further proposed that Hegel's philosophy served not only as an inspiration for communist and fascist totalitarian governments of the 20th century, whose dialectics allow for any belief to be construed as rational simply if it could be said to exist. Scholars such as Kaufmann and Shlomo Avineri have criticized Popper's theories about Hegel. Isaiah Berlin listed Hegel as one of the six architects of modern authoritarianism who undermined liberal democracy, along with Rousseau, Claude Adrien Helvétius, Fichte, Saint-Simon, and Joseph de Maistre. Walter Kaufmann has argued that as unlikely as it may sound, it is not the case that Hegel was unable to write clearly, but that Hegel felt that "he must and should not write in the way in which he was gifted." Voegelin argued that Hegel should be understood not as a philosopher, but as a "sorcerer" -- i.e., as a mystic and Hermetic thinker. This concept of Hegel as a Hermetic thinker was elaborated by Glenn Alexander Magee who argued that interpreting Hegel's body of work as an expression of mysticism and Hermetic ideas leads to a more accurate understanding of Hegel.   == Selected works ==   === Published during Hegel's lifetime === Differenz des Fichteschen und Schellingschen Systems der Philosophie, 1801 The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy, tr. H. S. Harris and Walter Cerf, 1977 Phänomenologie des Geistes, 1807 Phenomenology of Mind, tr. J. B. Baillie, 1910; 2nd ed. 1931 Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, tr. A. V. Miller, 1977 Phenomenology of Spirit, translated by Terry Pinkard, 2012 Wissenschaft der Logik, 1812, 1813, 1816, "Doctrine of Being" revised 1831 Science of Logic, tr. W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers, 2 vols., 1929; tr. A. V. Miller, 1969; tr. George di Giovanni, 2010 Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften, 1817; 2nd ed. 1827; 3rd ed. 1830 (Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences) (Pt. I:) The Logic of Hegel, tr. William Wallace, 1874, 2nd ed. 1892; tr. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting and H. S. Harris, 1991; tr. Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel O. Dahlstrom 2010 (Pt. II:) Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, tr. A. V. Miller, 1970 (Pt. III:) Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, tr. William Wallace, 1894; rev. by A. V. Miller, 1971; rev. 2007 by Michael Inwood Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, 1821 Elements of the Philosophy of Right, tr. T. M. Knox, 1942; tr. H. B. Nisbet, ed. Allen W. Wood, 1991   === Published posthumously === Lectures on Aesthetics Lectures on the Philosophy of History (also translated as Lectures on the Philosophy of World History) 1837 Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Lectures on the History of Philosophy   == See also ==   == Notes ==   == Further reading == The secondary literature on Hegel is vast. The following references provide only a small selection of introductory English-language texts. (For a more complete listing, see the External links section or the Library resources box to the right.)   == External links == Andrew Chitty's (University of Sussex) Hegel Bibliography « Der Instinkt der Vernünftigkeit » and other texts - Works on Hegel in Université du Québec site (in French) Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Hegel, as the National Philosopher of Germany (1874) Karl Rosenkranz, Granville Stanley Hall, William Torrey Harris, Gray, Baker & Co. 1874 Hegel page in 'The History Guide' Hegel.net - freely available resources (under the GNU FDL) Hegel's Aesthetics entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Lowenberg J., (1913) "The Life of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel". in German classics of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. New York: German Publication Society.   === Audio === Works by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)    === Video === Hegel: The First Cultural Psychologist 2007 from Vimeo Andy Blunden   === Societies === The Hegel Society of America The Hegel Society of Great Britain   === Hegel texts online === Works by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at Internet Archive Philosophy of History Introduction Hegel's The Philosophy of Right Hegel's The Philosophy of History Hegel by HyperText, reference archive on Marxists.org Phenomenology of Spirit. translated by Terry Pinkard (2012)

George Boole (/ˈbuːl/; 2 November 1815 – 8 December 1864) was an English mathematician, educator, philosopher and logician. He worked in the fields of differential equations and algebraic logic, and is best known as the author of The Laws of Thought (1854) which contains Boolean algebra. Boolean logic is credited with laying the foundations for the information age. Boole maintained that:  No general method for the solution of questions in the theory of probabilities can be established which does not explicitly recognise, not only the special numerical bases of the science, but also those universal laws of thought which are the basis of all reasoning, and which, whatever they may be as to their essence, are at least mathematical as to their form.   == Early lifeEdit ==  Boole was born in Lincoln, Lincolnshire, England, the son of John Boole (1779–1848), a shoemaker and Mary Ann Joyce. He had a primary school education, and received lessons from his father, but had little further formal and academic teaching. William Brooke, a bookseller in Lincoln, may have helped him with Latin, which he may also have learned at the school of Thomas Bainbridge. He was self-taught in modern languages. At age 16 Boole became the breadwinner for his parents and three younger siblings, taking up a junior teaching position in Doncaster at Heigham's School. He taught briefly in Liverpool. Boole participated in the local Mechanics Institute, the Lincoln Mechanics' Institution, which was founded in 1833. Edward Bromhead, who knew John Boole through the institution, helped George Boole with mathematics books and he was given the calculus text of Sylvestre François Lacroix by the Rev. George Stevens Dickson of St Swithin's Lincoln. Without a teacher, it took him many years to master calculus. At age 19, Boole successfully established his own school in Lincoln. Four years later he took over Hall's Academy in Waddington, outside Lincoln, following the death of Robert Hall. In 1840 he moved back to Lincoln, where he ran a boarding school. Boole became a prominent local figure, an admirer of John Kaye, the bishop. He took part in the local campaign for early closing. With E. R. Larken and others he set up a building society in 1847. He associated also with the Chartist Thomas Cooper, whose wife was a relation.  From 1838 onwards Boole was making contacts with sympathetic British academic mathematicians and reading more widely. He studied algebra in the form of symbolic methods, as these were understood at the time, and began to publish research papers.   == Professor at CorkEdit ==  Boole's status as mathematician was recognised by his appointment in 1849 as the first professor of mathematics at Queen's College, Cork (now University College Cork (UCC)) in Ireland. He met his future wife, Mary Everest, there in 1850 while she was visiting her uncle John Ryall who was Professor of Greek. They married some years later in 1855. He maintained his ties with Lincoln, working there with E. R. Larken in a campaign to reduce prostitution.   == Honours and awardsEdit == Boole was awarded the Keith Medal by the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1855  and was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1857. He received honorary degrees of LL.D. from the University of Dublin and the University of Oxford.   == DeathEdit == In late November 1864, Boole walked, in heavy rain, from his home at Lichfield Cottage in Ballintemple to the university, a distance of three miles, and lectured wearing his wet clothes. He soon became ill, developing a severe cold and high fever. As his wife believed that remedies should resemble their cause, she put her husband to bed and poured buckets of water over him – the wet having brought on his illness. Boole's condition worsened and on 8 December 1864, he died of fever-induced pleural effusion. He was buried in the Church of Ireland cemetery of St Michael's, Church Road, Blackrock (a suburb of Cork). There is a commemorative plaque inside the adjoining church.   == WorksEdit == Boole's first published paper was Researches in the theory of analytical transformations, with a special application to the reduction of the general equation of the second order, printed in the Cambridge Mathematical Journal in February 1840 (Volume 2, no. 8, pp. 64–73), and it led to a friendship between Boole and Duncan Farquharson Gregory, the editor of the journal. His works are in about 50 articles and a few separate publications. In 1841 Boole published an influential paper in early invariant theory. He received a medal from the Royal Society for his memoir of 1844, On A General Method of Analysis. It was a contribution to the theory of linear differential equations, moving from the case of constant coefficients on which he had already published, to variable coefficients. The innovation in operational methods is to admit that operations may not commute. In 1847 Boole published The Mathematical Analysis of Logic , the first of his works on symbolic logic.   === Differential equationsEdit === Boole completed two systematic treatises on mathematical subjects during his lifetime. The Treatise on Differential Equations appeared in 1859, and was followed, the next year, by a Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences, a sequel to the former work.   === AnalysisEdit === In 1857, Boole published the treatise On the Comparison of Transcendents, with Certain Applications to the Theory of Definite Integrals, in which he studied the sum of residues of a rational function. Among other results, he proved what is now called Boole's identity:  for any real numbers ak > 0, bk, and t > 0. Generalisations of this identity play an important role in the theory of the Hilbert transform.   === Symbolic logicEdit ===  In 1847 Boole published the pamphlet Mathematical Analysis of Logic. He later regarded it as a flawed exposition of his logical system, and wanted An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities to be seen as the mature statement of his views. Contrary to widespread belief, Boole never intended to criticise or disagree with the main principles of Aristotle's logic. Rather he intended to systematise it, to provide it with a foundation, and to extend its range of applicability. Boole's initial involvement in logic was prompted by a current debate on quantification, between Sir William Hamilton who supported the theory of "quantification of the predicate", and Boole's supporter Augustus De Morgan who advanced a version of De Morgan duality, as it is now called. Boole's approach was ultimately much further reaching than either sides' in the controversy. It founded what was first known as the "algebra of logic" tradition. Among his many innovations is his principle of wholistic reference, which was later, and probably independently, adopted by Gottlob Frege and by logicians who subscribe to standard first-order logic. A 2003 article provides a systematic comparison and critical evaluation of Aristotelian logic and Boolean logic; it also reveals the centrality of wholistic reference in Boole's philosophy of logic.   ==== Boole's 1854 definition of universe of discourseEdit ==== In every discourse, whether of the mind conversing with its own thoughts, or of the individual in his intercourse with others, there is an assumed or expressed limit within which the subjects of its operation are confined. The most unfettered discourse is that in which the words we use are understood in the widest possible application, and for them the limits of discourse are co-extensive with those of the universe itself. But more usually we confine ourselves to a less spacious field. Sometimes, in discoursing of men we imply (without expressing the limitation) that it is of men only under certain circumstances and conditions that we speak, as of civilised men, or of men in the vigour of life, or of men under some other condition or relation. Now, whatever may be the extent of the field within which all the objects of our discourse are found, that field may properly be termed the universe of discourse. Furthermore, this universe of discourse is in the strictest sense the ultimate subject of the discourse.   ==== Treatment of addition in logicEdit ==== Boole conceived of "elective symbols" of his kind as an algebraic structure. But this general concept was not available to him: he did not have the segregation standard in abstract algebra of postulated (axiomatic) properties of operations, and deduced properties. His work was a beginning to the algebra of sets, again not a concept available to Boole as a familiar model. His pioneering efforts encountered specific difficulties, and the treatment of addition was an obvious difficulty in the early days. Boole replaced the operation of multiplication by the word 'and' and addition by the word 'or'. But in Boole's original system, + was a partial operation: in the language of set theory it would correspond only to disjoint union of subsets. Later authors changed the interpretation, commonly reading it as exclusive or, or in set theory terms symmetric difference; this step means that addition is always defined. In fact there is the other possibility, that + should be read as disjunction, This other possibility extends from the disjoint union case, where exclusive or and non-exclusive or both give the same answer. Handling this ambiguity was an early problem of the theory, reflecting the modern use of both Boolean rings and Boolean algebras (which are simply different aspects of one type of structure). Boole and Jevons struggled over just this issue in 1863, in the form of the correct evaluation of x + x. Jevons argued for the result x, which is correct for + as disjunction. Boole kept the result as something undefined. He argued against the result 0, which is correct for exclusive or, because he saw the equation x + x = 0 as implying x = 0, a false analogy with ordinary algebra.   === Probability theoryEdit === The second part of the Laws of Thought contained a corresponding attempt to discover a general method in probabilities. Here the goal was algorithmic: from the given probabilities of any system of events, to determine the consequent probability of any other event logically connected with those events.   == LegacyEdit == Boolean algebra is named after him, as is the crater Boole on the Moon. The keyword Bool represents a Boolean datatype in many programming languages, though Pascal and Java, among others, both use the full name Boolean. The library, underground lecture theatre complex and the Boole Centre for Research in Informatics at University College Cork are named in his honour. A road called Boole Heights in Bracknell, Berkshire is named after him.   === 19th-century developmentEdit === Boole's work was extended and refined by a number of writers, beginning with William Stanley Jevons. Augustus De Morgan had worked on the logic of relations, and Charles Sanders Peirce integrated his work with Boole's during the 1870s. Other significant figures were Platon Sergeevich Poretskii, and William Ernest Johnson. The conception of a Boolean algebra structure on equivalent statements of a propositional calculus is credited to Hugh MacColl (1877), in work surveyed 15 years later by Johnson. Surveys of these developments were published by Ernst Schröder, Louis Couturat, and Clarence Irving Lewis.   === 20th-century developmentEdit ===  In 1921 the economist John Maynard Keynes published a book on probability theory, A Treatise of Probability. Keynes believed that Boole had made a fundamental error in his definition of independence which vitiated much of his analysis. In his book The Last Challenge Problem, David Miller provides a general method in accord with Boole's system and attempts to solve the problems recognised earlier by Keynes and others. Theodore Hailperin showed much earlier that Boole had used the correct mathematical definition of independence in his worked out problems  Boole's work and that of later logicians initially appeared to have no engineering uses. Claude Shannon attended a philosophy class at the University of Michigan which introduced him to Boole's studies. Shannon recognised that Boole's work could form the basis of mechanisms and processes in the real world and that it was therefore highly relevant. In 1937 Shannon went on to write a master's thesis, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in which he showed how Boolean algebra could optimise the design of systems of electromechanical relays then used in telephone routing switches. He also proved that circuits with relays could solve Boolean algebra problems. Employing the properties of electrical switches to process logic is the basic concept that underlies all modern electronic digital computers. Victor Shestakov at Moscow State University (1907–1987) proposed a theory of electric switches based on Boolean logic even earlier than Claude Shannon in 1935 on the testimony of Soviet logicians and mathematicians Sofya Yanovskaya, Gaaze-Rapoport, Roland Dobrushin, Lupanov, Medvedev and Uspensky, though they presented their academic theses in the same year, 1938. But the first publication of Shestakov's result took place only in 1941 (in Russian). Hence, Boolean algebra became the foundation of practical digital circuit design; and Boole, via Shannon and Shestakov, provided the theoretical grounding for the Information Age.   === 21st-century celebrationEdit ===  2015 sees the 200th anniversary of George Boole's birth, in 1815. To mark the bicentenary year, University College Cork will join admirers of Boole around the world to celebrate his life and legacy. UCC's George Boole 200 project, features events, student outreach activities and academic conferences on Boole's legacy in the digital age, including a new edition of Desmond MacHale's 1985 biography The Life and Work of George Boole: A Prelude to the Digital Age (Cork University Press, 2014). The search engine Google marked the 200th anniversary of his birth on 2 November 2015 with an algebraic reimaging of its Google Doodle.   == ViewsEdit == Boole's views were given in four published addresses: The Genius of Sir Isaac Newton; The Right Use of Leisure; The Claims of Science; and The Social Aspect of Intellectual Culture. The first of these was from 1835, when Charles Anderson-Pelham, 1st Earl of Yarborough gave a bust of Newton to the Mechanics' Institute in Lincoln. The second justified and celebrated in 1847 the outcome of the successful campaign for early closing in Lincoln, headed by Alexander Leslie-Melville, of Branston Hall. The Claims of Science was given in 1851 at Queen's College, Cork. The Social Aspect of Intellectual Culture was also given in Cork, in 1855 to the Cuvierian Society. Though his biographer Des MacHale describes Boole as an "agnostic deist", Boole read a wide variety of Christian theology. Combining his interests in mathematics and theology, he compared the Christian trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost with the three dimensions of space, and was attracted to the Hebrew conception of God as an absolute unity. Boole considered converting to Judaism but in the end was said to have chosen Unitarianism. Boole came to speak against a what he saw as "prideful" scepticism, and instead, favoured the belief in a "Supreme Intelligent Cause", He also declared "I firmly believe, for the accomplishment of a purpose of the Divine Mind." In addition, he stated that he perceived "teeming evidences of surrounding design" and concluded that "the course of this world is not abandoned to chance and inexorable fate." Two influences on Boole were later claimed by his wife, Mary Everest Boole: a universal mysticism tempered by Jewish thought, and Indian logic. Mary Boole stated that an adolescent mystical experience provided for his life's work:  My husband told me that when he was a lad of seventeen a thought struck him suddenly, which became the foundation of all his future discoveries. It was a flash of psychological insight into the conditions under which a mind most readily accumulates knowledge [...] For a few years he supposed himself to be convinced of the truth of "the Bible" as a whole, and even intended to take orders as a clergyman of the English Church. But by the help of a learned Jew in Lincoln he found out the true nature of the discovery which had dawned on him. This was that man's mind works by means of some mechanism which "functions normally towards Monism."  In Ch. 13 of Laws of Thought Boole used examples of propositions from Baruch Spinoza and Samuel Clarke. The work contains some remarks on the relationship of logic to religion, but they are slight and cryptic. Boole was apparently disconcerted at the book's reception just as a mathematical toolset:  George afterwards learned, to his great joy, that the same conception of the basis of Logic was held by Leibnitz, the contemporary of Newton. De Morgan, of course, understood the formula in its true sense; he was Boole's collaborator all along. Herbert Spencer, Jowett, and Robert Leslie Ellis understood, I feel sure; and a few others, but nearly all the logicians and mathematicians ignored [953] the statement that the book was meant to throw light on the nature of the human mind; and treated the formula entirely as a wonderful new method of reducing to logical order masses of evidence about external fact.  Mary Boole claimed that there was profound influence — via her uncle George Everest — of Indian thought on George Boole, as well as on Augustus De Morgan and Charles Babbage:  Think what must have been the effect of the intense Hinduizing of three such men as Babbage, De Morgan, and George Boole on the mathematical atmosphere of 1830–65. What share had it in generating the Vector Analysis and the mathematics by which investigations in physical science are now conducted?   == FamilyEdit == In 1855 he married Mary Everest (niece of George Everest), who later wrote several educational works on her husband's principles. The Booles had five daughters: Mary Lucy Margret (1856–1908) who married the mathematician and author Charles Howard Hinton and had four children: George (1882–1943), Eric (*1884), William (1886–1909) and Sebastian (1887–1923) inventor of the Jungle gym. Sebastian had three children: Jean Hinton (married name Rosner) (1917–2002) peace activist. William H. Hinton (1919–2004) visited China in the 1930s and 40s and wrote an influential account of the Communist land reform. Joan Hinton (1921–2010) worked for the Manhattan Project and lived in China from 1948 until her death on 8 June 2010; she was married to Sid Engst.  Margaret, (1858 – 1935) married Edward Ingram Taylor, an artist. Their elder son Geoffrey Ingram Taylor became a mathematician and a Fellow of the Royal Society. Their younger son Julian was a professor of surgery.  Alicia (1860–1940), who made important contributions to four-dimensional geometry Lucy Everest (1862–1904), who was first female professor of chemistry in England Ethel Lilian (1864–1960), who married the Polish scientist and revolutionary Wilfrid Michael Voynich and was the author of the novel The Gadfly.   == See alsoEdit ==  Boolean algebra, a logical calculus of truth values or set membership Boolean algebra (structure), a set with operations resembling logical ones Boolean circuit, a mathematical model for digital logical circuits. Boolean data type is a data type, having two values (usually denoted true and false) Boolean expression, an expression in a programming language that produces a Boolean value when evaluated Boolean function, a function that determines Boolean values or operators Boolean model (probability theory), a model in stochastic geometry Boolean network, a certain network consisting of a set of Boolean variables whose state is determined by other variables in the network Boolean processor, a 1-bit variables computing unit Boolean satisfiability problem Boole's syllogistic is a logic invented by 19th-century British mathematician George Boole, which attempts to incorporate the "empty set." List of Boolean algebra topics   == ReferencesEdit ==   == NotesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Roger Parsons' article on Boole George Boole: A 200-Year View by Stephen Wolfram. Works by George Boole at Project Gutenberg Works by or about George Boole at Internet Archive George Boole's work as first Professor of Mathematics in University College, Cork, Ireland George Boole Website Author profile in the database zbMATH

George Stephen Boolos (September 4, 1940 – May 27, 1996) was an American philosopher and a mathematical logician who taught at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   == LifeEdit == Boolos graduated from Princeton University in 1961 with an A.B. in mathematics. Oxford University awarded him the B.Phil in 1963. In 1966, he obtained the first Ph.D. in philosophy ever awarded by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, under the direction of Hilary Putnam. After teaching three years at Columbia University, he returned to MIT in 1969, where he spent the rest of his career until his death from cancer. A charismatic speaker well known for his clarity and wit, he once delivered a lecture (1994b) giving an account of Gödel's second incompleteness theorem, employing only words of one syllable. At the end of his viva, Hilary Putnam asked him, "And tell us, Mr. Boolos, what does the analytical hierarchy have to do with the real world?" Without hesitating Boolos replied, "It's part of it". An expert on puzzles of all kinds, in 1993 Boolos reached the London Regional Final of The Times crossword competition. His score was one of the highest ever recorded by an American. He wrote a paper on "the hardest logic puzzle ever"—one of many puzzles created by Raymond Smullyan.   == WorkEdit == Boolos coauthored with Richard Jeffrey the first three editions of the classic university text on mathematical logic, Computability and Logic. The book is now in its fifth edition, the last two editions updated by John P. Burgess. Kurt Gödel wrote the first paper on provability logic, which applies modal logic—the logic of necessity and possibility—to the theory of mathematical proof, but Gödel never developed the subject to any significant extent. Boolos was one of its earliest proponents and pioneers, and he produced the first book-length treatment of it, The Unprovability of Consistency, published in 1979. The solution of a major unsolved problem some years later led to a new treatment, The Logic of Provability, published in 1993. The modal-logical treatment of provability helped demonstrate the "intensionality" of Gödel's Second Incompleteness Theorem, meaning that the theorem's correctness depends on the precise formulation of the provability predicate. These conditions were first identified by David Hilbert and Paul Bernays in their Grundlagen der Arithmetik. The unclear status of the Second Theorem was noted for several decades by logicians such as Georg Kreisel and Leon Henkin, who asked whether the formal sentence expressing "This sentence is provable" (as opposed to the Gödel sentence, "This sentence is not provable") was provable and hence true. Martin Löb showed Henkin's conjecture to be true, as well as identifying an important "reflection" principle also neatly codified using the modal logical approach. Some of the key provability results involving the representation of provability predicates had been obtained earlier using very different methods by Solomon Feferman. Boolos was an authority on the 19th-century German mathematician and philosopher Gottlob Frege. Boolos proved a conjecture due to Crispin Wright (and also proved, independently, by others), that the system of Frege's Grundgesetze, long thought vitiated by Russell's paradox, could be freed of inconsistency by replacing one of its axioms, the notorious Basic Law V with Hume's Principle. The resulting system has since been the subject of intense work. Boolos argued that if one reads the second-order variables in monadic second-order logic plurally, then second-order logic can be interpreted as having no ontological commitment to entities other than those over which the first-order variables range. The result is plural quantification. David Lewis employed plural quantification in his Parts of Classes to derive a system in which Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory and the Peano axioms were all theorems. While Boolos is usually credited with plural quantification, Peter Simons (1982) has argued that the essential idea can be found in the work of Stanislaw Leśniewski. Shortly before his death, Boolos chose 30 of his papers to be published in a book. The result is perhaps his most highly regarded work, his posthumous Logic, Logic, and Logic. This book reprints much of Boolos's work on the rehabilitation of Frege, as well as a number of his papers on set theory, second-order logic and nonfirstorderizability, plural quantification, proof theory, and three short insightful papers on Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem. There are also papers on Dedekind, Cantor, and Russell.   == PublicationsEdit ==   === BooksEdit === 1979. The Unprovability of Consistency: An Essay in Modal Logic. Cambridge University Press. 1990 (editor). Meaning and Method: Essays in Honor of Hilary Putnam. Cambridge University Press. 1993. The Logic of Provability. Cambridge University Press. 1998 (Richard Jeffrey and John P. Burgess, eds.). Logic, Logic, and Logic. Harvard University Press. 2007 (1974) (with Richard Jeffrey and John P. Burgess). Computability and Logic, 4th ed. Cambridge University Press.   === ArticlesEdit === LLL = reprinted in Logic, Logic, and Logic. FPM = reprinted in Demopoulos, W., ed., 1995. Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard Univ. Press. 1968 (with Hilary Putnam), "Degrees of unsolvability of constructible sets of integers," Journal of Symbolic Logic 33: 497-513. 1969, "Effectiveness and natural languages" in Sidney Hook, ed., Language and Philosophy. New York University Press. 1970, "On the semantics of the constructible levels," ' 16: 139-148. 1970a, "A proof of the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 11: 76-78. 1971, "The iterative conception of set," Journal of Philosophy 68: 215-231. Reprinted in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam, eds.,1984. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, 2nd ed. Cambridge Univ. Press: 486-502. LLL 1973, "A note on Evert Willem Beth's theorem," Bulletin de l'Academie Polonaise des Sciences 2: 1-2. 1974, "Arithmetical functions and minimization," Zeitschrift für mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 20: 353-354. 1974a, "Reply to Charles Parsons' 'Sets and classes'." First published in LLL. 1975, "Friedman's 35th problem has an affirmative solution," Notices of the American Mathematical Society 22: A-646. 1975a, "On Kalmar's consistency proof and a generalization of the notion of omega-consistency," Archiv für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 17: 3-7. 1975b, "On second-order logic," Journal of Philosophy 72: 509-527. LLL. 1976, "On deciding the truth of certain statements involving the notion of consistency," Journal of Symbolic Logic 41: 779-781. 1977, "On deciding the provability of certain fixed point statements," Journal of Symbolic Logic 42: 191-193. 1979, "Reflection principles and iterated consistency assertions," Journal of Symbolic Logic 44: 33-35. 1980, "Omega-consistency and the diamond," Studia Logica 39: 237-243. 1980a, "On systems of modal logic with provability interpretations," Theoria 46: 7-18. 1980b, "Provability in arithmetic and a schema of Grzegorczyk," Fundamenta Mathematicae 106: 41-45. 1980c, "Provability, truth, and modal logic," Journal of Philosophical Logic 9: 1-7. 1980d, Review of Raymond M. Smullyan, What is the Name of This Book? The Philosophical Review 89: 467-470. 1981, "For every A there is a B," Linguistic Inquiry 12: 465-466. 1981a, Review of Robert M. Solovay, Provability Interpretations of Modal Logic," Journal of Symbolic Logic 46: 661-662. 1982, "Extremely undecidable sentences," Journal of Symbolic Logic 47: 191-196. 1982a, "On the nonexistence of certain normal forms in the logic of provability," Journal of Symbolic Logic 47: 638-640. 1984, "Don't eliminate cut," Journal of Philosophical Logic 13: 373-378. LLL. 1984a, "The logic of provability," American Mathematical Monthly 91: 470-480. 1984b, "Nonfirstorderizability again," Linguistic Inquiry 15: 343. 1984c, "On 'Syllogistic inference'," Cognition 17: 181-182. 1984d, "To be is to be the value of a variable (or some values of some variables)," Journal of Philosophy 81: 430-450. LLL. 1984e, "Trees and finite satisfiability: Proof of a conjecture of John Burgess," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 25: 193-197. 1984f, "The justification of mathematical induction," PSA 2: 469-475. LLL. 1985, "1-consistency and the diamond," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 26: 341-347. 1985a, "Nominalist Platonism," The Philosophical Review 94: 327-344. LLL. 1985b, "Reading the Begriffsschrift," Mind 94: 331-344. LLL; FPM: 163-81. 1985c (with Giovanni Sambin), "An incomplete system of modal logic," Journal of Philosophical Logic 14: 351-358. 1986, Review of Yuri Manin, A Course in Mathematical Logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 829-830. 1986-87, "Saving Frege from contradiction," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 87: 137-151. LLL; FPM 438-52. 1987, "The consistency of Frege's Foundations of Arithmetic" in J. J. Thomson, ed., 1987. On Being and Saying: Essays for Richard Cartwright. MIT Press: 3-20. LLL; FPM: 211-233. 1987a, "A curious inference," Journal of Philosophical Logic 16: 1-12. LLL. 1987b, "On notions of provability in provability logic," Abstracts of the 8th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science 5: 236-238. 1987c (with Vann McGee), "The degree of the set of sentences of predicate provability logic that are true under every interpretation," Journal of Symbolic Logic 52: 165-171. 1988, "Alphabetical order," Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 29: 214-215. 1988a, Review of Craig Smorynski, Self-Reference and Modal Logic, Journal of Symbolic Logic 53: 306-309. 1989, "Iteration again," Philosophical Topics 17: 5-21. LLL. 1989a, "A new proof of the Gödel incompleteness theorem," Notices of the American Mathematical Society 36: 388-390. LLL. An afterword appeared under the title "A letter from George Boolos," ibid., p. 676. LLL. 1990, "On 'seeing' the truth of the Gödel sentence," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13: 655-656. LLL. 1990a, Review of Jon Barwise and John Etchemendy, Turing's World and Tarski's World, Journal of Symbolic Logic 55: 370-371. 1990b, Review of V. A. Uspensky, Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem, Journal of Symbolic Logic 55: 889-891. 1990c, "The standard of equality of numbers" in Boolos, G., ed., Meaning and Method: Essays in Honor of Hilary Putnam. Cambridge Univ. Press: 261-278. LLL; FPM: 234-254. 1991, "Zooming down the slippery slope," Nous 25: 695-706. LLL. 1991a (with Giovanni Sambin), "Provability: The emergence of a mathematical modality," Studia Logica 50: 1-23. 1993, "The analytical completeness of Dzhaparidze's polymodal logics," Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 61: 95-111. 1993a, "Whence the contradiction?" Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 67: 213-233. LLL. 1994, "1879?" in P. Clark and B. Hale, eds. Reading Putnam. Oxford: Blackwell: 31-48. LLL. 1994a, "The advantages of honest toil over theft," in A. George, ed., Mathematics and Mind. Oxford University Press: 27-44. LLL. 1994b, "Gödel's second incompleteness theorem explained in words of one syllable," Mind 103: 1-3. LLL. 1995, "Frege's theorem and the Peano postulates," Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 1: 317-326. LLL. 1995a, "Introductory note to *1951" in Solomon Feferman et al., eds., Kurt Gödel, Collected Works, vol. 3. Oxford University Press: 290-304. LLL. *1951 is Gödel's 1951 Gibbs lecture, "Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their implications." 1995b, "Quotational ambiguity" in Leonardi, P., and Santambrogio, M., eds. On Quine. Cambridge University Press: 283-296. LLL 1996, "The Hardest Logic Puzzle Ever," Harvard Review of Philosophy 6: 62-65. LLL. Italian translation by Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini, "L'indovinello piu difficile del mondo," La Repubblica (16 April 1992): 36-37. 1996a, "On the proof of Frege's theorem" in A. Morton and S. P. Stich, eds., Paul Benacerraf and his Critics. Cambridge MA: Blackwell. LLL. 1997, "Constructing Cantorian counterexamples," Journal of Philosophical Logic 26: 237-239. LLL. 1997a, "Is Hume's principle analytic?" In Richard G. Heck, Jr., ed., Language, Thought, and Logic: Essays in Honour of Michael Dummett. Oxford Univ. Press: 245-61. LLL. 1997b (with Richard Heck), "Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik, §§82-83" in Matthias Schirn, ed., Philosophy of Mathematics Today. Oxford Univ. Press. LLL. 1998, "Gottlob Frege and the Foundations of Arithmetic." First published in LLL. French translation in Mathieu Marion and Alain Voizard eds., 1998. Frege. Logique et philosophie. Montréal and Paris: L'Harmattan: 17-32. 2000, "Must we believe in set theory?" in Gila Sher and Richard Tieszen, eds., Between Logic and Intuition: Essays in Honour of Charles Parsons. Cambridge University Press. LLL.   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy Axiomatic set theory S of Boolos (1989) General set theory, Boolos's axiomatic set theory just adequate for Peano and Robinson arithmetic. List of American philosophers   == NotesEdit == ^ Van Gelder, Lawrence (30 May 1996). "George Boolos, 55, Philosopher". NY Times.  ^ MIT faculty resolution on Boolos' death   == ReferencesEdit == Peter Simons (1982) "On understanding Lesniewski," History and Philosophy of Logic. Solomon Feferman (1960) "Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting," Fundamentae Mathematica vol. 49, pp. 35–92.   == External linksEdit == George Boolos Memorial Web Site George Boolos. The hardest logic puzzle ever. The Harvard Review of Philosophy, 6:62–65, 1996.

Gerald Enoch Sacks (born 1933, Brooklyn) is a logician who holds a joint appointment at Harvard University as a Professor of Mathematical Logic and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a Professor Emeritus. His most important contributions have been in recursion theory. Named after him is Sacks forcing, a forcing notion based on perfect sets and the Sacks Density Theorem, which asserts that the partial order of the recursively enumerable Turing degrees is dense. Sacks earned his Ph.D. in 1961 from Cornell University under the direction of J. Barkley Rosser, with a dissertation entitled On Suborderings of Degrees of Recursive Insolvability. Among his notable students are Lenore Blum, Harvey Friedman, Sy Friedman, Leo Harrington, Richard Shore, and Theodore Slaman.   == Selected publications == Degrees of unsolvability, Princeton University Press 1963, 1966 Saturated Model Theory, Benjamin 1972; 2nd edition, World Scientific 2010 Higher Recursion theory, Springer 1990 Selected Logic Papers, World Scientific 1999 Mathematical Logic in the 20th Century, World Scientific 2003   == References ==

Gerhard Karl Erich Gentzen (November 24, 1909 – August 4, 1945) was a German mathematician and logician. He made major contributions to the foundations of mathematics, proof theory, especially on natural deduction and sequent calculus. He died in 1945 after the Second World War, because he was deprived of food after being arrested in Prague.   == Life and careerEdit == Gentzen was a student of Paul Bernays at the University of Göttingen. Bernays was fired as "non-Aryan" in April 1933 and therefore Hermann Weyl formally acted as his supervisor. Gentzen joined the Sturmabteilung in November 1933 although he was by no means compelled to do so. Nevertheless he kept in contact with Bernays until the beginning of the Second World War. In 1935, he corresponded with Abraham Fraenkel in Jerusalem and was implicated by the Nazi teachers' union as one who "keeps contacts to the Chosen People." In 1935 and 1936, Hermann Weyl, head of the Göttingen mathematics department in 1933 until his resignation under Nazi pressure, made strong efforts to bring him to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. Between November 1935 and 1939 he was an assistant of David Hilbert in Göttingen. Gentzen joined the Nazi Party in 1937. In April 1939 Gentzen swore the oath of loyalty to Adolf Hitler as part of his academic appointment. From 1943 he was a teacher at the University of Prague. Under a contract from the SS Gentzen evidently worked for the V-2 project. Gentzen was arrested during the citizens uprising against the occupying German forces on May 5, 1945. He, along with the rest of the staff of the German University in Prague was subsequently handed over to Russian forces. Because of his past association with the SA, NSDAP and NSD Dozentenbund, Gentzen was detained in a prison camp, where he died of malnutrition on August 4, 1945.   == WorkEdit == Gentzen's main work was on the foundations of mathematics, in proof theory, specifically natural deduction and the sequent calculus. His cut-elimination theorem is the cornerstone of proof-theoretic semantics, and some philosophical remarks in his "Investigations into Logical Deduction", together with Ludwig Wittgenstein's later work, constitute the starting point for inferential role semantics. One of Gentzen's papers had a second publication in the ideological Deutsche Mathematik that was founded by Ludwig Bieberbach who promoted "Aryan" mathematics. Gentzen proved the consistency of the Peano axioms in a paper published in 1936. In his Habilitationsschrift, finished in 1939, he determined the proof-theoretical strength of Peano arithmetic. This was done by a direct proof of the unprovability of the principle of transfinite induction, used in his 1936 proof of consistency, within Peano arithmetic. The principle can, however, be expressed in arithmetic, so that a direct proof of Gödel's incompleteness theorem followed. Gödel used a coding procedure to construct an unprovable formula of arithmetic. Gentzen's proof was published in 1943 and marked the beginning of ordinal proof theory.   == PublicationsEdit == "Über die Existenz unabhängiger Axiomensysteme zu unendlichen Satzsystemen". Mathematische Annalen 107 (2): 329–350. 1932. doi:10.1007/bf01448897.  "Untersuchungen über das logische Schließen. I". Mathematische Zeitschrift 39 (2): 176–210. 1934. doi:10.1007/bf01201353.  "Untersuchungen über das logische Schließen. II". Mathematische Zeitschrift 39 (3): 405–431. 1935. doi:10.1007/bf01201363.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1936). "Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der Stufenlogik". Mathematische Zeitschrift 41: 357–366. doi:10.1007/BF01180425.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1936). "Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie". Mathematische Annalen 112: 493–565. doi:10.1007/BF01565428.  "Der Unendlichkeitsbegriff in der Mathematik. Vortrag, gehalten in Münster am 27. Juni 1936 am Institut von Heinrich Scholz". Semester-Berichte Münster: 65–80. 1936–1937.  (Lecture hold in Münster at the institute of Heinrich Scholz on 27 June 1936) "Unendlichkeitsbegriff und Widerspruchsfreiheit der Mathematik". Actualités scientifiques et industrielles 535: 201–205. 1937.  "Die gegenwärtige Lage in der mathematischen Grundlagenforschung". Deutsche Mathematik 3: 255–268. 1938.  "Neue Fassung des Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises für die reine Zahlentheorie". Forschungen zur Logik und zur Grundlegung der exakten Wissenschaften 4: 19–44. 1938.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1943). "Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsfällen der transfiniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie". Mathematische Annalen 119: 140–161. doi:10.1007/BF01564760.    === PosthumousEdit === "Zusammenfassung von mehreren vollständigen Induktionen zu einer einzigen". Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 2 (1): 81–93. 1954.  Gentzen, Gerhard (1974). "Der erste Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweis für die klassische Zahlentheorie". Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 16 (3–4): 97–118. doi:10.1007/BF02015370.  – Published by Paul Bernays. Gentzen, Gerhard (1974). "Über das Verhältnis zwischen intuitionistischer und klassischer Arithmetik". Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 16 (3–4): 119–132. doi:10.1007/BF02015371.  – Published by Paul Bernays.   == See alsoEdit ==  Bertrand Russell   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Gentzen, Gerhard (1969), M. E., Szabo, ed., Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, Studies in logic and the foundations of mathematics (Hardcover ed.), North-Holland, ISBN 0-7204-2254-X  - (English translation). Menzler-Trott, Eckart (2001-08-01), Gentzens Problem: Mathematische Logik im nationalsozialistischen Deutschland, Basel, Switzerland: Birkhäuser Verlag, ISBN 3-7643-6574-9  Menzler-Trott, Eckart (November 21, 2007), Logic's Lost Genius: The Life of Gerhard Gentzen, History of Mathematics, vol. 33, Translated by Griffor, Edward and Smorynski, Craig, American Mathematical Society, ISBN 978-0-8218-3550-0  - an English translation.   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Gerhard Gentzen", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Gerhard Gentzen at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Gilbert de la Porrée (after 1085 – 4 September 1154), also known as Gilbert of Poitiers, Gilbertus Porretanus or Pictaviensis, was a scholastic logician and theologian.   == Life == He was born in Poitiers, and completed his first studies there. He was then educated at Chartres under Bernard of Chartres, where he learned the differences between Aristotle and Plato and later at Laon under Anselm of Laon and Ralph of Laon, where he studied biblical scriptures. After his education, he returned to Poitiers, where its believed he taught. He then returned to Chartres to teach logic and theology and took over Chancellor after Bernard from 1126-1140. It is in Paris where we also know he gave lectures. From a passage from the text, Dialogue with Ratius and Everard, by the Cistercian Everardus, we learn that Gilbert was more popular in Paris then in Chartres. Everardus writes that he was fourth to attend Gilberts lectures in Chartres and three hundredth to attend in Paris. In Paris, John of Salisbury attended Gilbert's lectures in 1141 and was greatly influenced by them. John of Salisbury would later become chancellor of Chartres and also wrote over Gilbert saying: He taught grammar and theology, would whip a student who made a grammatical error, if he believed a student was wasting time in class he would suggest they take up bread making, and last when he lectured he used philosophers, orators and as well as poets to help interpret. Sometime in the 1140s, Gilbert published his Commentary on Boethius's, Opuscala Sacra. Although intended as an explanation of what Boethius meant, it interpreted the Holy Trinity in such a way that it went against the teachings of the church. In 1142, Gilbert became Bishop of Poitiers and within the same year two archdeacons, Arnaud and Calon, denounced Gilbert for his ideas on the trinity. It was also in 1142 when Gilbert's teaching position was taken over in Chartres. By 1147, in Paris, Peter Lombard attacked Gilbert for his trinitarian beliefs. In 1148, Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, known as the great detector of heresies, brought Gilbert to trial. Saint Bernard had previous reasons to believe Gilbert was a heretic because when Abelard was tried and condemned, the school of Chartres}--where Gilbert was chancellor at that moment—backed Abelard. Pope Eugene III presided over the trial. During the trial, Gilbert and Bernard were asked to recite and speak of specific biblical scriptures. Bernard, being nowhere near as well versed as Gilbert, was not able to condemn him. It was decided however that in order to make the church happy, Gilbert had to change parts of his book that were not in accordance with the official position on faith. Gilbert died in 1154.   == Works == Authentic Works Commentaria in Boethii opuscula sacra, edited by Nikolaus M. Häring, Toronto: Pontifical Institute of mediaeval studies, 1966. The Psalms Commentary of Gilbert of Poitiers, edited by T. Gross-Diaz. Leiden: Brill, 1996. Spurious Work Hermes Trismegistus, De sex rerum principiis, edited by P. Lucentini and M. Delp, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis (CCCM 142), Turnhot: Brepols, 2006. Gilbert is almost the only logician of the 12th century who is quoted by the greater scholastics of the succeeding age. The Liber sex principiorum, attributed to him, but of an anonymous author, was regarded with a reverence almost equal to that paid to Aristotle, and furnished matter for numerous commentators, amongst them Albertus Magnus. Owing to the fame of this work, he is mentioned by Dante as the Magister sex principiorum. The treatise itself is a discussion of the Aristotelian categories, specially of the six subordinate modes. The author distinguishes in the ten categories two classes, one essential, the other derivative. Essential or inhering (formae inhaerentes) in the objects themselves are only substance, quantity, quality and relation in the stricter sense of that term. The remaining six, when, where, action, passion, position and habit, are relative and subordinate (formae assistantes). This suggestion has some interest, but is of no great value, either in logic or in the theory of knowledge. More important in the history of scholasticism are the theological consequences to which Gilbert's realism led him. In the commentary on the treatise De Trinitate of Boethius he proceeds from the metaphysical notion that pure or abstract being is prior in nature to that which is. This pure being is God, and must be distinguished from the triune God as known to us. God is incomprehensible, and the categories cannot be applied to determine his existence. In God there is no distinction or difference, whereas in all substances or things there is duality, arising from the element of matter. Between pure being and substances stand the ideas or forms, which subsist, though they are not substances. These forms, when materialized, are called formae substantiales or formae nativae; they are the essences of things, and in themselves have no relation to the accidents of things. Things are temporal, the ideas perpetual, God eternal. The pure form of existence, that by which God is God, must be distinguished from the three persons who are God by participation in this form. The form or essence is one, the persons or substances three. This distinction clearly goes against the church's tenet of divine simplicity. It was this distinction between Deitas or Divinitas and Deus that led to the condemnation of Gilbert's doctrine.   == References == Hermes Trismegistus, De sex rerum principiis, edited by P. Lucentini and M. Delp, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis (CCCM 142), Turnhot: Brepols, 2006. De sex rerum principiis and commentary on the De Trinitate in Migne, Patrologia Latina, lxiv. 1255 and clxxxviii. 1257.   == Notes ==   == Bibliography == F.C. Copleston, A History of Medieval Philosophy (New York: Harper and Row, 1972). L. M. de Rijk, Semantics and metaphysics in Gilbert of Poitiers. A chapter of twelfth century Platonism Vivarium, 26, 1988, pp. 73-113 and 27, 1989, pp. 1-35 (Contains the English transltion of some passages of the Commentaries on Boethius). T. Gross-Diaz, The Psalms Commentary of Gilbert of Poitiers, Leiden: Brill, 1995. Edouard Jeauneau, Rethinking The School of Chartres, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009. J. Jolivet et A. de Libera (eds.), Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains, Naples, Bibliopolis, 1987. Lewry, Osmond. The Liber sex principiourm, a supposedly Porretanean work. A study in ascription. In: Jean Jolivet, and Alain de Libera (eds. ), Gilbert de Poitiers et ses contemporains.Aux origines de la "Logica Modernorum"., Naples: Bibliopolis, 1987, pp. 251-278. John Marenbon "Gilbert of Poitiers," Gracia, Jorge J.E. and Timothy B. Noone (eds.), A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages, Malden MA: Blackwell, 2003. John Marenbon, Early Medieval Philosophy, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Compendium logicae Porretanum Christopher J. Martin The Compendium Logicae Porretanum: A Survey of Philosophical Logic from the School of Gilbert of Poitiers Leslie Nielsen, On the Doctrine of Logic and Language of Gilbert Porreta and His Followers

Giorgi Japaridze (also spelled Giorgie Dzhaparidze) is a Georgian-American researcher in logic and theoretical computer science. He currently holds the title of Full Professor at the Computing Sciences Department of Villanova University. Japaridze is best known for his invention of computability logic, cirquent calculus, and Japaridze's polymodal logic.   == Research == During 1985–1988 Japaridze elaborated the system GLP, known as Japaridze's polymodal logic. This is a system of modal logic with the “necessity” operators [0],[1],[2],…, understood as a natural series of incrementally weak provability predicates for Peano arithmetic. In "The polymodal logic of provability" Japaridze proved the arithmetical completeness of this system, as well as its inherent incompleteness with respect to Kripke frames. GLP has been extensively studied by various authors during the subsequent three decades, especially after Lev Beklemishev, in 2004, pointed out its usefulness in understanding the proof theory of arithmetic (provability algebras and proof-theoretic ordinals). Japaridze has also studied the first-order (predicate) versions of provability logic. He came up with an axiomatization of the single-variable fragment of that logic, and proved its arithmetical completeness and decidability. In the same paper he showed that, on the condition of the 1-completeness of the underlying arithmetical theory, predicate provability logic with non-iterated modalities is recursively enumerable. In he did the same for the predicate provability logic with non-modalized quantifiers. In 1992–1993, Japaridze came up with the concepts of cointerpretability, tolerance and cotolerance, naturally arising in interpretability logic. He proved that cointerpretability is equivalent to 1-conservativity and tolerance is equivalent to 1-consistency. The former was an answer to the long-standing open problem regarding the metamathematical meaning of 1-conservativity. Within the same line of research, Japaridze constructed the modal logics of tolerance> (1993) and the arithmetical hierarchy (1994), and proved their arithmetical completeness. In 2002 Japaridze introduced “the Logic of Tasks”, which later became a part of his Abstract Resource Semantics on one hand, and a fragment of Computability Logic (see below) on the other hand. Japaridze is best known for founding Computability Logic in 2003 and making subsequent contributions to its evolution. This is a long-term research program and a semantical platform for “redeveloping logic as a formal theory of (interactive) computability, as opposed to the formal theory of truth that it has more traditionally been”. In 2006 Japaridze conceived cirquent calculus as a proof-theoretic approach that manipulates graph-style constructs, termed cirquents, instead of the more traditional and less general tree-like constructs such as formulas or sequents. This novel proof-theoretic approach was later successfully used to “tame” various fragments of computability logic, which had otherwise stubbornly resisted all axiomatization attempts within the traditional proof theory such as sequent calculus or Hilbert-style systems. It was also used to (define and) axiomatize the purely propositional fragment of Independent-Friendly Logic. The birth of cirquent calculus was accompanied with offering the associated “abstract resource semantics”. Cirquent calculus with that semantics can be seen as a logic of resources which, unlike Linear Logic, makes it possible to account for resource-sharing. As such, it has been presented by Japaridze as a viable alternative to linear logic, who repeatedly has criticized the latter for being neither sufficiently expressive nor complete as a resource logic. This challenge, however, has remained largely unnoticed by the linear logic community, which never responded to it. Japaridze has cast a similar (and also never answered) challenge to intuitionistic logic, criticizing it for lacking a convincing semantical justification the associated constructivistic claims, and for being incomplete as a result of “throwing out the baby with the bath water”. Heiting’s intuitionistic logic, in its full generality, has been shown to be sound but incomplete with respect to the semantics of computability logic. The positive (negation-free) propositional fragment of intuitionistic logic, however, has been proven to be complete with respect to the computability-logic semantics. In "On the system CL12 of computability logic", on the platform of computability logic, Japaridze generalized the traditional concepts of time and space complexities to interactive computations, and introduced a third sort of a complexity measure for such computations, termed “amplitude complexity”. Among Japaridze’s contributions is the elaboration of a series of systems of (Peano) arithmetic based on computability logic, named “clarithmetics”. These include complexity-oriented systems (in the style of bounded arithmetic) for various combinations of time, space and amplitude complexity classes.   == Biography and academic career == Giorgi Japaridze was born in 1961 in Tbilisi, Georgia (then in the Soviet Union). He graduated from Tbilisi State University in 1983, received a PhD degree (in philosophy) from Moscow State University in 1987, and then a second PhD degree (in computer science) from the University of Pennsylvania in 1998. During 1987-1992 Japaridze worked as a Senior Researcher at the Institute of Philosophy of the Georgian Academy of Sciences. During 1992-1993 he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Amsterdam (Mathematics and Computer Science department). During 1993-1994 he held the position of a Visiting Associate Professor at the University of Notre Dame (Philosophy Department). He has joined the faculty of Villanova University (Computing Sciences Department). Japaridze has also worked as a Visiting Professor at Xiamen University (2007) and Shandong University (2010-2013) in China.   == Awards == In 1982, for his work “Determinism and Freedom of Will”, Japaridze received a Medal from the Georgian Academy of Sciences for the best student research paper, granted to one student in the nation each year. In 2015, he received an Outstanding Faculty Research Award from Villanova University, granted to one faculty member each year. Japaridze has been a recipient of various grants and scholarships, including research grants from the US National Science Foundation, Villanova University and Shandong University, Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Dutch government, Smullyan Fellowship from Indiana University (never utilized), and Dean’s Fellowship from the University of Pennsylvania.   == Related bibliography == F.Pakhomov, “On the complexity of the closed fragment of Japaridze's provability logic”. Archive for Mathematical Logic 53 (2014), pages 949-967. D.Fernandez-Duque and J.Joosten, “Well-orders in the transfinite Japaridze algebra”. Logic Journal of the IGPL 22 (2014), pages 933-963. W.Xu, “A propositional system induced by Japaridze's approach to IF logic”. Logic Journal of the IGPL 22 (2014), pages 982-991. I. Shapirovsky, “PSPACE-decidability of Japaridze's polymodal logic". Advances in Modal Logic 7 (2008), pages 289-304. L.D. Beklemishev, J.J. Joosten and M. Vervoort, “A finitary treatment of the closed fragment of Japaridze's provability logic”. Journal of Logic and Computation 15(4) (2005), pages 447-463. G. Boolos, “The analytical completeness of Japaridze's polymodal logics”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 61 (1993), pages 95–111.   == Selected publications == G.Japaridze, “Introduction to clarithmetic III”.Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 165 (2014), pages 241-252. G.Japaridze, “The taming of recurrences in computability logic through cirquent calculus, Part II” Archive for Mathematical Logic 52 (2013), pages 213-259. G.Japaridze, “The taming of recurrences in computability logic through cirquent calculus, Part I”.Archive for Mathematical Logic 52 (2013), pages 173-212. G.Japaridze, “A new face of the branching recurrence of computability logic”. Applied Mathematics Letters 25 (2012), pages 1585-1589. G.Japaridze, “A logical basis for constructive systems”. Journal of Logic and Computation 22 (2012), pages 605-642. G.Japaridze, “Separating the basic logics of the basic recurrences”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 163 (2012), pages 377-389. G.Japaridze, “Introduction to clarithmetic I”.Information and Computation 209 (2011), pages 1312-1354. G.Japaridze, “From formulas to cirquents in computability logic”. Logical Methods is Computer Science 7 (2011), Issue 2 , Paper 1, pages 1-55. G.Japaridze, [2] G.Japaridze, “[Toggling operators in computability logic]”. Theoretical Computer Science 412 (2011), pages 971-1004. G.Japaridze, “Towards applied theories based on computability logic”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 75 (2010), pages 565-601. G.Japaridze, “Many concepts and two logics of algorithmic reduction”. Studia Logica 91 (2009), pages 1-24. G.Japaridze, “In the beginning was game semantics”. Games: Unifying Logic, Language and Philosophy. O. Majer, A.-V. Pietarinen and T. Tulenheimo, eds. Springer 2009, pages 249-350. G.Japaridze, “Sequential operators in computability logic”. Information and Computation 206 (2008), pages 1443-1475. G.Japaridze, “Cirquent calculus deepened.” Journal of Logic and Computation 18 (2008), pages 983-1028. G.Japaridze, “The intuitionistic fragment of computability logic at the propositional level”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 147 (2007), pages 187-227. G.Japaridze, “The logic of interactive Turing reduction”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 72 (2007), pages 243-276. G.Japaridze, “Intuitionistic computability logic”. Acta Cybernetica 18 (2007), pages 77-113. G.Japaridze, “From truth to computability II”. Theoretical Computer Science 379 (2007), pages 20-52. G.Japaridze, “From truth to computability I”. Theoretical Computer Science 357 (2006), pages 100-135. G.Japaridze, “Introduction to cirquent calculus and abstract resource semantics”. Journal of Logic and Computation 16 (2006), pages 489-532. G.Japaridze, “Computability logic: a formal theory of interaction”. Interactive Computation: The New Paradigm. D.Goldin, S.Smolka and P.Wegner, eds. Springer Verlag, Berlin 2006, pages 183-223. G.Japaridze, “Propositional computability logic II”. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic 7 (2006), pages 331-362. G.Japaridze, “Propositional computability logic I ”. ACM Transactions on Computational Logic 7 (2006), pages 302-330. G. Japaridze, “Introduction to computability logic”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 123 (2003), pages 1–99. G.Japaridze, “The logic of tasks”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 117 (2002), pages 261-293. G.Japaridze, “The propositional logic of elementary tasks”. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 41 (2000), No. 2, pages 171-183. G.Japaridze and D.DeJongh, “The logic of provability”. In: Handbook of Proof Theory, S.Buss, ed., North-Holland, 1998, pages 475-545. G.Japaridze, “A constructive game semantics for the language of linear logic”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 85 (1997), pages 87-156. G.Japaridze, “A simple proof of arithmetical completeness for Pi-1 conservativity logic”. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 35 (1994), pages 346-354. G.Japaridze, “The logic of arithmetical hierarchy”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 66 (1994), pages 89-112. G.Japaridze, “A generalized notion of weak interpretability and the corresponding modal logic”. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 61 (1993), pages 113-160. G.Japaridze, “The logic of linear tolerance”. Studia Logica 51 (1992), pages 249-277. G.Japaridze, “Predicate provability logic with non-modalized quantifiers”. Studia Logica 50 (1991), pages 149-160. G.Japaridze, “Decidable and enumerable predicate logics of provability”. Studia Logica 49 (1990), pages 7-21. S.Artemov and G.Japaridze, “Finite Kripke models and predicate logics of provability”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 55 (1990), pages 1090-1098. G.Japaridze, “The polymodal logic of provability”. Intensional Logics and Logical Structure of Theories. Metsniereba, Tbilisi, 1988, pages 16-48 (Russian). S.Artemov and G.Japaridze, “[On effective predicate logics of provability]”. Dokady Mathematics 297 (1987), pages 521-523 (Russian). English translation in: Soviet Math. Doklady 36, pp. 478–480.   == See also == Japaridze's Polymodal Logic   == External links == Giorgi Japaridze's Homepage Villanova professor honored for research (Philadelphia Inquirer article) Villanova University Selects Computing Sciences Professor as Recipient of 2015 Outstanding Faculty Research Award (press release) Computability Logic Homepage Game Semantics or Linear Logic? Lecture Course on Computability Logic On abstract resource semantics and computabilty logic (video lecture by N.Vereshchagin)   == References ==

Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri (Italian pronunciation: [dʒoˈvanni dʒiˈrɔlamo sakˈkɛri]; 5 September 1667 – 25 October 1733) was an Italian Jesuit priest, scholastic philosopher, and mathematician. Saccheri was born in Sanremo. He entered the Jesuit order in 1685, and was ordained as a priest in 1694. He taught philosophy at Turin from 1694 to 1697, and philosophy, theology, and mathematics at Pavia from 1697 until his death. He was a protégé of the mathematician Tommaso Ceva and published several works including Quaesita geometrica (1693), Logica demonstrativa (1697), and Neo-statica (1708). He is primarily known today for his last publication, in 1733 shortly before his death. Now considered the second work in non-Euclidean geometry, Euclides ab omni naevo vindicatus (Euclid Freed of Every Flaw) languished in obscurity until it was rediscovered by Eugenio Beltrami in the mid-19th century. Many of Saccheri's ideas have a precedent in the 11th Century Persian polymath Omar Khayyám's Discussion of Difficulties in Euclid (Risâla fî sharh mâ ashkala min musâdarât Kitâb 'Uglîdis), a fact ignored in most Western sources until recently. It is unclear whether Saccheri had access to this work in translation, or developed his ideas independently. The Saccheri quadrilateral is now sometimes referred to as the Khayyam-Saccheri quadrilateral. The intent of Saccheri's work was ostensibly to establish the validity of Euclid by means of a reductio ad absurdum proof of any alternative to Euclid's parallel postulate. To do this he assumed that the parallel postulate was false, and attempted to derive a contradiction. Since Euclid's postulate is equivalent to the statement that the sum of the internal angles of a triangle is 180°, he considered both the hypothesis that the angles add up to more or less than 180°. The first led to the conclusion that straight lines are finite, contradicting Euclid's second postulate. So Saccheri correctly rejected it. However, today this principle is accepted as the basis of elliptic geometry, where both the second and fifth postulates are rejected. The second possibility turned out to be harder to refute. In fact he was unable to derive a logical contradiction and instead derived many non-intuitive results; for example that triangles have a maximum finite area and that there is an absolute unit of length. He finally concluded that: "the hypothesis of the acute angle is absolutely false; because it is repugnant to the nature of straight lines". Today, his results are theorems of hyperbolic geometry. There is some minor argument on whether Saccheri really meant this, as he published his work in the final year of his life, came extremely close to discovering non-Euclidean geometry and was a logician. Some believe Saccheri only concluded in such way in an intent to avoid criticism that might come from seemingly illogical aspects of hyperbolic geometry.   == See also == Saccheri–Legendre theorem Hyperbolic geometry Parallel postulate List of Jesuit scientists List of Roman Catholic cleric–scientists   == References == Martin Gardner, Non-Euclidean Geometry, Chapter 14 of The Colossal Book of Mathematics, W. W.Norton & Company, 2001, ISBN 0-393-02023-1 M. J. Greenberg, Euclidean and Non-Euclidean Geometries: Development and History, 1st ed. 1974, 2nd ed. 1980, 3rd ed. 1993, 4th edition, W. H. Freeman, 2008. Girolamo Saccheri, Euclides Vindicatus (1733), edited and translated by G. B. Halsted, 1st ed. (1920); 2nd ed. (1986), review by John Corcoran: Mathematical Reviews 88j:01013, 1988.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Giuseppe Peano (Italian: [dʒuˈzɛppe peˈaːno]; 27 August 1858 – 20 April 1932) was an Italian mathematician. The author of over 200 books and papers, he was a founder of mathematical logic and set theory, to which he contributed much notation. The standard axiomatization of the natural numbers is named the Peano axioms in his honor. As part of this effort, he made key contributions to the modern rigorous and systematic treatment of the method of mathematical induction. He spent most of his career teaching mathematics at the University of Turin.   == Biography ==  Peano was born and raised on a farm at Spinetta, a hamlet now belonging to Cuneo, Piedmont, Italy. He attended the Liceo classico Cavour in Turin, and enrolled at the University of Turin in 1876, graduating in 1880 with high honors, after which the University employed him to assist first Enrico D'Ovidio, and then Angelo Genocchi, the Chair of calculus. Due to Genocchi's poor health, Peano took over the teaching of calculus course within 2 years. His first major work, a textbook on calculus, was published in 1884 and was credited to Genocchi. A few years later, Peano published his first book dealing with mathematical logic. Here the modern symbols for the union and intersection of sets appeared for the first time.  In 1887, Peano married Carola Crosio, the daughter of the Turin-based painter Luigi Crosio, known for painting the Refugium Peccatorum Madonna. In 1886, he began teaching concurrently at the Royal Military Academy, and was promoted to Professor First Class in 1889. The next year, the University of Turin also granted him his full professorship. Peano's famous space-filling curve appeared in 1890 as a counterexample. He used it to show that a continuous curve cannot always be enclosed in an arbitrarily small region. This was an early example of what came to be known as a fractal. In 1890 Peano founded the journal Rivista di Matematica, which published its first issue in January 1891. In 1891 Peano started the Formulario Project. It was to be an "Encyclopedia of Mathematics", containing all known formulae and theorems of mathematical science using a standard notation invented by Peano. In 1897, the first International Congress of Mathematicians was held in Zürich. Peano was a key participant, presenting a paper on mathematical logic. He also started to become increasingly occupied with Formulario to the detriment of his other work. In 1898 he presented a note to the Academy about binary numeration and its ability to be used to represent the sounds of languages. He also became so frustrated with publishing delays (due to his demand that formulae be printed on one line) that he purchased a printing press. Paris was the venue for the Second International Congress of Mathematicians in 1900. The conference was preceded by the First International Conference of Philosophy where Peano was a member of the patronage committee. He presented a paper which posed the question of correctly formed definitions in mathematics, i.e. "how do you define a definition?". This became one of Peano's main philosophical interests for the rest of his life. At the conference Peano met Bertrand Russell and gave him a copy of Formulario. Russell was so struck by Peano's innovative logical symbols that he left the conference and returned home to study Peano's text. Peano's students Mario Pieri and Alessandro Padoa had papers presented at the philosophy congress also. For the mathematical congress, Peano did not speak, but Padoa's memorable presentation has been frequently recalled. A resolution calling for the formation of an "international auxiliary language" to facilitate the spread of mathematical (and commercial) ideas, was proposed; Peano fully supported it. By 1901, Peano was at the peak of his mathematical career. He had made advances in the areas of analysis, foundations and logic, made many contributions to the teaching of calculus and also contributed to the fields of differential equations and vector analysis. Peano played a key role in the axiomatization of mathematics and was a leading pioneer in the development of mathematical logic. Peano had by this stage become heavily involved with the Formulario project and his teaching began to suffer. In fact, he became so determined to teach his new mathematical symbols that the calculus in his course was neglected. As a result, he was dismissed from the Royal Military Academy but retained his post at Turin University. In 1903 Peano announced his work on an international auxiliary language called Latino sine flexione ("Latin without inflexion," later called Interlingua, but which should not be confused with the later Interlingua of the IALA). This was an important project for him (along with finding contributors for 'Formulario'). The idea was to use Latin vocabulary, since this was widely known, but simplify the grammar as much as possible and remove all irregular and anomalous forms to make it easier to learn. In one speech, he started speaking in Latin and, as he described each simplification, introduced it into his speech so that by the end he was talking in his new language. The year 1908 was important for Peano. The fifth and final edition of the Formulario project, titled Formulario Mathematico, was published. It contained 4200 formulae and theorems, all completely stated and most of them proved. The book received little attention since much of the content was dated by this time. However, it remains a significant contribution to mathematical literature. The comments and examples were written in Latino sine flexione. Also in 1908, Peano took over the chair of higher analysis at Turin (this appointment was to last for only two years). He was elected the director of Academia pro Interlingua. Having previously created Idiom Neutral, the Academy effectively chose to abandon it in favor of Peano's Latino sine flexione. After his mother died in 1910, Peano divided his time between teaching, working on texts aimed for secondary schooling including a dictionary of mathematics, and developing and promoting his and other auxiliary languages, becoming a revered member of the international auxiliary language movement. He used his membership of the Accademia dei Lincei to present papers written by friends and colleagues who were not members (the Accademia recorded and published all presented papers given in sessions). During the years 1913-1918, Peano published several papers that dealt with the remainder term for various numerical quadrature formulas, and introduced the Peano kernel. In 1925 Peano switched Chairs unofficially from Infinitesimal Calculus to Complementary Mathematics, a field which better suited his current style of mathematics. This move became official in 1931. Giuseppe Peano continued teaching at Turin University until the day before he died, when he suffered a fatal heart attack.   == Milestones and honors received == 1881: Published first paper. 1884: Calcolo Differenziale e Principii di Calcolo Integrale. 1887: Applicazioni Geometriche del Calcolo Infinitesimale. 1889: Appointed Professor First Class at the Royal Military Academy. 1889: Arithmetices principia: nova methodo exposita 1890: Appointed Extraordinary Professor of infinitesimal calculus at the University of Turin. 1891: Made a member of the Academy of Science, Torino. 1893: Lezioni di Analisi Infinitesimale, 2 vols. 1895: Promoted to Ordinary Professor. 1901: Made Knight of the Order of Saints Maurizio and Lazzaro. 1903: Announces Latino sine flexione. 1905: Made Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy. Elected a corresponding member of the Accademia dei Lincei in Rome, the highest Italian honour for scientists. 1908: Fifth and final edition of the Formulario mathematico. 1917: Made an Officer of the Crown of Italy. 1921: Promoted to Commendatore of the Crown of Italy.   == See also ==  Foundations of geometry Peano axioms   == Bibliography == Peano's writings in English translation 1889. "The principles of arithmetic, presented by a new method" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 83–97. 1973. Selected works of Giuseppe Peano. Kennedy, Hubert C., ed. and transl. With a biographical sketch and bibliography. London: Allen & Unwin. Secondary literature Gillies, Douglas A., 1982. Frege, Dedekind, and Peano on the foundations of arithmetic. Assen, Netherlands: Van Gorcum. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Kennedy, Hubert C., 1980. Peano: Life and Works of Giuseppe Peano at the Wayback Machine. Reidel. Biography with complete bibliography (p. 195–209).   == References ==   == External links == Works by Giuseppe Peano at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Giuseppe Peano at Internet Archive O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Giuseppe Peano", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Giuseppe Peano at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Kennedy, Hubert (2002). "Twelve articles on Giuseppe Peano" (PDF). San Francisco: Peremptory Publications. Retrieved 8 April 2012.  Collection of articles on life and mathematics of Peano (1960s to 1980s). Kennedy, Hubert (2002). "Peano. Life and Works of Giuseppe Peano". San Francisco: Peremptory Publications. CiteSeerX: 10.1.1.201.8126.  Instituto Pro Latino Sine Flexione

This is a redirect from a title that is a shortened form of a person's full name, a book title or other more complete article title. Use this rcat (not {{R from initialism}}) to tag redirects that are the initials of a person's name. For more information follow the bold category link.

Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob Frege (/ˈfreɪɡə/; German: [ˈɡɔtloːp ˈfreːɡə]; 8 November 1848 – 26 July 1925) was a German philosopher, logician, and mathematician. He is considered to be one of the founders of modern logic and made major contributions to the foundations of mathematics. He is generally considered to be the father of analytic philosophy, for his writings on the philosophy of language and mathematics. While he was mainly ignored by the intellectual world when he published his writings, Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) introduced his work to later generations of logicians and philosophers.   == LifeEdit ==   === Childhood (1848–69)Edit === Frege was born in 1848 in Wismar, in the state of Mecklenburg-Schwerin (which is today part of the German federal state Mecklenburg-Vorpommern). His father Carl (Karl) Alexander Frege (3 August 1809 – 30 November 1866) was the co-founder and headmaster of a girls' high school until his death. After Carl's death, the school was led by Frege's mother Auguste Wilhelmine Sophie Frege (née Bialloblotzky, of Polish descent, 12 January 1815 – 14 October 1898). In childhood, Frege encountered philosophies that would guide his future scientific career. For example, his father wrote a textbook on the German language for children aged 9–13, entitled Hülfsbuch zum Unterrichte in der deutschen Sprache für Kinder von 9 bis 13 Jahren (2nd ed., Wismar 1850; 3rd ed., Wismar and Ludwigslust: Hinstorff, 1862), the first section of which dealt with the structure and logic of language. Frege studied at a gymnasium in Wismar and graduated in 1869. His teacher Gustav Adolf Leo Sachse (5 November 1843 – 1 September 1909), who was a poet, played the most important role in determining Frege's future scientific career, encouraging him to continue his studies at the University of Jena.   === Studies at University: Jena and Göttingen (1869–74)Edit === Frege matriculated at the University of Jena in the spring of 1869 as a citizen of the North German Confederation. In the four semesters of his studies he attended approximately twenty courses of lectures, most of them on mathematics and physics. His most important teacher was Ernst Karl Abbe (1840–1905; physicist, mathematician, and inventor). Abbe gave lectures on theory of gravity, galvanism and electrodynamics, complex analysis theory of functions of a complex variable, applications of physics, selected divisions of mechanics, and mechanics of solids. Abbe was more than a teacher to Frege: he was a trusted friend, and, as director of the optical manufacturer Carl Zeiss AG, he was in a position to advance Frege's career. After Frege's graduation, they came into closer correspondence. His other notable university teachers were Christian Philipp Karl Snell (1806–86; subjects: use of infinitesimal analysis in geometry, analytical geometry of planes, analytical mechanics, optics, physical foundations of mechanics); Hermann Karl Julius Traugott Schaeffer (1824–1900; analytical geometry, applied physics, algebraic analysis, on the telegraph and other electronic machines); and the philosopher Kuno Fischer (1824–1907; Kantian and critical philosophy). Starting in 1871, Frege continued his studies in Göttingen, the leading university in mathematics in German-speaking territories, where he attended the lectures of Rudolf Friedrich Alfred Clebsch (1833–72; analytical geometry), Ernst Christian Julius Schering (1824–97; function theory), Wilhelm Eduard Weber (1804–91; physical studies, applied physics), Eduard Riecke (1845–1915; theory of electricity), and Hermann Lotze (1817–81; philosophy of religion). Many of the philosophical doctrines of the mature Frege have parallels in Lotze; it has been the subject of scholarly debate whether or not there was a direct influence on Frege's views arising from his attending Lotze's lectures. In 1873, Frege attained his doctorate under Ernst Christian Julius Schering, with a dissertation under the title of "Über eine geometrische Darstellung der imaginären Gebilde in der Ebene" ("On a Geometrical Representation of Imaginary Forms in a Plane"), in which he aimed to solve such fundamental problems in geometry as the mathematical interpretation of projective geometry's infinitely distant (imaginary) points. Frege married Margarete Katharina Sophia Anna Lieseberg (15 February 1856 – 25 June 1904) on 14 March 1887.   == Work as a logicianEdit ==  Though his education and early work were mathematical, especially geometrical, Frege's thought soon turned to logic. His Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens [Concept-Script: A Formal Language for Pure Thought Modeled on that of Arithmetic] (in German), Halle a/S: Verlag von Louis Nebert, 1879  marked a turning point in the history of logic. The Begriffsschrift broke new ground, including a rigorous treatment of the ideas of functions and variables. Frege wanted to show that mathematics grows out of logic, but in so doing, he devised techniques that took him far beyond the Aristotelian syllogistic and Stoic propositional logic that had come down to him in the logical tradition.  In effect, Frege invented axiomatic predicate logic, in large part thanks to his invention of quantified variables, which eventually became ubiquitous in mathematics and logic, and which solved the problem of multiple generality. Previous logic had dealt with the logical constants and, or, if... then..., not, and some and all, but iterations of these operations, especially "some" and "all", were little understood: even the distinction between a sentence like "every boy loves some girl" and "some girl is loved by every boy" could be represented only very artificially, whereas Frege's formalism had no difficulty expressing the different readings of "every boy loves some girl who loves some boy who loves some girl" and similar sentences, in complete parallel with his treatment of, say, "every boy is foolish". A frequently noted example is that Aristotle's logic is unable to represent mathematical statements like Euclid's theorem, a fundamental statement of number theory that there are an infinite number of prime numbers. Frege's "conceptual notation" however can represent such inferences. The analysis of logical concepts and the machinery of formalization that is essential to Principia Mathematica (3 vols., 1910–13) (by Bertrand Russell, 1872–1970, and Alfred North Whitehead, 1861–1947), to Russell's theory of descriptions, to Kurt Gödel's (1906–78) incompleteness theorems, and to Alfred Tarski's (1901–83) theory of truth, is ultimately due to Frege. One of Frege's stated purposes was to isolate genuinely logical principles of inference, so that in the proper representation of mathematical proof, one would at no point appeal to "intuition". If there was an intuitive element, it was to be isolated and represented separately as an axiom: from there on, the proof was to be purely logical and without gaps. Having exhibited this possibility, Frege's larger purpose was to defend the view that arithmetic is a branch of logic, a view known as logicism: unlike geometry, arithmetic was to be shown to have no basis in "intuition", and no need for non-logical axioms. Already in the 1879 Begriffsschrift important preliminary theorems, for example a generalized form of law of trichotomy, were derived within what Frege understood to be pure logic. This idea was formulated in non-symbolic terms in his Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik [The Foundations of Arithmetic] (in German), 1884 . Later, in his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik [Basic Laws of Arithmetic] (in German)  (vol. 1, 1893; vol. 2, 1903) (vol. 2 of which was published at his own expense), Frege attempted to derive, by use of his symbolism, all of the laws of arithmetic from axioms he asserted as logical. Most of these axioms were carried over from his Begriffsschrift, though not without some significant changes. The one truly new principle was one he called the Basic Law V: the "value-range" of the function f(x) is the same as the "value-range" of the function g(x) if and only if ∀x[f(x) = g(x)]. The crucial case of the law may be formulated in modern notation as follows. Let {x|Fx} denote the extension of the predicate Fx, i.e., the set of all Fs, and similarly for Gx. Then Basic Law V says that the predicates Fx and Gx have the same extension iff ∀x[Fx ↔ Gx]. The set of Fs is the same as the set of Gs just in case every F is a G and every G is an F. (The case is special because what is here being called the extension of a predicate, or a set, is only one type of "value-range" of a function.) In a famous episode, Bertrand Russell wrote to Frege, just as Vol. 2 of the Grundgesetze was about to go to press in 1903, showing that Russell's paradox could be derived from Frege's Basic Law V. It is easy to define the relation of membership of a set or extension in Frege's system; Russell then drew attention to "the set of things x that are such that x is not a member of x". The system of the Grundgesetze entails that the set thus characterised both is and is not a member of itself, and is thus inconsistent. Frege wrote a hasty, last-minute Appendix to Vol. 2, deriving the contradiction and proposing to eliminate it by modifying Basic Law V. Frege opened the Appendix with the exceptionally honest comment: "Hardly anything more unfortunate can befall a scientific writer than to have one of the foundations of his edifice shaken after the work is finished. This was the position I was placed in by a letter of Mr. Bertrand Russell, just when the printing of this volume was nearing its completion." (This letter and Frege's reply are translated in Jean van Heijenoort 1967.) Frege's proposed remedy was subsequently shown to imply that there is but one object in the universe of discourse, and hence is worthless (indeed, this would make for a contradiction in Frege's system if he had axiomatized the idea, fundamental to his discussion, that the True and the False are distinct objects; see, for example, Dummett 1973), but recent work has shown that much of the program of the Grundgesetze might be salvaged in other ways: Basic Law V can be weakened in other ways. The best-known way is due to philosopher and mathematical logician George Boolos (1940–1996), who was an expert on the work of Frege. A "concept" F is "small" if the objects falling under F cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with the universe of discourse, that is, unless: ∃R[R is 1-to-1 & ∀x∃y(xRy & Fy)]. Now weaken V to V*: a "concept" F and a "concept" G have the same "extension" if and only if neither F nor G is small or ∀x(Fx ↔ Gx). V* is consistent if second-order arithmetic is, and suffices to prove the axioms of second-order arithmetic. Basic Law V can simply be replaced with Hume's Principle, which says that the number of Fs is the same as the number of Gs if and only if the Fs can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the Gs. This principle, too, is consistent if second-order arithmetic is, and suffices to prove the axioms of second-order arithmetic. This result is termed Frege's Theorem because it was noticed that in developing arithmetic, Frege's use of Basic Law V is restricted to a proof of Hume's Principle; it is from this, in turn, that arithmetical principles are derived. On Hume's Principle and Frege's Theorem, see "Frege's Logic, Theorem, and Foundations for Arithmetic". Frege's logic, now known as second-order logic, can be weakened to so-called predicative second-order logic. Predicative second-order logic plus Basic Law V is provably consistent by finitistic or constructive methods, but it can interpret only very weak fragments of arithmetic. Frege's work in logic had little international attention until 1903 when Russell wrote an appendix to The Principles of Mathematics stating his differences with Frege. The diagrammatic notation that Frege used had no antecedents (and has had no imitators since). Moreover, until Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica (3 vols.) appeared in 1910–13, the dominant approach to mathematical logic was still that of George Boole (1815–64) and his intellectual descendants, especially Ernst Schröder (1841–1902). Frege's logical ideas nevertheless spread through the writings of his student Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970) and other admirers, particularly Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951).   == PhilosopherEdit == Frege is one of the founders of analytic philosophy, mainly because of his contributions to the philosophy of language, including the Function–argument analysis of the proposition; Distinction between concept and object (Begriff und Gegenstand); Principle of compositionality; Context principle; Distinction between the sense and reference (Sinn und Bedeutung) of names and other expressions, sometimes said to involve a mediated reference theory. As a philosopher of mathematics, Frege attacked the psychologistic appeal to mental explanations of the content of judgment of the meaning of sentences. His original purpose was very far from answering general questions about meaning; instead, he devised his logic to explore the foundations of arithmetic, undertaking to answer questions such as "What is a number?" or "What objects do number-words ("one", "two", etc.) refer to?" But in pursuing these matters, he eventually found himself analysing and explaining what meaning is, and thus came to several conclusions that proved highly consequential for the subsequent course of analytic philosophy and the philosophy of language. It should be kept in mind that Frege was employed as a mathematician, not a philosopher, and he published his philosophical papers in scholarly journals that often were hard to access outside of the German-speaking world. He never published a philosophical monograph other than The Foundations of Arithmetic, much of which was mathematical in content, and the first collections of his writings appeared only after World War II. A volume of English translations of Frege's philosophical essays first appeared in 1952, edited by students of Wittgenstein, Peter Geach (born 1916) and Max Black (1909–88), with the bibliographic assistance of Wittgenstein (see Geach, ed. 1975, Introduction). Despite the generous praise of Russell and Wittgenstein, Frege was little known as a philosopher during his lifetime. His ideas spread chiefly through those he influenced, such as Russell, Wittgenstein, and Carnap, and through work on logic and semantics by Polish logicians.   == Sense and referenceEdit ==  The distinction between Sinn ("sense") and Bedeutung (usually translated "reference", but also as "meaning" or "denotation") was an innovation of Frege in his 1892 paper "Über Sinn und Bedeutung" ("On Sense and Reference"). According to Frege, sense and reference are two different aspects of the significance of an expression. Frege applied Bedeutung in the first instance to proper names, where it means the bearer of the name, the object in question, but then also to other expressions, including complete sentences, which bedeuten the two "truth values", the true and the false; by contrast, the sense or Sinn associated with a complete sentence is the thought it expresses. The sense of an expression is said to be the "mode of presentation" of the item referred to. The distinction can be illustrated thus: In their ordinary uses, the name "Charles Philip Arthur George Mountbatten-Windsor", which for logical purposes is an unanalyzable whole, and the functional expression "the Prince of Wales", which contains the significant parts "the prince of ξ" and "Wales", have the same reference, namely, the person best known as Prince Charles. But the sense of the word "Wales" is a part of the sense of the latter expression, but no part of the sense of the "full name" of Prince Charles. These distinctions were disputed by Bertrand Russell, especially in his paper "On Denoting"; the controversy has continued into the present, fueled especially by Saul Kripke's famous lectures "Naming and Necessity".   == 1924 diaryEdit == Frege's published philosophical writings were of a very technical nature and divorced from practical issues, so much so that Frege scholar Dummett expresses his "shock to discover, while reading Frege's diary, that his hero was an anti-Semite." After World War I his political opinion became more radical. In the last year of his life, at the age of 76, his diary contains extreme right-wing political opinions, opposing the parliamentary system, democrats, liberals, Catholics, the French and Jews, who he thought ought to be deprived of political rights and, preferably, expelled from Germany". Frege confided "that he had once thought of himself as a liberal and was an admirer of Bismarck", but then sympathized with General Ludendorff and Adolf Hitler. Some interpretations have been written about that time. The diary contains a critique of universal suffrage and socialism. Frege had friendly relations with Jews in real life: among his students was Gershom Scholem who much valued his teacher; and he encouraged Ludwig Wittgenstein to leave for England. The 1924 diary was published posthumously in 1944. Frege apparently never spoke in public about his political viewpoints.   == PersonalityEdit == Frege was described by his students as a highly introverted person, seldom entering into dialogue, mostly facing the blackboard while lecturing though being witty and sometimes bitterly sarcastic.   == Important datesEdit == Born 8 November 1848 in Wismar, Mecklenburg-Schwerin. 1869 — attends the University of Jena. 1871 — attends the University of Göttingen. 1873 — PhD, doctor in mathematics (geometry), attained at Göttingen. 1874 — Habilitation at Jena; private teacher. 1879 — Ausserordentlicher Professor at Jena. 1896 — Ordentlicher Honorarprofessor at Jena. 1917 or 1918 — retires. Died 26 July 1925 in Bad Kleinen (now part of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern).   == Important worksEdit ==   === Logic, foundation of arithmeticEdit === Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens (1879). Halle a. S. English: Concept Notation, the Formal Language of the Pure Thought like that of Arithmetics. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung über den Begriff der Zahl (1884). Breslau. English: The Foundations of Arithmetic: the logical-mathematical Investigation of the Concept of Number. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, Band I (1893); Band II (1903). Jena: Verlag Hermann Pohle. English: Basic Laws of Arithmetic, translated and edited with an introduction by Philip A. Ebert and Marcus Rossberg. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. ISBN 978-0-199-28174-9   === Philosophical studiesEdit === Function and Concept (1891) Original: Funktion und Begriff : Vortrag, gehalten in der Sitzung; vom 9. Januar 1891 der Jenaischen Gesellschaft für Medizin und Naturwissenschaft, Jena, 1891; In English: Function and Concept. "On Sense and Reference" (1892) Original: "Über Sinn und Bedeutung", in Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik C (1892): 25–50; In English: "On Sense and Reference", alternatively translated (in later edition) as "On Sense and Meaning". "Concept and Object" (1892) Original: "Über Begriff und Gegenstand", in Vierteljahresschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie XVI (1892): 192–205; In English: "Concept and Object". "What is a Function?" (1904) Original: "Was ist eine Funktion?", in Festschrift Ludwig Boltzmann gewidmet zum sechzigsten Geburtstage, 20. February 1904, S. Meyer (ed.), Leipzig, 1904, pp. 656–666 (Internet Archive: [2], [3], [4]); In English: "What is a Function?". Logical Investigations (1918–1923). Frege intended that the following three papers be published together in a book titled Logische Untersuchungen (Logical Investigations). Though the German book never appeared, the papers were published together in Logische Untersuchungen, ed. G. Patzig, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1966, and English translations appeared together in Logical Investigations, ed. Peter Geach, Blackwell, 1975. 1918–19. "Der Gedanke: Eine logische Untersuchung" ("The Thought: A Logical Inquiry"), in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus I: 58–77. 1918–19. "Die Verneinung" ("Negation") in Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus I: 143–157. 1923. "Gedankengefüge" ("Compound Thought"), in Beiträge zur Philosophie des Deutschen Idealismus III: 36–51.   === Articles on geometryEdit === 1903: "Über die Grundlagen der Geometrie". II. Jahresbericht der deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung XII (1903), 368–375; In English: "On the Foundations of Geometry".  1967: Kleine Schriften. (I. Angelelli, ed.) Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. Darmstadt, 1967 és G. Olms, Hildescheim, 1967. "Small Writings," a collection of most of his writings (e.g., the previous), posthumously published.   == TriviaEdit == The Frege programming language is named after him.   == ReferencesEdit ==   === PrimaryEdit === Online bibliography of Frege's works and their English translations (compiled by E.N. Zalta, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy). 1879. Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens. Halle a. S.: Louis Nebert. Translation: Concept Script, a formal language of pure thought modelled upon that of arithmetic, by S. Bauer-Mengelberg in Jean Van Heijenoort, ed., 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press. 1884. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung über den Begriff der Zahl. Breslau: W. Koebner. Translation: J. L. Austin, 1974. The Foundations of Arithmetic: A logico-mathematical enquiry into the concept of number, 2nd ed. Blackwell. 1891. "Funktion und Begriff." Translation: "Function and Concept" in Geach and Black (1980). 1892a. "Über Sinn und Bedeutung" in Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 100: 25–50. Translation: "On Sense and Reference" in Geach and Black (1980). 1892b. "Über Begriff und Gegenstand" in Vierteljahresschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie 16: 192–205. Translation: "Concept and Object" in Geach and Black (1980). 1893. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, Band I. Jena: Verlag Hermann Pohle. Band II, 1903. Band I+II online Partial translation of volume 1: Furth, M, 1964. The Basic Laws of Arithmetic. Univ. of California Press. Translation of selected sections from volume 2 in Geach and Black (1980). Complete translation of both volumes: Ebert, P.A., and Rossberg, M., 2013, Basic Laws of Arithmetic. Oxford University Press. 1904. "Was ist eine Funktion?" in Meyer, S., ed., 1904. Festschrift Ludwig Boltzmann gewidmet zum sechzigsten Geburtstage, 20. Februar 1904. Leipzig: Barth: 656–666. Translation: "What is a Function?" in Geach and Black (1980). 1918–1923. Peter Geach (editor): Logical Investigations, Blackwell's, 1975. 1924. Gottfried Gabriel, Wolfgang Kienzler (editors): Gottlob Freges politisches Tagebuch. In: Deutsche Zeitschrift für Philosophie, vol. 42, 1994, pp. 1057–98. Introduction by the editors on pp. 1057–66. This article has been translated into English, in: Inquiry, vol. 39, 1996, pp. 303–342. Peter Geach and Max Black, eds., and trans., 1980. Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, 3rd ed. Blackwell (1st ed. 1952).   === SecondaryEdit === Philosophy: Badiou, Alain. "On a Contemporary Usage of Frege", trans. Justin Clemens and Sam Gillespie. UMBR(a), no. 1, 2000, pp. 99–115. Baker, Gordon, and P.M.S. Hacker, 1984. Frege: Logical Excavations. Oxford University Press. — Vigorous, if controversial, criticism of both Frege's philosophy and influential contemporary interpretations such as Dummett's. Currie, Gregory, 1982. Frege: An Introduction to His Philosophy. Harvester Press. Dummett, Michael, 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. Harvard University Press. ------, 1981. The Interpretation of Frege's Philosophy. Harvard University Press. Hill, Claire Ortiz, 1991. Word and Object in Husserl, Frege and Russell: The Roots of Twentieth-Century Philosophy. Athens OH: Ohio University Press. ------, and Rosado Haddock, G. E., 2000. Husserl or Frege: Meaning, Objectivity, and Mathematics. Open Court. — On the Frege-Husserl-Cantor triangle. Kenny, Anthony, 1995. Frege — An introduction to the founder of modern analytic philosophy. Penguin Books. — Excellent non-technical introduction and overview of Frege's philosophy. Klemke, E.D., ed., 1968. Essays on Frege. University of Illinois Press. — 31 essays by philosophers, grouped under three headings: 1. Ontology; 2. Semantics; and 3. Logic and Philosophy of Mathematics. Rosado Haddock, Guillermo E., 2006. A Critical Introduction to the Philosophy of Gottlob Frege. Ashgate Publishing. Sisti, Nicola, 2005. Il Programma Logicista di Frege e il Tema delle Definizioni. Franco Angeli. — On Frege's theory of definitions. Sluga, Hans, 1980. Gottlob Frege. Routledge. Nicla Vassallo, 2014, Frege on Thinking and Its Epistemic Significance with Pieranna Garavaso, Lexington Books–Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD, Usa. Weiner, Joan, 1990. Frege in Perspective, Cornell University Press. Logic and mathematics: Anderson, D. J., and Edward Zalta, 2004, "Frege, Boolos, and Logical Objects," Journal of Philosophical Logic 33: 1–26. Blanchette, Patricia, 2012, Frege's Conception of Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012 Burgess, John, 2005. Fixing Frege. Princeton Univ. Press. — A critical survey of the ongoing rehabilitation of Frege's logicism. Boolos, George, 1998. Logic, Logic, and Logic. MIT Press. — 12 papers on Frege's theorem and the logicist approach to the foundation of arithmetic. Dummett, Michael, 1991. Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard University Press. Demopoulos, William, ed., 1995. Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics. Harvard Univ. Press. — Papers exploring Frege's theorem and Frege's mathematical and intellectual background. Ferreira, F. and Wehmeier, K., 2002, "On the consistency of the Delta-1-1-CA fragment of Frege's Grundgesetze," Journal of Philosophic Logic 31: 301–11. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. — Fair to the mathematician, less so to the philosopher. Gillies, Donald A., 1982. Frege, Dedekind, and Peano on the foundations of arithmetic. Methodology and Science Foundation, 2. Van Gorcum & Co., Assen, 1982. Gillies, Donald: The Fregean revolution in logic. Revolutions in mathematics, 265–305, Oxford Sci. Publ., Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1992. Charles Parsons, 1965, "Frege's Theory of Number." Reprinted with Postscript in Demopoulos (1965): 182–210. The starting point of the ongoing sympathetic reexamination of Frege's logicism. Gillies, Donald: The Fregean revolution in logic. Revolutions in mathematics, 265–305, Oxford Sci. Publ., Oxford Univ. Press, New York, 1992. Heck, Richard G., Jr: Frege's Theorem. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011 Heck, Richard G., Jr: Reading Frege's Grundgesetze. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013 Wright, Crispin, 1983. Frege's Conception of Numbers as Objects. Aberdeen University Press. — A systematic exposition and a scope-restricted defense of Frege's Grundlagen conception of numbers.   == External linksEdit ==  Works by or about Gottlob Frege at Internet Archive Frege at Genealogy Project A comprehensive guide to Fregean material available on the web by Brian Carver. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Gottlob Frege" — by Edward Zalta. "Frege's Logic, Theorem, and Foundations for Arithmetic" — by Edward Zalta.  Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Gottlob Frege — by Kevin C. Klement. Frege and Language — by Dorothea Lotter.  Metaphysics Research Lab: Gottlob Frege. Frege on Being, Existence and Truth. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Gottlob Frege", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Begriff, a LaTeX package for typesetting Frege's logic notation, earlier version grundgesetze, a LaTeX package for typesetting Frege's logic notation, mature version Frege's Basic Laws of Arithmetic, info website, incl. corrigenda and LaTeX typesetting tool — by P.A. Ebert and M. Rossberg


Graham Priest (born 1948) is Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the CUNY Graduate Center, as well as a regular visitor at the University of Melbourne where he was Boyce Gibson Professor of Philosophy and also at St. Andrews University. He was educated at the University of Cambridge and the London School of Economics. His thesis advisor was John Lane Bell.   == Work == He is known for his defence of dialetheism, his in-depth analyses of the logical paradoxes (holding the thesis that there is a uniform treatment for many well-known paradoxes, such as the semantic, set-theoretic and Liar paradoxes), and his many writings related to paraconsistent and other non-classical logics. Priest, a long-time resident of Australia, now residing in New York City, is the author of numerous books, and has published articles in nearly every major philosophical and logical journal. He was a frequent collaborator with the late Richard Sylvan, a fellow proponent of dialetheism and paraconsistent logic. Priest has also published on metaphilosophy. In addition to his work in philosophy and logic, Priest practiced Karate-do. He is 3rd Dan, International Karate-do Shobukai; 4th Dan, Shi’to Ryu, and an Australian National Kumite Referee and Kata Judge. Presently, he practices Taichi.   == Selected works ==   === Books === Priest, Graham; Routley, R. On Paraconsistency Research Report #l3, Research School of Social Sciences, Australian National University 1983. Reprinted as the introductory chapters of Paraconsistent Logic, G.Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman (eds.), Philosophia Verlag, 1989. Translated into Romanian as chapters in I. Lucica (ed.), Ex Falso Quodlibet: studii de logica paraconsistenta (in Romanian), Editura Technica, 2004. Priest, Graham. Logic: a Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-289320-3 Translated into Portuguese as Lógica para Começar, Temas & Debates, 2002. Translated into Spanish as Una Brevísima Introducción a la Lógica, Oceano, 2006. Translated into Czech, as Logika – průvodce pro každého, Dokořán, 2007. Translated into Persian by Bahram Asadian, 2007. Translated into Japanese, Iwanami Shoten, 2008. Priest, Graham; van Bendegem, Jean Paul; Batens, Diderik; Mortensen, Chris (2000). Frontiers of paraconsistent logic. Baldock, Hertfordshire, England Philadelphia, Pennysylvania: Research Studies Press. ISBN 9780863802539.  Priest, Graham. Introduction to Non-Classical Logic, Cambridge University Press, 2001. 2nd edition: Introduction to Non-Classical Logic: From If to Is, Cambridge University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-521-67026-5 German translation of Part 1 of Introduction to Non-Classical Logic: From If to Is: Einführung in die nicht-klassische Logik, Mentis 2008. Priest, Graham. Beyond the Limits of Thought, Cambridge University Press, 1995. 2nd edition, Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-924421-9 Priest, Graham. Towards Non-Being: the Semantics and Metaphysics of Intentionality, Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-19-926254-3 Priest, Graham. In Contradiction: A Study of the Transconsistent, Martinus Nijhoff, 1987. Second edition Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-19-926330-2 Priest, Graham. Doubt Truth to be a Liar, Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-19-926328-0 Priest, Graham. Logic: A Brief Insight, Sterling 2010. ISBN 1-4027-6896-6 Priest, Graham. One: Being an Investigation into the Unity of Reality and of its Parts, including the Singular Object which is Nothingness, Oxford University Press, 2014. ISBN 978-0-19-968825-8   === Articles === — (September 1976). "Gruesome Simplicity". Philosophy of Science 43 (3): 432–7. doi:10.1086/288698. JSTOR 187236.  — (1976). "Modality as a Metaconcept". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 17 (3): 401–414. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093887632. MR 0446907. Zbl 0212.01303.  —; Read, S. (1977). "The Formalization of Ockham's Theory of Supposition" (PDF). Mind. LXXXVI (341): 109–113. doi:10.1093/mind/LXXXVI.341.109.  — (1977). "A Refoundation of Modal Logic". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 18 (3): 340–354. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093888007. MR 0505278. Zbl 0348.02025.  — (January 1979). "Logic of Paradox". Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1): 219–241. JSTOR 30227165.  Translated into French as 'La Logique du Paradoxe', Philosophie 94 (2007), 72–94. — (1979). "Indefinite Descriptions". Logique et Analyse 22: 5–21.  — (March 1979). "A Note on the Sorites paradox". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 57 (1): 74–75. doi:10.1080/00048407912341061.  — (1979). "Two Dogmas of Quineanism". Philosophical Quarterly 29 (117): 289–301. doi:10.2307/2219445.  — (November 1980). "Sense, Entailment and Modus Ponens". Journal of Philosophical Logic 9 (4): 415–435. doi:10.1007/BF00262864.  —; Read, S. (1980). "Merely Confused Supposition: A Theoretical Advance or a Mere Confusion". Franciscan Studies 40: 265–297. doi:10.1353/frc.1980.0009.  —; Read, S. (1981). "Ockham's Rejection of Ampliation" (PDF). Mind XC (358): 274–9. doi:10.1093/mind/XC.358.274.  — (December 1981). "The argument from design". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 59 (4): 422–431. doi:10.1080/00048408112340371.  — (1983). "The Logical Paradoxes and the Law of Excluded Middle". Philosophical Quarterly 33 (131): 160–5. doi:10.2307/2218742.  — (1982). "To be and not to be: Dialectical Tense Logic". Studia Logica 41 (2–3): 249–268. doi:10.1007/BF00370347.  translated into Bulgarian and reprinted in Filosofska Missal XL(8), 1984, 63–76. —; Routley, R. (1982). "Lessons from Pseudo-Scotus". Philosophical Studies 42 (2): 189–199. doi:10.1007/BF00374033.  —; Mortensen, C. (1981). "The Truth Teller Paradox". Logique et Analyse: 95–6, 381–8.  — (1983). "An Anti-Realist Account of Mathematical Truth". Synthese 57: 49–65. doi:10.1007/BF01064067.  Reprinted as ch. 8 of D. Jacquette (ed.) Philosophy of Mathematics, Blackwell, 2002. — (May 1984). "Logic of Paradox Revisited". Journal of Philosophical Logic 13 (2): 153–179. doi:10.1007/BF00453020.  — (1984). "Semantic Closure". Studia Logica 43 (1–2): 117–129. doi:10.1007/BF00935745.  —; Routley, R. (1984). "Introduction: Paraconsistent logics". Studia Logica 43 (1–2): 3–16. doi:10.1007/BF00935736.  — (1984). "Hypercontradictions". Logique et Analyse (107): 237–243.  — (1985). "Hume's Final Argument". History of Philosophy Quarterly 2: 349–352.  — (1985). "Contradictions in Motion". American Philosophical Quarterly 22: 339–346.  — (1985). "Contradiction, Belief and Rationality". Proc. Aristotelian Society. LXXXVI (6): 99–116.  — (1986). "Tense and Truth Conditions" (PDF). Analysis 46 (4): 162–6. doi:10.1093/analys/46.4.162.  — (1986). "The Logic of Nuclear Armaments". Critical Philosophy 3: 107–113.  'Unstable Solutions to the Liar Paradox' in Self Reference: Reflections and Reflexivity, S.J. Bartlett and P. Suber (eds.), Nijhoff, 1987. — (1987). "Tense, Tense and TENSE" (PDF). Analysis 47 (4): 177–9. doi:10.1093/analys/47.4.184.  'Reasoning about Truth', Technical Report TR-ARP-2/88, Automated Reasoning Project, Australian National University, 1988. 'Consistency by Default', Technical Report TR-ARP-3/88, Automated Reasoning Project, Australian National University, 1988. — (1988). "When Inconsistency is Inescapable". South African Journal of Philosophy 7: 83–89.  — (1989). "Primary Qualities are Secondary Qualities Too" (PDF). Br J Philos Sci 40 (1): 29–37. doi:10.1093/bjps/40.1.29.  —; Sylvan, R. (1989). "Contradiction, Assertion, and "Frege's Point"" (PDF). Analysis 49 (1): 23–6. doi:10.1093/analys/49.1.23.  — (June 1989). "Reasoning About Truth". Artificial Intelligence 39 (2): 231–244. doi:10.1016/0004-3702(89)90027-1.  — (1989). "Denyer's $ not Backed by Sterling Arguments" (PDF). Mind. XCVIII (390): 265–8. doi:10.1093/mind/XCVIII.390.265.  'Classical Logic Aufgehogen' in Paraconsistent Logic, G. Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman (eds.), Philosophia Verlag, 1989. 'Reductio ad Absurdum et Modus Tollendo Ponens' in Paraconsistent Logic, G. Priest, R. Routley and J. Norman (eds.), Philosophia Verlag, 1989. Reprinted in Rumanian in I. Lucica (ed.), Ex Falso Quodlibet: studii de logica paraconsistenta (in Romanian), Editura Technica, 2004. 'Relevance, Truth and Meaning' (with J. Crosthwaite) in Directions of Relevant Logic, R. Sylvan and J. Norman (eds.), Nijhoff, 1989. — (1989). "Gegen Wessel". Philosophische Logik 2: 109–120.  — (1990). "Dialectic and Dialetheic". Science & Society 53: 388–415.  — (May 1990). "Boolean negation, and all that". Journal of Philosophical Logic 19 (2): 201–215. doi:10.1007/BF00263541.  —; McKenzie, J. (1990). "Paraconsistent Dialogues". Logique et Analyse (131–2): 339–57.  — (1991). "Was Marx a Dialetheist?". Science & Society 54: 468–475.  — (1991). "Minimally inconsistent LP". Studia Logica 50 (2): 321–331. doi:10.1007/BF00370190.  — (1991). "Intensional Paradoxes". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 32 (2): 193–211. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1093635745. MR 1122994. Zbl 0747.03005.  — (1991). "The Limits of Thought – and Beyond" (PDF). Mind C (399): 361–370. doi:10.1093/mind/C.399.361.  — (1991). "Sorites and Identity". Logique et Analyse (135–6): 293–6.  —; Sylvan R (May 1992). "Simplified semantics for basic relevant logics". Journal of Philosophical Logic 21 (2): 217–232. doi:10.1007/BF00248640.  — (1992). "On Time". Philosophia 50: 9–18.  — (1992). "What is a Non-Normal World?". Logique et Analyse 35: 291–302.  — (March 1993). "Another disguise of the same fundamental problems: Barwise and Etchemendy on the liar". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 71 (1): 60–69. doi:10.1080/00048409312345052.  — (1993). "Yu and Your Mind". Synthese 95 (3): 459–460. doi:10.1007/BF01063882.  — (1993). "Can Contradictions be True?, II". Proc. Aristotelian Society 67 (Suppl): 35–54.  — (March 1994). "Derrida and self-reference". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 72 (1): 103–111. doi:10.1080/00048409412345911.  — (1994). "The Structure of the Paradoxes of Self-Reference" (PDF). Mind 103 (409): 25–34. doi:10.1093/mind/103.409.25.  — (1994). "Is Arithmetic Consistent?" (PDF). Mind 103 (411): 337–349. doi:10.1093/mind/103.411.337.  — (1994). "What Could the Least Inconsistent Number be?". Logique et Analyse 37: 3–12.  'Goedel's Theorem and Creativity', in Creativity, ed. T Dartnall, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994. Reprinted with a different introduction as 'Goedel's Theorem and the Mind... Again', in Philosophy of Mind: the place of philosophy in the study of mind, eds. M.Michaelis and J. O'Leary-Horthorne, Kluwer, 1994. — (1995). "Etchemendy and Logical Consequence". Canadian Journal of Philosophy 25: 283–292.  — (1995). "Gaps and Gluts: Reply to Parsons". Canadian Journal of Philosophy 25: 57–66.  — (1995). "Multiple Denotation, Ambiguity and the Strange Case of the Missing Amoeba". Logique et Analyse 38: 361–73.  'Some Priorities of Berkeley', Logic and Reality: Essays on the Legacy of Arthur Prior, ed. B.J.Copeland, Oxford University Press, 1996. — (1996). "Everett's Trilogy" (PDF). Mind 105 (420): 631–647. doi:10.1093/mind/105.420.631.  — (1996). "On Inconsistent Arithmetics: Reply to Denyer" (PDF). Mind 105 (420): 649–659. doi:10.1093/mind/105.420.649.  Crosthwaite, J.; Priest, G (March 1996). "The definition of sexual harassment". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (1): 66–82. doi:10.1080/00048409612347071.  Reprinted in G. Lee Bowie and Meredith Michaels (eds.), 13 Questions in Ethics and Social Philosophy, Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 2nd ed., 1997. 'Paraconsistent Logic', Encyclopaedia of Mathematics; Supplement, ed. M. Hazenwinkle, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997, 400–1. 'Logic, Nonstandard', pp. 307–10, Encyclopedia of Philosophy; Supplement, ed. D.Borshert, MacMillan, 1996. Paraconsistent Logic' (with K.Tanaka), Stanford Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, created 1996. — (February 1997). "On a Paradox of Hilbert and Bernays". Journal of Philosophical Logic 26 (1): 45–56. doi:10.1023/A:1017900703234.  — (1997). "The Linguistic Construction of Reality". Exordium 6: 1–7.  — (1997). "Sylvan's Box: A Short Story and Ten Morals". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 38 (4): 573–582. doi:10.1305/ndjfl/1039540770. MR 1648853. Zbl 0926.03003.  — (1997). "Inconsistent Models of Arithmetic; I Finite Models". Journal of Philosophical Logic 26 (2): 223–235. doi:10.1023/A:1004251506208.  — (September 1997). "Sexual perversion". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 75 (3): 360–372. doi:10.1080/00048409712347951.  Translated into Croatian, ch. 9 of I. Primoratz (ed.), Suvremena filozofija seksualnosti, Zagreb: KruZak, 2003. — (1997). "Yablo's Paradox" (PDF). Analysis 57 (4): 236–42. doi:10.1093/analys/57.4.236.  'Language, its Possibility, and Ineffability', pp. 790–794 of P. Wiengartner, G.Schurz and G.Dorn (eds.), Proceedings of the 20th International Wittgenstein Symposium, The Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society, 1997. — (1998). "What's so Bad about Contradictions?". Journal of Philosophy 95 (8): 410–426. doi:10.2307/2564636.  —; Tanaka, K. (1997). "On an Error in Grove's Proof". Logique et Analyse (158): 215–7.  'Paraconsistent Logic', Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol.7, 208–11, ed. E.Craig, Routledge, 1998. — (1998). "Fuzzy Identity and Local Validity". Monist 81: 331–342. doi:10.5840/monist19988123.  'Number', Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol.7, 47–54, ed. E.Craig, Routledge, 1998. — (1998). "To be and Not to Be – That is the Answer. On Aristotle on the Law of Non-Contradiction". Philosophiegeschichte und Logische Analyse 1: 91–130.  — (1998). "The Trivial Object and the Non-Triviality of a Semantically Closed Theory with Descriptions". Journal of Applied and Non-Classical Logic 8: 171–183. doi:10.1080/11663081.1998.10510937.  — (1998). "The Import of Inclosure; some Comments on Grattan-Guinness" (PDF). Mind 107 (428): 835–840. doi:10.1093/mind/107.428.835.  'Dialetheism', Stanford Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, created 1998. [1] 'What not? A Defence of a Dialetheic Account of Negation', in D.Gabbay and H.Wansing (eds.), What is Negation?, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999. — (1999). "Negation as Cancellation, and Connexivism". Topoi 18 (2): 141–8. doi:10.1023/A:1006294205280.  — (1999). "On a Version of one of Zeno's Paradoxes" (PDF). Analysis 59 (1): 1–2. doi:10.1093/analys/59.1.1.  — (December 1999). "Perceiving contradictions". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77 (4): 439–446. doi:10.1080/00048409912349211.  — (December 1999). "Semantic Closure, Descriptions and Non-Triviality". Journal of Philosophical Logic 28 (6): 549–558. doi:10.1023/A:1004608013532.  'Validity', pp. 183–206 of A.Varzi (ed.) The Nature of Logic, CSLI Publications, 1999. (European Review of Philosophy, vol. 4). An abbreviated version under the same title appears as pp. 18–25 of The Logica Yearbook, 1997, ed. T.Childers, Institute of Philosophy, Czech Republic. — (July 2000). "Truth and Contradiction". Philosophical Quarterly 50 (200): 305–319. doi:10.1111/j.0031-8094.2000.00187.x.  — (2001). "Paraconsistent Belief Revision". Theoria 68: 214–228. doi:10.1111/j.1755-2567.2001.tb00204.x.  — (June 2000). "Could everything be true?". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (2): 189–195. doi:10.1080/00048400012349471.  — (2000). "The Logic of Backwards Inductions". Economics and Philosophy 16 (2): 267–285. doi:10.1017/S0266267100000250.  ‘Worlds Apart', Mind! 2000 (a supplement to Mind 109 (2000)), 25–31. — (2000). "Vasil'év and Imaginary Logic". History and Philosophy of Logic 21 (2): 135–146. doi:10.1080/01445340050064031.  'Motivations for Paraconsistency: the Slippery Slope from Classical Logic to Dialetheism', in D.Batens et al. (eds.), Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic, Research Studies Press, 2000. — (2000). "Inconsistent Models of Arithmetic II; the Genera Case". Journal of Symbolic Logic 65 (4): 1519–29. doi:10.2307/2695062.  — (2000). "On the Principle of Uniform Solution: a Reply to Smith" (PDF). Mind 109 (433): 123–6. doi:10.1093/mind/109.433.123.  — (December 2000). "Objects of thought". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 78 (4): 494–502. doi:10.1080/00048400012349761.  Logic: One or Many’ in J. Woods, and B. Brown (eds.), pp. 23–28 of Logical Consequence: Rival Approaches Proceedings of the 1999 Conference of the Society of Exact Philosophy, Stanmore: Hermes, 2001. 'Heidegger and the Grammar of Being’, ch. 10 of R.Gaskin (ed.), Grammar in Early 20th Century Philosophy, Routledge, 2001. ‘Why it’s Irrational to Believe in Consistency’, pp. 284–93 of Rationality and Irrationality; Proc. 23rd International Wittgenstein Symposium, eds., B.Brogard and B.Smith, 2001. 'Paraconsistent Logic', Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Vol. 6, pp. 287 – 393, eds. D.Gabbay and F. Guenthner, 2nd edition, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. 'Inconsistency and the Empirical Sciences', in J. Meheus (ed.), Inconsistency in Science, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. ‘Logicians Setting Together Contradictories. A Perspective on Relevance, Paraconsistency, and Dialetheism’, ch. 14 of D.Jacquette (ed.), A Companion to Philosophical Logic, Blackwell, 2002. ‘Fuzzy Relevant Logic’, Paraconsistency: the Logical Way to the Inconsistent, ed. W.Carnielli et al., Marcel Dekker, 2002. — (October 2002). "The Hooded Man". Journal of Philosophical Logic 31 (5): 445–467. doi:10.1023/A:1020153327867.  — (2002). "Rational Dilemmas" (PDF). Analysis 62 (1): 11–16. doi:10.1093/analys/62.1.11.  — (2003). "Meinong and the Philosophy of Mathematics". Philosophica Mathematica 11: 3–15. doi:10.1093/philmat/11.1.3.  — (2003). "On Alternative Geometries, Arithmetics, and Logics; a Tribute to Łukasiewicz". Studia Logica 74 (3): 441–468. doi:10.1023/A:1025123418085.  — (June 2003). "Where is Philosophy at the Start of the Twenty First century?". Proc. Aristotelian Society 103 (1): 85–96. doi:10.1111/j.0066-7372.2003.00065.x.  ‘Geometries and Arithmetics’, pp. 65–78 of P.Weingartner (ed.), Alternative Logics; Do Sciences Need Them?, Springer Verlag, 2003. A Site for Sorites', pp. 9–23 of J. C. Beall (ed.), Liars and Heaps: New Essays on Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2003. 'Inconsistent Arithmetic: Issues Technical and Philosophical', pp. 273–99 of V. F. Hendricks and J. Malinowski (eds.), Trends in Logic: 50 Years of Studia Logica (Studia Logica Library, Vol. 21), Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003. 'Nagarjuna and the Limits of Thought’ (with Jay Garfield), Philosophy East West 53 (2003), 1–21. Reprinted as ch. 5 of J. Garfield, Empty Words, Oxford University Press, 2002. 'Consistency, Paraconsistency and the Logical Limitative Theorems', in Grenzen und Grenzüberschreitungen (XIX Deutscher Kongress für Philosphie), ed. W. Hogrebe and J. Bromond, Akademie Verlag, 2004. Bryson, Brown; Priest, G (August 2004). "Chunk and Permeate, a Paraconsistent Inference Strategy. Part I: The Infinitesimal Calculus". Journal of Philosophical Logic 33 (4): 379–388. doi:10.1023/B:LOGI.0000036831.48866.12.  —; Read, Stephen (September 2004). "Intentionality: Meinongianisn and the Medievals". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 82 (3): 421–442. doi:10.1080/713659877.  'Spiking the Field Artillery', in J. C. Beall and B. Armour-Garb (eds.), ch. 3 of Truth and Deflationism, Oxford University Press, 2005. —; Colyvan, Mark; Garfield, Jay (2005). "Problems with the Argument for Fine Tuning". Synthese 145 (3): 325–338. doi:10.1007/s11229-005-6195-0.  — (2005). "Words Without Knowledge". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (3): 686–694. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2005.tb00481.x.  'The Limits of Language' in K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, (second edition) Vol.7, 156–9, Elsevier, 2005. —; Armour-Garb, Brad (2005). "Analetheism: a Phyrric Victory" (PDF). Analysis 65 (2): 167–173. doi:10.1093/analys/65.2.167.  — (2005). "Analysing of the Iraqi Adventure". Ormond Papers 22: 147–150.  'The Paradoxes of Denotation', ch. 7 of Self-Reference, eds. T. Bolander, V. F. Hendrix, and S. A Pedersen, CLSI Lecture Notes, Stanford University, 2006. ‘Logic, Paraconsistent’, in D. Borchert (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (second edition), Macmillan, 2006, Vol. 7, 105–6. ‘Logic, Relevant (Relevance)’, in D. Borchert (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (second edition), Macmillan, 2006, Vol. 8, 358–9. 'Motion', in D. Borchert (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy (second edition), Macmillan, 2006, Vol. 6, 409–11. Beall, JC; Brady, Ross T.; Hazen, A.P.; Priest, G; Restall, G. (December 2006). "Relevant Restricted Quantification" (PDF). Journal of Philosophical Logic 35 (6): 587–598. doi:10.1007/s10992-005-9008-5.  — (2006). "What is Philosophy?". Philosophy 81 (2): 189–207. doi:10.1017/S0031819106316026.  — (2006). "A Hundred Flowers". Topoi 25: 91–5. doi:10.1007/s11245-006-0014-1.  —; Beall, JC (2007). "Not so Deep Inconsistency: a Reply to Eklund". Australasian Journal of Logic 5: 74–84.  'Paraconsistency and Dialetheism', pp. 129–204 of Handbook of the History of Logic, Vol. 8, eds. D. Gabbay and J. Woods, North Holland, 2007. 'Reply to Slater', pp. 467–74 of J-Y Beziau, W. Carnielli and D. Gabbay (eds.), Handbook of Paraconsistency, College Publications, 2007. —; Thomason, Neil (2007). "60% Proof: Proof, Lakatos and Paraconsistency". Australasian Journal of Logic 5: 89–100.  ‘Revenge, Field, and ZF’, ch. 9 of JC Beall (ed.), Revenge of the Liar: New Essays on the Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2007. — (2007). "How the Particular Quantifier became Existentially Loaded Behind our Backs". Soochow Journal of Philosophical Studies 16: 197–213.  — (2007). "Translation of 'Logic of Paradox', 'La Logique du paraqdoxe'". Philosophie 94: 72–94.  —; Garfield, J.; Deguchi, Y. (2008). "The Way of the Dialetheist: Contradictions in Buddhism". Philosophy East and West 58 (3): 395–402. doi:10.1353/pew.0.0011.  — (2008). "Jaina Logic: a Contemporary Perspective". History and Philosophy of Logic 29 (3): 263–278. doi:10.1080/01445340701690233.  — (2008). "Precis of Towards Non-Being". Review of Metaphysics 74: 185–190.  — (2008). "Replies to Nolan and Kroon". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 74: 208–214. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2007.00125.x.  — (2008). "Many-Valued Modal Logic: a Simple Approach". Review of Symbolic Logic 1 (2): 190–203. doi:10.1017/S1755020308080179.  — (2008). "The Closing of the Mind: How the Particular Quantifier Became Existentially Loaded Behind our Backs". Review of Symbolic Logic 1: 42–55. doi:10.1017/S1755020308080015.  "Graham Priest and Diderik Batens Interview Each Other". The Reasoner 2 (8): 2–4. 2008.  — (2008). "Creating Non-Existents: Some Initial Thoughts". Studies in Logic 1: 18–24.  — (2008). "Badici on Inclosures". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 86: 583–596.  — (2008). "Logical Pluralism Hollandaise". The Australasian Journal of Logic 6: 210–4.  'Envelops and Indifference', (with Greg Restall), pages 283–290 in Dialogues, Logics and Other Strange Things, essays in honour of Shahid Rahman, edited by Cédric Dégremont, Laurent Keiff and Helge Rückert, College Publications, 2008. [2] 'Conditionals: a Debate with Jackson', ch. 13 of I. Ravenscroft (ed.), Minds, Worlds and Conditionals: Themes from the Philosophy of Frank Jackson. Oxford University Press, 2009. ‘Beyond the Limits of Knowledge’, ch. 7 (pp. 93–104) of J. Salerno (ed.), New Essays on the Knowability Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2009. — (2009). "The Structure of Emptiness". Philosophy East and West 59 (4): 467–480. doi:10.1353/pew.0.0069.  'Mountains are Just Mountains' (with Jay Garfield), pp. 71–82 of J. Garfield and M. D’Amato (eds.), Pointing at the Moon: Buddhism. Logic and Analytic Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2009. — (December 2009). "Obituary for Leonard Goddard". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 87 (4): 693–4. doi:10.1080/00048400903208805.  Translation of 'Objects of Thought' into Japanese, in Human Ontology 15 (2009), 1–12. (Trans. S. Yamahguchi.) — (2009). "Neighbourhood Semantics for Intentional Operators". Review of Symbolic Logic 2 (2): 360–373. doi:10.1017/S1755020309090170.  'Not to Be', ch. 23 of R. Le Poidevin, P. Simons, A. McGonical, and R. Cameron (eds.), The Routledge Companion to Metaphysics, Routledge 2009. — (2009). "Dualising Intuitionist Negation". Principia 13 (2): 165–184. doi:10.5007/1808-1711.2009v13n2p165.  'A Case of Mistaken Identity’, ch. 11, pp. 205–222 of J. Lear and A. Oliver, The Force of Argument, Routledge, 2010. — (January 2010). "Hopes Fade for Saving Truth". Philosophy 85 (1): 109–140. doi:10.1017/S0031819109990489.  ‘Two Truths: Two Models’, to appear in the Cowherds (eds.), Moonshadows, Oxford University Press. ‘The Truth(s) about the Two Truths’, (with T.Tilemans and M. Siderits) to appear in the Cowherds (eds.), Moonshadows, Oxford University Press (2010). — (2010). "Inclosures, Vagueness and Self-Reference". Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 51 (1): 69–84. doi:10.1215/00294527-2010-005. MR 2666570. Zbl 05720470.    == References ==   == External links == Graham Priest personal website -- free pdfs of papers available for download Priest archive on the CUNY Philosophy Commons Video of Graham Priest & Maureen Eckert on Deviant Logic Rationally Speaking, Podcast of Graham Priest on Paradoxes and Paraconsistent Logic Arche Foundations of Logical Consequence Workshop 2009, "Is the Ternary R Depraved?" The Monthly: Graham priest on Gottlob Frege The Philosopher's Zone, 10 July 2010: "It's All about Me: A Forum on the Philosophy of the Self" The New York Times, The Stone Blog, 28 November 2010: "Paradoxical Truth" Graham Priest Photograph (full NYT version) Wikimedia Sept. 2010 Philosophy TV, 10 January 2011: Discussion of Deviant (Non-Classical) Logic, teaching logic, metafiction and logic with Maureen Eckert (UMASS Dartmouth) Two-Part Interview on Florida Student Philosophy Blog: Part 1 General Questions and Part 2 Technical Questions.

Gregory John Chaitin (/ˈtʃaɪtɨn/ CHY-tən; born 15 November 1947) is an Argentine-American mathematician and computer scientist. Beginning in the late 1960s, Chaitin made contributions to algorithmic information theory and metamathematics, in particular a computer-theoretic result equivalent to Gödel's incompleteness theorem. He is considered to be one of the founders of what is today known as Kolmogorov (or Kolmogorov-Chaitin) complexity together with Andrei Kolmogorov and Ray Solomonoff. Today, algorithmic information theory is a common subject in any computer science curriculum.   == Mathematics and computer science == He attended the Bronx High School of Science and City College of New York, where he (still in his teens) developed the theory that led to his independent discovery of Kolmogorov complexity. Chaitin has defined Chaitin's constant Ω, a real number whose digits are equidistributed and which is sometimes informally described as an expression of the probability that a random program will halt. Ω has the mathematical property that it is definable but not computable. Chaitin's early work on algorithmic information theory followed after the work of Solomonoff, Kolmogorov, and Martin-Lof. Chaitin is also the originator of using graph coloring to do register allocation in compiling, a process known as Chaitin's algorithm. He was formerly a researcher at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center in New York and remains an emeritus researcher. He has written more than 10 book titles that have been translated to about 15 languages. He is today interested in questions of metabiology and information-theoretic formalizations of the theory of evolution.   == Other scholarly contributions == Chaitin also writes about philosophy, especially metaphysics and philosophy of mathematics (particularly about epistemological matters in mathematics). In metaphysics, Chaitin claims that algorithmic information theory is the key to solving problems in the field of biology (obtaining a formal definition of 'life', its origin and evolution) and neuroscience (the problem of consciousness and the study of the mind). In recent writings, he defends a position known as digital philosophy. In the epistemology of mathematics, he claims that his findings in mathematical logic and algorithmic information theory show there are "mathematical facts that are true for no reason, they're true by accident. They are random mathematical facts". Chaitin proposes that mathematicians must abandon any hope of proving those mathematical facts and adopt a quasi-empirical methodology.   == Honors == In 1995 he was given the degree of doctor of science honoris causa by the University of Maine. In 2002 he was given the title of honorary professor by the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina, where his parents were born and where Chaitin spent part of his youth. In 2007 he was given a Leibniz Medal by Wolfram Research. In 2009 he was given the degree of doctor of philosophy honoris causa by the National University of Córdoba. He was formerly a researcher at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center and is now a professor at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.   == Criticism == Some philosophers and logicians strongly disagree with the philosophical conclusions that Chaitin has drawn from his theorems. The logician Torkel Franzén criticized Chaitin’s interpretation of Gödel's incompleteness theorem and the alleged explanation for it that Chaitin’s work represents.   == See also == Digital philosophy Halting problem Algorithmic information theory   == Bibliography == Information, Randomness & Incompleteness (World Scientific 1987) (online) Algorithmic Information Theory (Cambridge University Press 1987) online Information-theoretic Incompleteness (World Scientific 1992) (online) The Limits of Mathematics (Springer-Verlag 1998) The Unknowable (Springer-Verlag 1999) Exploring Randomness (Springer-Verlag 2001) Conversations with a Mathematician (Springer-Verlag 2002) From Philosophy to Program Size (Tallinn Cybernetics Institute 2003) Meta Math!: The Quest for Omega (Pantheon Books 2005) (reprinted in UK as Meta Maths: The Quest for Omega, Atlantic Books 2006) (arXiv preprint) Teoria algoritmica della complessità (G. Giappichelli Editore 2006) Thinking about Gödel & Turing (World Scientific 2007) Mathematics, Complexity and Philosophy (Editorial Midas 2011) Gödel's Way (CRC Press 2012) Proving Darwin: Making Biology Mathematical (Pantheon Books 2012)   == Notes ==   == References == Pagallo, Ugo (2005), Introduzione alla filosofia digitale. Da Leibniz a Chaitin [Introduction to Digital Philosophy: From Leibniz to Chaitin] (in Italian), G. Giappichelli Editore, ISBN 88-348-5635-X  Calude, Cristian S., ed. (2007), Randomness and Complexity. From Leibniz to Chaitin, World Scientific, ISBN 978-981-277-082-0    == External links == G J Chaitin Home Page List of publications of G J Chaitin Video of lecture on metabiology: "Life as evolving software" on YouTube Video of lecture on "Leibniz, complexity and incompleteness" Works by or about Gregory Chaitin in libraries (WorldCat catalog) New Scientist article (March, 2001) on Chaitin, Omegas and Super-Omegas A short version of Chaitin's proof

Grigori Mints (June 7, 1939 – May 29, 2014) was a Russian philosopher and mathematician with worked in mathematical logic. He was born in St. Petersburg, Russia, and received his Ph.D. in 1965 from the Leningrad State University under Nikolai Aleksandrovich Shanin with a thesis entitled "On Predicate and Operator Variants for Building Theories of Constructive Mathematics". In 1990 he received his D.Sc. from Leningrad State University with a thesis entitled "Proof Transformations and Synthesis of Programs". He was a Stanford University professor. Since 1991, Grigori "Grisha" Mints was a professor of philosophy and, by courtesy, of mathematics and of computer science at Stanford University. Before joining Stanford, Mints held research positions at the Steklov Mathematical Institute, the Leningrad University and the Estonian Academy of Sciences. Considered one of the most distinguished logicians in the world, Mints was passionate about the applications of logic to philosophy. His expertise was in proof theory – the analysis of the structure of mathematical reasoning. Mints was elected to the Estonian Academy of Sciences in 2008 and to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2010. Mints was a very active member of the steering committee of the WoLLIC series of workshops on logic and language, after having been a member of the community in several capacities such as invited speaker, PC member, PC chair, Organising Committee chair, guest editor of proceedings and special issue, and steering committee member.   == Selected Publications == Mints, G. (2013) Epsilon substitution for first- and second-order predicate logic. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 164(6): 733-739. Mints, G., Olkhovikov, G.V., Urquhart, A. (2013) Failure of interpolation in constant domain intuitionistic logic. "J. Symb. Log." 78(3): 937-950. Mints, G. (2013) ADC Method of Proof Search for Intuitionistic Propositional Natural Deduction. To appear in a "Festsschrift for A. Avron". Mints, G. (2012) Effective Cut-elimination for a Fragment of Modal mu-calculus. "Studia Logica" 100(1-2): 279-287. Mints, G. (2010) Cut-free formulations for a quantified logic of here and there. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 162(3): 237-242. Mints, G. (2008) Cut elimination for a simple formulation of epsilon calculus. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 152(1-3): 148-160. Mints, G. (2006) Notes on constructive negation. in R. Kahle and P. Schroeder-Heister (eds.), "Proof-Theoretic Semantics", special issue of "Synthese", 2006, 148, issue 3, pp. 701–717. Mints, G. (2006) Cut Elimination for a Simple Formulation of PAepsilon. "Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci." 143: 159-169. Mints, G. (2006) S4 is Topologically Complete for (0, 1): a Short Proof. "Logic Journal of the IGPL" 14(1): 63-71. Mints, G. (2006) Cut Elimination for S4C: A Case Study. "Studia Logica" 82(1): 121-132. Mints, G. & Zhang, T. (2005) Propositional logic of continuous transformations in Cantor space. "Arch. Math. Log." 44(6): 783-799. Kremer, Ph. & Mints, G. (2005) Dynamic topological logic. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 131(1-3): 133-158. Mints, G. & Zhang, T. (2005) A proof of topological completeness for S4 in (0, 1). "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 133(1-3): 231-245. Tatsuta, M. & Mints, G. (2005) A simple proof of second-order strong normalization with permutative conversions. "Ann. Pure Appl. Logic" 136(1-2): 134-155 Mints, G. & Muskens, R. (eds.) (2003) "Games, Logic, and Constructive Sets". Published by Center for the Study of Language and Information - Lecture Notes (Book 161), 2003. ISBN 978-1575864501 Mints, G. (2001) "A Short Introduction to Intuitionistic Logic" (University Series in Mathematics). Published by Kluwer Academic Publisher, 2001. Mints, G. (1992) "A Short Introduction to Modal Logic". Published by Center for the Study of Language and Information - Lecture Notes (Book 30), 1992. ISBN 978-0937073759 Selected Papers in Proof Theory (North-Holland), August 1992, ISBN 978-0444896193, Studies in Proof Theory series) Mints, G. & Martin-Löf, P. (eds.) (1990) "COLOG-88: International Conference on Computer Logic", Tallinn, USSR, December 12–16, 1988, Proceedings - Lecture Notes in Computer Science (Vol. 417), 1990. ISBN 978-3540523352   == References ==   == External links == Grigori Mints official website at Stanford University Tributes to Grigori Mints



Hartry H. Field (born 1946) is Silver Professor of Philosophy at New York University and a leading contributor to philosophy of language, mind, and mathematics. He previously taught at Princeton University, the University of Southern California and The Graduate Center of the City University of New York. He earned his Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University under the direction of Hilary Putnam. His first work was a commentary on Alfred Tarski's theory of truth, which he has worked on since 1972. His current view on this matter is in favor of a deflationary theory of truth. His most influential work produced in this period is probably "Theory Change and the Indeterminacy of Reference" (Journal of Philosophy, 70, 14: 462-481), in which he introduced the concept of partial denotation. In the 1980s, Field started a project in the philosophy of mathematics discussing mathematical fictionalism, the doctrine that all mathematical statements are merely useful fictions, and shouldn't be taken to be literally true. More precisely, Field holds that the existence of sets may be denied, in opposition to Quine and Putnam. Field is also Distinguished Research Professor in the Department of Philosophy, University of Birmingham, UK. Much of his current work is in the semantic paradoxes. In 2008, he gave the John Locke Lectures, entitled "Logic, Normativity, and Rational Revisability."   == BooksEdit == Science Without Numbers, Blackwell, 1980 Realism, Mathematics and Modality, Blackwell, 1989 Truth and the Absence of Fact, Oxford University Press 2001 Saving Truth from Paradox, Oxford University Press, 2008   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == http://philosophy.fas.nyu.edu/object/hartryfield

Harvey Friedman (born 23 September 1948) is a mathematical logician at Ohio State University in Columbus, Ohio. He has worked on reverse mathematics, a project intended to derive the axioms of mathematics from the theorems considered to be necessary. In recent years this has advanced to a study of Boolean relation theory, which attempts to justify large cardinal axioms by demonstrating their necessity for deriving certain propositions considered "concrete". Friedman earned his Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1967, with a dissertation on Subsystems of Analysis. His advisor was Gerald Sacks. Friedman received the Alan T. Waterman Award in 1984. He delivered the Tarski Lectures in 2007. In 1967, Friedman was listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for being the world's youngest professor when he taught at Stanford University at age 18 as an assistant professor of philosophy. He has also been a professor of mathematics and a professor of music. He officially retired in July of 2012. Friedman is the brother of mathematician Sy Friedman.   == See also == Friedman's grand conjecture   == References == ^ a b Handbook of Philosophical Logic, ISBN 0-7923-7018-X, p. 38 ^ Dr. Harvey Martin Friedman ^ Ohio State University Distinguished Lecturers (2007—2008) ^ Harvey Friedman's Degrees and Employment History   == Further reading == L. A. Harrington et al., eds., Harvey Friedman's research in the foundations of mathematics, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 117, Amsterdam, North-Holland Publishing Company (1985)   == External links == Harvey Friedman's homepage at the Ohio State University Harvey Friedman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Haskell Brooks Curry (/ˈhæskəl ˈkɜri/; September 12, 1900 – September 1, 1982) was an American mathematician and logician. Curry is best known for his work in combinatory logic; while the initial concept of combinatory logic was based on a single paper by Moses Schönfinkel, much of the development was done by Curry. Curry is also known for Curry's paradox and the Curry–Howard correspondence. There are three programming languages named after him, Haskell, Brooks and Curry, as well as the concept of currying, a technique used for transforming functions in mathematics and computer science.   == Life == Curry was born on September 12, 1900, in Millis, Massachusetts, to Samuel Silas Curry and Anna Baright Curry, who ran a school for elocution. He entered Harvard University in 1916 to study medicine but switched to mathematics before graduating in 1920. After two years of graduate work in electrical engineering at MIT, he returned to Harvard to study physics, earning a MA in 1924. Curry's interest in mathematical logic started during this period when he was introduced to the Principia Mathematica, the attempt by Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell to ground mathematics in symbolic logic. Remaining at Harvard, Curry pursued a Ph.D. in mathematics. While he was directed by George Birkhoff to work on differential equations, his interests continued to shift to logic. In 1927, while an instructor at Princeton University, he discovered the work of Moses Schönfinkel in combinatory logic. Schönfinkel's work had anticipated much of Curry's own research, and as a consequence, he moved to Göttingen where he could work with Heinrich Behmann and Paul Bernays, who were familiar with Schönfinkel's work. Curry was supervised by David Hilbert and worked closely with Bernays, receiving a Ph.D. in 1930 with a dissertation on combinatory logic. In 1928, before leaving for Göttingen, Curry married Mary Virginia Wheatley. The couple lived in Germany while Curry completed his dissertation, then, in 1929, moved to State College, Pennsylvania where Curry accepted a position at Pennsylvania State College. They had two children, Anne Wright Curry (July 27, 1930) and Robert Wheatley Curry (July 6, 1934). Curry remained at Penn State for the next 37 years. He spent one year at University of Chicago in 1931–32 under a National Research Fellowship and one year in 1938–39 at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. In 1942 he took a leave of absence to do applied mathematics for the US government during World War II. Immediately after the war he worked on the ENIAC project, in 1945 and 1946. Under a Fulbright fellowship, he collaborated with Robert Feys in Louvain, Belgium. After retiring from Penn State in 1966, Curry accepted a position at the University of Amsterdam. In 1970, after finishing the second volume of his treatise on the combinatory logic, Curry retired from the University of Amsterdam and returned to State College, Pennsylvania. Haskell Curry died on September 1, 1982 in State College, Pennsylvania.   == Work == The focus of Curry's work were attempts to show that combinatory logic could provide a foundation for mathematics. Towards the end of 1933, he learned of the Kleene–Rosser paradox from correspondence with John Rosser. The paradox, developed by Rosser and Stephen Kleene had proved the inconsistency of a number of related formal systems including one proposed by Alonzo Church (a system which had the lambda calculus as a consistent subsystem) and Curry's own system. However, unlike Church, Kleene, and Rosser, Curry did not give up on the foundational approach, saying that he did not want to "run away from paradoxes." By working in the area of Combinatory Logic for his entire career, Curry essentially became the founder and biggest name in the field. Combinatory logic is the foundation for one style of functional programming language. The power and scope of combinatory logic is quite similar to that of the lambda calculus of Church, and the latter formalism has tended to predominate in recent decades. In 1947 Curry also described one of the first high-level programming languages and provided the first description of a procedure to convert a general arithmetic expression into a code for one-address computer.  He taught at Harvard, Princeton, and from 1929 to 1966, at the Pennsylvania State University. In 1942, he published Curry's paradox. In 1966 he became professor of mathematics at the Universiteit van Amsterdam. Curry also wrote and taught mathematical logic more generally; his teaching in this area culminated in his 1963 Foundations of Mathematical Logic. His preferred philosophy of mathematics was formalism (cf. his 1951 book), following his mentor Hilbert, but his writings betray substantial philosophical curiosity and a very open mind about intuitionistic logic.   == Major publications == "Grundlagen der Kombinatorischen Logik" [Foundations of combinatorial logic]. American Journal of Mathematics (in German) (The Johns Hopkins University Press) 52 (3): 509–536. 1930. doi:10.2307/2370619. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  A theory of formal deducibility. University of Notre Dame Press. 1950. A theory of formal deducibility (2nd ed.). University of Notre Dame Press. 1957.   Outlines of a formalist philosophy of mathematics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 1951. ISBN 0444533680. Retrieved 23 July 2012.  Leçons de logique algébrique (in French). Paris: Gauthier-Villars. 1952.  Curry, Haskell; Feys, Robert (1958). Combinatory Logic I. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.  Foundations of Mathematical Logic. Mcgraw Hill. 1963.  Foundations of mathematical logic (Unabridged and corrected Dover ed.). New York: Dover Publications. 1977. ISBN 0-486-63462-0. Retrieved 23 July 2012.   Combinatory Logic II. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company. 1972. ISBN 0720422086.    == See also == Currying Curry's paradox Functional programming Lambda calculus Curry–Howard correspondence Haskell (programming language)   == References == ^ 1924. "Über die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik", Mathematische Annalen 92, pp. 305–316. Translated by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg as "On the building blocks of mathematical logic" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 355–66. ^ a b Seldin, Jonathan. "The Logic of Curry and Church".  ^ Barendregt, H.P. The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics. Elsevier. p. 4.  ^ Knuth, Donald E.; Pardo, Luis Trabb (1976). "Early development of programming languages". Stanford University, Computer Science Department, p. 22 ^ Nelson, D. (1952). "Review: A theory of formal deducibility, by H. B. Curry". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 58 (3): 415–417. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1952-09596-3.  ^ Marcus, R. Barcan (1952). "Review: Leçons de logique algébrique, by H. B. Curry". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 58 (2): 673–674. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1952-09657-9.    == Further reading == Seldin, J.P., and Hindley, J.R., eds., 1980. To H.B. Curry: Essays on combinatory logic, lambda calculus, and formalism. Academic Press. Includes biographical essay.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Haskell Curry", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Curry archives provides images of several hundred manuscript pages from 1920 to 1931. CLg. bibliography 587 pp Haskell Brooks Curry at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Heiric of Auxerre  (841–876) was a French Benedictine theologian and writer. He was an oblate of the monastery of St. Germanus of Auxerre from a young age. He studied with Servatus Lupus and Haymo of Auxerre. His own students included Remigius of Auxerre and Hucbald. His Miracula sancti Germani was a verse life of St. Germanus. Other works include his Collectaeum, a homiliary, and glosses on the Categoriae decem.   == Notes ==   == External links == Friedrich Wilhelm Bautz (1990). "Heiric of Auxerre". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 2. Hamm: Bautz. col. 689. ISBN 3-88309-032-8.  Chapter on the School of Auxerre from The History of Philosophy by William Turner, 1903. Heiric of Auxerre's labyrinth

Helena Rasiowa (June 20, 1917 – August 9, 1994) was a Polish mathematician. She worked in the foundations of mathematics and algebraic logic.   == Early years == Rasiowa was born in Vienna on June 20, 1917 to Polish parents. As soon as Poland regained its independence in 1918, the family settled in Warsaw. Helena's father was a railway specialist. She exhibited many different skills and interests, from music to business management and the most important of her interests, mathematics. In 1938, the time was not very opportune for entering a university. Rasiowa had to interrupt her studies, as no legal education was possible in Poland after 1939. Many people fled the country, or at least they fled the big towns, which were subject to German bombardment and terror. The Rasiowa family fled also, as most high-ranking administration officials and members of the government were being evacuated to Romania. The family spent a year in Lvov. After a Soviet invasion in September 1939, the town was taken over by the Soviet Union. The lives of many Poles became endangered, so Helena's father decided to return to Warsaw.   == Academic development == Rasiowa became strongly influenced by Polish logicians. She wrote her Master's thesis under the supervision of Jan Łukasiewicz and Bolesław Sobociński. In 1944, the Warsaw Uprising broke out and consequently Warsaw was almost completely destroyed. This was not only due to the immediate fighting, but also because of the systematic destruction which followed the uprising after it had been suppressed. Rasiowa's thesis burned with the whole house. She herself survived with her mother in a cellar covered by the ruins of the demolished building. After the war, Polish mathematics began to recover its institutions, its moods, and its people. Those who remained considered their duty to be the reconstruction of Polish universities and the scientific community. One of the important conditions for this reconstruction was to gather all those who could participate in re-creating mathematics. In the meantime, Rasiowa had accepted a teaching position in a secondary school. That is where she met Andrzej Mostowski and came back to the University. She re-wrote her Master's thesis in 1945 and in the next year she started her academic career as an assistant at the University of Warsaw, the institution she remained linked with for the rest of her life. At the University, she prepared and defended her PhD thesis, Algebraic Treatment of the Functional Calculi of Lewis and Heyting,in 1950 under the guidance of Prof. Andrzej Mostowski. This paper pointed to the main field of Rasiowa's future research: algebraic methods in logic. In 1956, she took her second academic degree, doktor nauk (equivalent to habilitation today) in the Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sciences, where between 1954 and 1957, she held a post of Associate Professor, becoming a Professor in 1957 and subsequently Full Professor in 1967. For the degree, she submitted two papers, Algebraic Models of Axiomatic Theories and Constructive Theories, which together formed a thesis named Algebraic Models of Elementary Theories and their Applications.   == Works == The Mathematics of Metamathematics (1963, together with Roman Sikorski) An Algebraic Approach to Non-Classical Logics (1974)   == External links == Helena Rasiowa at the Mathematics Genealogy Project "Helena Rasiowa", Biographies of Women Mathematicians, Agnes Scott College O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Helena Rasiowa", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Rasiowa's Biography A tribute to Helena Rasiowa – by Melvin Fitting On the contributions of Helena Rasiowa to mathematical logic – an article by J. M. Font Website dedicated to Helena Rasiowa

Hendrik Pieter (Henk) Barendregt (born 18 December 1947, Amsterdam) is a Dutch logician, known for his work in lambda calculus and type theory.   == Life and work == Barendregt studied mathematical logic at Utrecht University, obtaining his Masters in 1968 and his Ph.D. in 1971, both cum laude, under Dirk van Dalen and Georg Kreisel. After a postdoctoral position at Stanford University, he taught at Utrecht University. Since 1986, Barendregt has taught at Radboud University Nijmegen, where he now holds the Chair of Foundations of Mathematics and Computer Science. His research group works on Constructive Interactive Mathematics. He is also Adjunct Professor at Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA. He has been a visiting scholar at Darmstadt, ETH Zürich, Siena, and Kyoto. In 1997 Barendregt was elected member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. On 6 February 2003 Barendregt was awarded the Spinozapremie for 2002, the highest scientific award in the Netherlands. In 2002 he was knighted in the Orde van de Nederlandse Leeuw.   == Selected publications == H.P. Barendregt (1985). The Lambda Calculus — Its Syntax and Semantics. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 103. Amsterdam: North-Holland. ISBN 0-444-87508-5.  — See Errata Toyama, Y. and Klop, J.W. and Barendregt, H.P. (1989). "Termination for the Direct Sum of left-Linear Term Rewriting Systems (Preliminary Draft)". In Nachum Dershowitz. Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 3rd Int. Conf., RTA-89. LNCS 355. Springer. pp. 477–491.  Barendregt, H. (2001). "Computing and Proving (invited lecture)". In Middeldorp, A. Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 12th Int. Conf., RTA-01. LNCS 2051. Springer.  2013. Lambda Calculus with Types, part of Perspectives in Logic. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521766142   == References ==   == External links == Henk Barendregt's homepage Author profile in the database zbMATH

Rudolf Hermann Lotze (German: [ˈlɔtsə]; 21 May 1817 – 1 July 1881) was a German philosopher and logician. He also had a medical degree and was unusually well versed in biology. He argued that if the physical world is governed by mechanical laws, relations and developments in the universe could be explained as the functioning of a world mind. His medical studies were pioneering works in scientific psychology.   == Biography == Lotze was born in Bautzen (Budziszyn), Saxony, Germany, the son of a physician. He was educated at the grammar school of Zittau; he had an enduring love of the classical authors, publishing a translation of Sophocles' Antigone into Latin verse in his middle age. He attended the University of Leipzig as a student of philosophy and natural sciences, but entered officially as a student of medicine when he was seventeen. Lotze's early studies were mostly governed by two distinct interests: the first was scientific, based upon mathematical and physical studies under the guidance of E. H. Weber, Alfred Wilhelm Volkmann and Gustav Fechner. The other was his aesthetic and artistic interest, which was developed under the care of Christian Hermann Weisse. He was attracted both by science and by the idealism of Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Lotze's first essay was his dissertation De futurae biologiae principibus philosophicis, with which he gained (1838) the degree of doctor of medicine, four months after obtaining the degree of doctor of philosophy. He laid the foundation of his philosophical system in his Metaphysik (Leipzig, 1841) and his Logik (1843), short books published while still a junior lecturer at Leipzig, from whence he moved to Göttingen, succeeding Johann Friedrich Herbart in the chair of philosophy. His two early books remained unnoticed by the reading public, and Lotze first became known to a larger circle through a series of works which aimed at establishing in the study of the physical and mental phenomena of the human organism in its normal and diseased states the same general principles which had been adopted in the investigation of inorganic phenomena. These works were his Allgemeine Pathologie und Therapie als mechanische Naturwissenschaften (1842, 2nd ed., 1848), the articles "Lebenskraft" (1843) and "Seele und Seelenleben" (1846) in Rudolf Wagner's Handwörterbuch der Physiologie, his Allgemeine Physiologie des Körperlichen Lebens (1851), and his Medizinische Psychologie oder Physiologie der Seele (1852). When Lotze published these works, medical science was still under the influence of Schelling's philosophy of nature. The mechanical laws, to which external things were subject, were conceived as being valid only in the inorganic world. Mechanism was the unalterable connexion of every phenomenon a with other phenomena b, c, d, either as following or preceding it; mechanism was the inexorable form into which the events of this world are cast, and by which they are connected. The object of those writings was to establish the all-pervading rule of mechanism. But the mechanical view of nature is not identical with the materialistic. In the last of the above-mentioned works the question is discussed at great length how we have to consider mind, and the relation between mind and body; the answer is we have to consider mind as an immaterial principle, its action, however, on the body and vice versa as purely mechanical, indicated by the fixed laws of a psycho-physical mechanism. These doctrines of Lotze, though pronounced with the distinct and reiterated reservation that they did not contain a solution of the philosophical question regarding the nature of mechanism, were nevertheless by many considered to be the last word of the philosopher, a decisive rejection of the reveries of Schelling and the idealistic theories of Hegel. Published as they were during the years when the modern school of German materialism was at its height, these works of Lotze were enrolled in the opposing camp of Empirical philosophy. The misinterpretations which he had suffered induced Lotze to publish a small polemical pamphlet (Streitschriften, 1857), in which he corrected two mistakes. His opposition to Hegel's formalism had induced some to associate him with the materialistic school, others to count him among the followers of Herbart. Lotze denied that he belonged to the school of Herbart. He admitted, though, that historically the same doctrine which might be considered the forerunner of Herbart's teachings might lead to his own views, viz. the monadology of Leibniz.   == Philosophy == Lotze worked in a post-revolutionary time of transition between the idealistic and rationalist legacies of Leibniz, Kant and Hegel and the new Materialism and scientific interpretation of reality. He believed that everywhere in the wide realm of observation we find three distinct regions: the region of facts, the region of laws and the region of standards of value. These three regions are separate only in our thoughts, not in reality. Full understanding comes through conviction that the world of facts is the field in which those higher standards of moral and aesthetic value are being realized through the medium of laws. Such a union is, for him, only intelligible through the idea of a personal Deity, who in the creation and preservation of a world has voluntarily chosen certain forms and laws, through the natural operation of which the ends of His work are gained. His lectures ranged over a wide field: he delivered annually lectures on psychology and on logic (the latter including a survey of the entirety of philosophical research, Encyclopädie der Philosophie), then at longer intervals lectures on metaphysics, philosophy of nature, philosophy of art, philosophy of religion, rarely on history of philosophy and ethics. In these lectures he expounded his peculiar views in a stricter form, and during the last decade of his life he embodied the substance of those courses in his System der Philosophie, of which only two volumes have appeared (vol. I Logik, 1st ed., 1874, 2nd ed., 1880; vol. II Metaphysik, 1879). The third and concluding volume, which was to treat in a more condensed form the principal problems of practical philosophy, of philosophy of art and religion, was not completed before his death. A problem of a purely formal character for him was to try to bring unity and harmony into the scattered thoughts of our general culture. Through regression analysis he sought a harmonious view of things. He wanted especially to investigate those conceptions which form the initial assumptions and conditions of the several sciences, and to fix the limits of their applicability. The investigations will then naturally divide themselves into three parts, the first of which deals with those to our mind inevitable forms, or laws, in which we are obliged to think about things, if we think at all (metaphysics), the second being devoted to the great region of facts, trying to apply the results of metaphysics to these, specially the two great regions of external and mental phenomena (cosmology and psychology), the third dealing with those standards of value from which we pronounce our aesthetic or ethical approval or disapproval. His goal was to form some general idea how laws, facts and standards of value may be combined in one comprehensive view. The world of many things surrounds us; our notions, by which we manage correctly or incorrectly to describe it, are also ready made. What remains to be done is, not to explain how such a world manages to be what it is, nor how we came to form these notions, but to eliminate those abstract notions which are inconsistent and jarring, or to remodel and define them so that they may constitute a consistent and harmonious view. The course of things and their connexion is only thinkable by the assumption of a plurality of existences, the reality of which (as distinguished from our knowledge of them) can be conceived only as a multitude of relations. This quality of standing in relation to other things is that which gives to a thing its reality. And the nature of this reality again can neither be consistently represented as a fixed and hard substance nor as an unalterable something, but only as a fixed order of recurrence of continually changing events or impressions. The things themselves which exist and their changing phases must stand in some internal connexion; they themselves must be active or passive, capable of doing or suffering. Why not interpret at once and render intelligible the common conception originating in natural science, viz. that of a system of laws which governs the many things? But, in attempting to make this conception quite clear and thinkable, we are forced to represent the connexion of things as a universal substance, the essence of which we conceive as a system of laws which underlies everything and in its own self connects everything, but is imperceptible, and known to us merely through the impressions it produces on us, which we call things. Practical life as well as those of science are equally served if we deprive the material things outside of us of an independence, and assign to them merely a connected existence through the universal substance by the action of which alone they can appear to us. He traced material things through our scientific discovery of them, back to the culture which gave them reality through this science, and ultimately back to the values which established this culture. Lotze's historical position is of much interest. Though he disclaims being a follower of Herbart, his formal definition of philosophy and his conception of the object of metaphysics are similar to those of Herbart, who defines philosophy as an attempt to remodel the notions given by experience. In this endeavor he forms with Herbart an opposition to the philosophies of Johann Gottlieb Fichte. Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling, and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel which aimed at objective and absolute knowledge, and also to the criticism of Kant, which aimed at determining the validity of all human knowledge. What, however, with the idealists was an object of thought alone, the absolute, for Lotze cannot be defined in rigorous philosophical language; the aspirations of the human heart, the contents of our feelings and desires, the aims of art and the tenets of religious faith must be grasped in order to fill the empty idea of the absolute with meaning. These manifestations of the divine spirit again cannot be traced and understood by reducing (as Hegel did) the growth of the human mind in the individual, in society and in history to the monotonous rhythm of a speculative schematism. The essence and worth which is in them reveals itself only to the student of detail, for reality is larger and wider than philosophy. The problem, "how the one can be many", is only solved for us in the numberless examples in life and experience which surround us, for which we must retain a lifelong interest and which constitute the true field of all useful human work. This conviction of the emptiness of terms and abstract notions, and of the fullness of individual life, led Lotze to combine in his writings the two courses into which German philosophical thought had been moving since the death of its great founder, Leibniz. We may define these courses by the terms esoteric and exoteric. The former was the academic quest to systematize everything and reduce all our knowledge to an intelligible principle. This attempt missed the deeper meaning of Leibniz's philosophy. The latter was the unsystematized philosophy of general culture which we find in the work of the great writers of the classical period, Lessing, Winckelmann, Goethe, Schiller and Herder. All of these expressed in some degree their indebtedness to Leibniz. Lotze can be said to have brought philosophy out of the lecture-room into the market-place of life. By understanding and combining the strengths of each approach, he became the true successor of Leibniz. The age in which Lotze lived and wrote in Germany did not appreciate the position he took up. Frequently misunderstood, yet rarely criticized, he was nevertheless greatly admired, listened to by devoted hearers and read by an increasing circle. But this circle never attained to the unity of a philosophical school.   == Works == De futurae biologiae principiis philosophicis (1838). Reprinted in Kleine Schriften, 1885. Vol. 1, pp. 1-25 Gedichte (1840). Metaphysik (1841). Google (Oxford) Allgemeine Pathologie und Therapie als mechanische Naturwissenschaften (1842). 2nd ed., 1848. Google (Harvard) Logik (1843). Google (NYPL) 2nd ed., 1880. Ueber den Begriff der Schönheit (1845). Reprint, 1847. Google (Oxford) Allgemeine Physiologie des koerperlichen Lebens (1851). Google (Harvard) Medicinische Psychologie oder Physiologie der Seele (1852). Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Mikrokosmus: Ideen zur Naturgeschichte und Geschichte der Menschheit (1856–64). 2nd ed., 1868-72. 4th ed., 1884-88. Volume 1, 1856. Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Volume 2, 1858. Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Google (NYPL) Volume 3, 1864. Google (Oxford) Google (NYPL)  Streitschriften (1857). Google (Harvard) Geschichte der Aesthetik in Deutschland (1868). Google (Oxford) System der Philosophie. Part 1. Logik: Drei Bücher (1874). Google (Oxford) Google (UMich) Google (UWisc). 2nd ed., 1880. Part 2. Metaphysik: Drei Bücher (1879). 2nd ed., 1884.  Geschichte der deutschen Philosophie seit Kant (1882). 2nd ed., 1894. Google (UWisc) Grundzüge der Psychologie (1881). Google (Harvard) 2nd ed., 1882. Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der Naturphilosophie (1882). Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der praktischen Philosophie (1882). 2nd ed., 1884. Google (UCal) Grundzüge der Religionsphilosophie (1883). 2nd ed., 1884. Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der Logik und Encyclopädie der Philosophie (1883). 2nd ed., 1885. Google (UCal) Grundzüge der Metaphysik (1883). Google (Oxford) Grundzüge der Aesthetik (1884). Kleine Schriften (1885–91). Volume 1, 1885. Google (Oxford) Google (Stanford) Google (UWisc) Volume 2, 1886. Google (Harvard) Volume 3, 1891. Google (UWisc)   === Works in English === Lotze's Outlines of Philosophy. Part 1. Outlines of Metaphysic (1884). IA (UCal) IA (UVictoria) 1886. Google (UMich) Part 2. Outlines of the Philosophy of Religion (1885). Google (UWisc) Reprint, 1886. IA (OISE) 1895. IA (St. Michael's) 1901. Google (UWisc)  Part 3. Outlines of Practical Philosophy (1885). Google (UCal) Part 4. Outlines of Psychology (1886). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) Part 5. Outlines of Aesthetics (1886). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) Part 6. Outlines of Logic (1887). Google (UMich) IA (UToronto) 1892. Google (Harvard)  Lotze's System of Philosophy. Part 1. Logic: In Three Books (1884). Google (Oxford) IA (State Central) IA (UToronto). 2nd ed., 1888. Volume 1. IA (St. Basil's) IA (UIllinois) IA (Osmania) Google (Stanford) 2nd ed., 1888. Volume 2. IA (St. Basil's) IA (UIllinois).  Part 2. Metaphysic: In Three Books (1884). Google (Oxford) IA (State Central) IA (UToronto) 2nd ed., 1887. Volume 1. IA (Osmania) Google (Harvard) 2nd ed., 1887. Volume 2. IA (Osmania)  Microcosmus: An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the World (1885). Volume 1. IA (Union) 2nd ed., 1887. IA (UCal) IA (KCPL) 3rd ed., 1888. Google (Harvard) IA (St. Michael's) Volume 2. IA (Union) 2nd ed., 1887. IA (UCal) 3rd ed., 1888.Google (Harvard) IA (St. Michael's)   == Notes ==   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Lotze, Rudolf Hermann". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links ==  Works written by or about Hermann Lotze at Wikisource Hermann Lotze entry by David Sullivan in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Rudolf Hermann Lotze (1817–1881) entry by Nikolay Milkov in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Frederick Beiser Late German Idealism: Trendelenburg and Lotze, Oxford University Press, 2013: the most complete discussion of Lotze's philosophy in English Carl von Prantl (1884), "Lotze, Rudolf Hermann", Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (ADB) (in German) 19, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 288–290  Richard Falckenberg (1906), "Lotze, Rudolf Hermann", Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (ADB) (in German) 52, Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 93–97

Hilary Whitehall Putnam (born July 31, 1926) is an American philosopher, mathematician, and computer scientist who has been a central figure in analytic philosophy since the 1960s, especially in philosophy of mind, philosophy of language, philosophy of mathematics, and philosophy of science. He is known for his willingness to apply an equal degree of scrutiny to his own philosophical positions as to those of others, subjecting each position to rigorous analysis until he exposes its flaws. As a result, he has acquired a reputation for frequently changing his own position. Putnam is currently Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University. In philosophy of mind, Putnam is known for his argument against the type-identity of mental and physical states based on his hypothesis of the multiple realizability of the mental, and for the concept of functionalism, an influential theory regarding the mind–body problem. In philosophy of language, along with Saul Kripke and others, he developed the causal theory of reference, and formulated an original theory of meaning, introducing the notion of semantic externalism based on a famous thought experiment called Twin Earth. In philosophy of mathematics, he and his mentor W. V. Quine developed the "Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis", an argument for the reality of mathematical entities, later espousing the view that mathematics is not purely logical, but "quasi-empirical". In the field of epistemology, he is known for his critique of the well known "brain in a vat" thought experiment. This thought experiment appears to provide a powerful argument for epistemological skepticism, but Putnam challenges its coherence. In metaphysics, he originally espoused a position called metaphysical realism, but eventually became one of its most outspoken critics, first adopting a view he called "internal realism", which he later abandoned. Despite these changes of view, throughout his career he remained committed to scientific realism, roughly the view that mature scientific theories are approximately true descriptions of ways things are. In the philosophy of perception Putnam came to endorse direct realism, according to which perceptual experiences directly present one with the external world. In the past, he further held that there are no mental representations, sense data, or other intermediaries that stand between the mind and the world. By 2012, however, he rejected this further commitment, in favor of "transactionalism", a view that accepts both that perceptual experiences are world-involving transactions, and that these transactions are functionally describable (provided that worldly items and intentional states may be referred to in the specification of the function). Such transactions can further involve qualia. In his later work, Putnam has become increasingly interested in American pragmatism, Jewish philosophy, and ethics, thus engaging with a wider array of philosophical traditions. He has also displayed an interest in metaphilosophy, seeking to "renew philosophy" from what he identifies as narrow and inflated concerns. Outside philosophy, Putnam has contributed to mathematics and computer science. Together with Martin Davis he developed the Davis–Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem and he helped demonstrate the unsolvability of Hilbert's tenth problem. He has been at times a politically controversial figure, especially for his involvement with the Progressive Labor Party in the late 1960s and early 1970s.   == Personal lifeEdit == Putnam was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1926. His father, Samuel Putnam, was a scholar of Romance languages, columnist and translator who wrote for the Daily Worker, a publication of the American Communist Party, from 1936 to 1946 (when he became disillusioned with communism). As a result of his father's commitment to communism, Putnam had a secular upbringing, although his mother, Riva, was Jewish. The family lived in France until 1934, when they returned to the United States, settling in Philadelphia. Putnam attended Central High School; there he met Noam Chomsky, who was a year behind him. The two have been friends—and often intellectual opponents—ever since. Putnam studied mathematics and philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania, receiving his BA (undergraduate degree) and becoming a member of the Philomathean Society, one of the oldest collegiate literary societies in the U.S. He went on to do graduate work in philosophy at Harvard University, and later at UCLA's Philosophy Department, where he received his Ph.D. in 1951 for a dissertation entitled "The Meaning of the Concept of Probability in Application to Finite Sequences". Putnam's teacher Hans Reichenbach (his dissertation supervisor) was a leading figure in logical positivism, the dominant school of philosophy of the day; one of Putnam's most consistent positions has been his rejection of logical positivism as self-defeating. After briefly teaching at Northwestern, Princeton, and MIT, he moved to Harvard in 1965 with his wife, Ruth Anna Jacobs, who took a teaching position in philosophy at Wellesley College. Hilary and Ruth Anna were married in 1962. Ruth Anna Jacobs, descendant of a family with a long scholarly tradition in Gotha (her ancestor was the German classical scholar Christian Friedrich Wilhelm Jacobs), was born in Berlin, Germany, in 1927 to anti-Nazi political-activist parents and, like Putnam himself, she was raised an atheist (her mother was Jewish and her father had been from a Christian background). The Putnams, rebelling against the anti-Semitism that they had experienced during their youth, decided to establish a traditional Jewish home for their children. Since they had no experience with the rituals of Judaism, they sought out invitations to other Jews' homes for Seder. They had "no idea how to do it [themselves]", in the words of Ruth Anna. They therefore began to study Jewish ritual and Hebrew, and became more Jewishly interested, identified, and active. In 1994, Hilary Putnam celebrated a belated Bar Mitzvah service. His wife had a Bat Mitzvah service four years later. Hilary was a popular teacher at Harvard. In keeping with the family tradition, he was politically active. In the 1960s and early 1970s, he was an active supporter of civil rights causes and an opponent of American military intervention in Vietnam. In 1963, he organized one of the first faculty and student committees at MIT against the war. Putnam was disturbed when he learned from reading the reports of David Halberstam that the U.S. was "defending" South Vietnamese peasants from the Vietcong by poisoning their rice crops. After moving to Harvard in 1965, he organized campus protests and began teaching courses on Marxism. Hilary became an official faculty advisor to the Students for a Democratic Society and, in 1968, became a member of the Progressive Labor Party (PLP). He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1965. After 1968, his political activities were centered on the PLP. The Harvard administration considered these activities disruptive and attempted to censure Putnam, but two other faculty members criticized the procedures. Putnam permanently severed his ties with the PLP in 1972. In 1997, at a meeting of former draft resistance activists at Arlington Street Church in Boston, Putnam described his involvement with the PLP as a mistake. He said that he had been impressed at first with PLP's commitment to alliance-building, and its willingness to attempt to organize from within the armed forces. In 1976, he was elected President of the American Philosophical Association. The following year, he was selected as Walter Beverly Pearson Professor of Mathematical Logic, in recognition of his contributions to philosophy of logic and mathematics. While breaking with his radical past, Putnam has never abandoned his belief that academics have a particular social and ethical responsibility toward society. He has continued to be forthright and progressive in his political views, as expressed in the articles "How Not to Solve Ethical Problems" (1983) and "Education for Democracy" (1993). Putnam is a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. He retired from teaching in June 2000, but, as of 2009, he still gives a seminar almost yearly at Tel Aviv University. He also held the Spinoza Chair of Philosophy at the University of Amsterdam in 2001. He is the Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University. He is also a founding patron of the small liberal arts college Ralston College. His corpus includes five volumes of collected works, seven books, and more than 200 articles. Putnam's renewed interest in Judaism has inspired him to publish several recent books and essays on the topic. With his wife, he has co-authored several books and essays on the late-19th-century American pragmatist movement. Putnam began a blog in May 2014: http://putnamphil.blogspot.com.   == Philosophy of mindEdit ==   === Multiple realizabilityEdit ===  Putnam's best-known work concerns philosophy of mind. His most noted original contributions to that field came in several key papers published in the late 1960s that set out the hypothesis of multiple realizability. In these papers, Putnam argues that, contrary to the famous claim of the type-identity theory, it is not necessarily true that "Pain is identical to C-fibre firing." Pain, according to Putnam's papers, may correspond to utterly different physical states of the nervous system in different organisms, and yet they all experience the same mental state of "being in pain". Putnam cited examples from the animal kingdom to illustrate his thesis. He asked whether it was likely that the brain structures of diverse types of animals realize pain, or other mental states, the same way. If they do not share the same brain structures, they cannot share the same mental states and properties. The answer to this puzzle had to be that mental states were realized by different physical states in different species. Putnam then took his argument a step further, asking about such things as the nervous systems of alien beings, artificially intelligent robots and other silicon-based life forms. These hypothetical entities, he contended, should not be considered incapable of experiencing pain just because they lack the same neurochemistry as humans. Putnam concluded that type-identity theorists had been making an "ambitious" and "highly implausible" conjecture which could be disproven with one example of multiple realizability. This argument is sometimes referred to as the "likelihood argument". Putnam formulated a complementary argument based on what he called "functional isomorphism". He defined the concept in these terms: "Two systems are functionally isomorphic if 'there is a correspondence between the states of one and the states of the other that preserves functional relations'." In the case of computers, two machines are functionally isomorphic if and only if the sequential relations among states in the first are exactly mirrored by the sequential relations among states in the other. Therefore, a computer made out of silicon chips and a computer made out of cogs and wheels can be functionally isomorphic but constitutionally diverse. Functional isomorphism implies multiple realizability. This argument is sometimes referred to as an "a priori argument". Jerry Fodor, Putnam, and others noted that, along with being an effective argument against type-identity theories, multiple realizability implies that any low-level explanation of higher-level mental phenomena is insufficiently abstract and general. Functionalism, which identifies mental kinds with functional kinds that are characterized exclusively in terms of causes and effects, abstracts from the level of microphysics, and therefore seemed to be a better explanation of the relation between mind and body. In fact, there are many functional kinds, such as mousetraps, software and bookshelves, which are multiply realized at the physical level.   === Machine state functionalismEdit ===  The first formulation of such a functionalist theory was put forth by Putnam himself. This formulation, which is now called "machine-state functionalism", was inspired by analogies noted by Putnam and others between the mind and theoretical "Turing machines" capable of computing any given algorithm. In non-technical terms, a Turing machine can be visualized as an infinitely long tape divided into squares (the memory) with a box-shaped scanning device that sits over and scans one square of the memory at a time. Each square is either blank (B) or has a 1 written on it. These are the inputs to the machine. The possible outputs are: Halt: Do nothing. R: move one square to the right. L: move one square to the left. B: erase whatever is on the square. 1: erase whatever is on the square and print a 1. A simple example of a Turing machine which writes out the sequence '111' after scanning three blank squares and then stopping is specified by the following machine table: This table states that if the machine is in state one and scans a blank square (B), it will print a 1 and remain in state one. If it is in state one and reads a 1, it will move one square to the right and also go into state two. If it is in state two and reads a B, it will print a 1 and stay in state two. If it's in state two and reads a 1, it will move one square to the right and go into state three. Finally, if it is in state three and reads a B, it prints a 1 and remains in state three. The point, for functionalism, is the nature of the "states" of the Turing machine. Each state can be defined in terms of its relations to the other states and to the inputs and outputs. State one, for example, is simply the state in which the machine, if it reads a B, writes a 1 and stays in that state, and in which, if it reads a 1, it moves one square to the right and goes into a different state. This is the functional definition of state one; it is its causal role in the overall system. The details of how it accomplishes what it accomplishes and of its material constitution are completely irrelevant. According to machine-state functionalism, the nature of a mental state is just like the nature of the automaton states described above. Just as "state one" simply is the state in which, given an input B, such-and-such happens, so being in pain is the state which disposes one to cry "ouch", become distracted, wonder what the cause is, and so forth.   === Rejection of functionalismEdit === In the late 1980s, Putnam abandoned his adherence to functionalism and other computational theories of mind. His change of mind was primarily due to the difficulties that computational theories have in explaining certain intuitions with respect to the externalism of mental content. This is illustrated by Putnam's own Twin Earth thought experiment (see Philosophy of language). He also developed a separate argument against functionalism in 1988, based on Fodor's generalized version of multiple realizability. Asserting that functionalism is really a watered-down identity theory in which mental kinds are identified with functional kinds, Putnam argued that mental kinds may be multiply realizable over functional kinds. The argument for functionalism is that the same mental state could be implemented by the different states of a universal Turing machine. Despite Putnam's rejection of functionalism, it has continued to flourish and has been developed into numerous versions by thinkers as diverse as David Marr, Daniel Dennett, Jerry Fodor, and David Lewis. Functionalism helped lay the foundations for modern cognitive science and is the dominant theory of mind in philosophy today. By 2012 Putnam accepted a modification of functionalism called "liberal functionalism". The view holds that "what matters for consciousness and for mental properties generally is the right sort of functional capacities and not the particular matter that subserves those capacities". The specification of these capacities (1) may refer to what goes on outside the organism’s “brain”, (2) may include intentional idioms, and (3) need not describe a capacity to compute something or other.   == Philosophy of languageEdit ==   === Semantic externalismEdit === One of Putnam's contributions to philosophy of language is his claim that "meaning just ain't in the head". He illustrated this using his "Twin Earth" thought experiment to argue that environmental factors play a substantial role in determining meaning. Twin Earth shows this, according to Putnam, since on Twin Earth everything is identical to Earth, except that its lakes, rivers and oceans are filled with XYZ whereas those of earth are filled with H2O. Consequently, when an earthling, Fredrick, uses the Earth-English word "water", it has a different meaning from the Twin Earth-English word "water" when used by his physically identical twin, Frodrick, on Twin Earth. Since Fredrick and Frodrick are physically indistinguishable when they utter their respective words, and since their words have different meanings, meaning cannot be determined solely by what is in their heads. This led Putnam to adopt a version of semantic externalism with regard to meaning and mental content. The late philosopher of mind and language Donald Davidson, despite his many differences of opinion with Putnam, wrote that semantic externalism constituted an "anti-subjectivist revolution" in philosophers' way of seeing the world. Since the time of Descartes, philosophers had been concerned with proving knowledge from the basis of subjective experience. Thanks to Putnam, Tyler Burge and others, Davidson said, philosophy could now take the objective realm for granted and start questioning the alleged "truths" of subjective experience.   === Theory of meaningEdit === Putnam, along with Saul Kripke, Keith Donnellan, and others, contributed to what is known as the causal theory of reference. In particular, Putnam maintained in The Meaning of "Meaning" that the objects referred to by natural kind terms—such as tiger, water, and tree—are the principal elements of the meaning of such terms. There is a linguistic division of labor, analogous to Adam Smith's economic division of labor, according to which such terms have their references fixed by the "experts" in the particular field of science to which the terms belong. So, for example, the reference of the term "lion" is fixed by the community of zoologists, the reference of the term "elm tree" is fixed by the community of botanists, and the reference of the term "table salt" is fixed as "NaCl" by chemists. These referents are considered rigid designators in the Kripkean sense and are disseminated outward to the linguistic community. Putnam specifies a finite sequence of elements (a vector) for the description of the meaning of every term in the language. Such a vector consists of four components: the object to which the term refers, e.g., the object individuated by the chemical formula H2O; a set of typical descriptions of the term, referred to as "the stereotype", e.g., "transparent", "colorless", and "hydrating"; the semantic indicators that place the object into a general category, e.g., "natural kind" and "liquid"; the syntactic indicators, e.g., "concrete noun" and "mass noun". Such a "meaning-vector" provides a description of the reference and use of an expression within a particular linguistic community. It provides the conditions for its correct usage and makes it possible to judge whether a single speaker attributes the appropriate meaning to that expression or whether its use has changed enough to cause a difference in its meaning. According to Putnam, it is legitimate to speak of a change in the meaning of an expression only if the reference of the term, and not its stereotype, has changed. However, since there is no possible algorithm that can determine which aspect—the stereotype or the reference—has changed in a particular case, it is necessary to consider the usage of other expressions of the language. Since there is no limit to the number of such expressions which must be considered, Putnam embraced a form of semantic holism.   == Philosophy of mathematicsEdit == Putnam made a significant contribution to philosophy of mathematics in the Quine–Putnam "indispensability argument" for mathematical realism. This argument is considered by Stephen Yablo to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities, such as numbers and sets. The form of the argument is as follows. One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories, and to those entities only (commonly referred to as "all and only"). Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore, One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities. The justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the "only" part of "all and only". The assertion that "all" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism. Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry, but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position. Putnam holds the view that mathematics, like physics and other empirical sciences, uses both strict logical proofs and "quasi-empirical" methods. For example, Fermat's last theorem states that for no integer  are there positive integer values of x, y, and z such that . Before this was proven for all  in 1995 by Andrew Wiles, it had been proven for many values of n. These proofs inspired further research in the area, and formed a quasi-empirical consensus for the theorem. Even though such knowledge is more conjectural than a strictly proven theorem, it was still used in developing other mathematical ideas.   == Mathematics and computer scienceEdit == Putnam has contributed to scientific fields not directly related to his work in philosophy. As a mathematician, Putnam contributed to the resolution of Hilbert's tenth problem in mathematics. This problem was settled by Yuri Matiyasevich in 1970, with a proof that relied heavily on previous research by Putnam, Julia Robinson and Martin Davis. In computability theory, Putnam investigated the structure of the ramified analytical hierarchy, its connection with the constructible hierarchy and its Turing degrees. He showed that there exist many levels of the constructible hierarchy which do not add any subsets of the integers and later, with his student George Boolos, that the first such "non-index" is the ordinal  of ramified analysis (this is the smallest  such that  is a model of full second-order comprehension), and also, together with a separate paper with Richard Boyd (another of Putnam's students) and Gustav Hensel, how the Davis–Mostowski–Kleene hyperarithmetical hierarchy of arithmetical degrees can be naturally extended up to . In computer science, Putnam is known for the Davis-Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT), developed with Martin Davis in 1960. The algorithm finds if there is a set of true or false values that satisfies a given Boolean expression so that the entire expression becomes true. In 1962, they further refined the algorithm with the help of George Logemann and Donald W. Loveland. It became known as the DPLL algorithm. This algorithm is efficient and still forms the basis of most complete SAT solvers.   == EpistemologyEdit ==  In the field of epistemology, Putnam is known for his "brain in a vat" thought experiment (a modernized version of Descartes' evil demon hypothesis). The argument is that one cannot coherently state that one is a disembodied "brain in a vat" placed there by some "mad scientist". This follows from the causal theory of reference. Words always refer to the kinds of things they were coined to refer to, thus the kinds of things their user, or the user's ancestors, experienced. So, if some person, Mary, were a "brain in a vat", whose every experience is received through wiring and other gadgetry created by the "mad scientist", then Mary's idea of a "brain" would not refer to a "real" brain, since she and her linguistic community have never seen such a thing. Rather, she saw something that looked like a brain, but was actually an image fed to her through the wiring. Similarly, her idea of a "vat" would not refer to a "real" vat. So, if, as a "brain in a vat", she were to say "I'm a brain in a vat", she would actually be saying "I'm a brain-image in a vat-image", which is incoherent. On the other hand, if she is not a "brain in a vat", then saying that she is still incoherent, but now because she actually means the opposite. This is a form of epistemological externalism: knowledge or justification depends on factors outside the mind and is not solely determined internally. Putnam has clarified that his real target in this argument was never skepticism, but metaphysical realism. Since realism of this kind assumes the existence of a gap between how man conceives the world and the way the world really is, skeptical scenarios such as this one (or Descartes' Evil demon) present a formidable challenge. Putnam, by arguing that such a scenario is impossible, attempts to show that this notion of a gap between man's concept of the world and the way it is, is in itself absurd. Man cannot have a "God's eye" view of reality. He is limited to his conceptual schemes. Metaphysical realism is therefore false, according to Putnam.   == Metaphilosophy and ontologyEdit == In the late 1970s and the 1980s, stimulated by results from mathematical logic and by some ideas of Quine, Putnam abandoned his long-standing defence of metaphysical realism—the view that the categories and structures of the external world are both causally and ontologically independent of the conceptualizations of the human mind. He adopted a rather different view, which he called "internal realism". Internal realism was the view that, although the world may be causally independent of the human mind, the structure of the world—its division into kinds, individuals and categories—is a function of the human mind, and hence the world is not ontologically independent. The general idea is influenced by Kant's idea of the dependence of our knowledge of the world on the categories of thought. The problem with metaphysical realism, according to Putnam, was that it fails to explain the possibility of reference and truth. According to the metaphysical realist, our concepts and categories refer because they match up in some mysterious manner with the pre-structured categories, kinds and individuals that are inherent in the external world. But how is it possible that the world "carves up" into certain structures and categories, the mind carves up the world into its own categories and structures, and the two "carvings" perfectly coincide? The answer must be that the world does not come pre-structured but that structure must be imposed on it by the human mind and its conceptual schemes. In Reason, Truth, and History, Putnam identified truth with what he termed "idealized rational acceptability." The theory, which owes something to C. S. Peirce, is that a belief is true if it would be accepted by anyone under ideal epistemic conditions. Nelson Goodman had formulated a similar notion in Fact, Fiction and Forecast in 1956. In that work, Goodman went as far as to suggest that there is "no one world, but many worlds, each created by the human mind." Putnam rejected this form of social constructivism, but retained the idea that there can be many correct descriptions of reality. No one of these descriptions can be scientifically proven to be the "one, true" description of the world. This does not imply relativism, for Putnam, because not all descriptions are equally correct and the ones that are correct are not determined subjectively. Putnam renounced internal realism in his reply to Simon Blackburn in the volume Reading Putnam. The reasons he gave up his "antirealism" are stated in the first three of his replies in "The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam", an issue of the journal Philosophical Topics, where he gives a history of his use(s) of the term "internal realism", and, at more length, in his The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body and World (1999). Although he abandoned internal realism, Putnam still resists the idea that any given thing or system of things can only be described in exactly one complete and correct way. He thus accepts "conceptual relativity" - the view that it may be a matter of choice or convention, e.g., whether mereological sums exist, or whether space-time points are individuals or mere limits. In other words, having abandoned internal realism Putnam came to accept metaphysical realism in simply the broad sense of rejecting all forms of verificationism and all talk of our ‘making’ the world. Under the influence of C. S. Peirce and William James, Putnam also became convinced that there is no fact–value dichotomy; that is, normative (e.g., ethical and aesthetic) judgments often have a factual basis, while scientific judgments have a normative element.   == Neopragmatism and WittgensteinEdit == At the end of the 1980s, Putnam became increasingly disillusioned with what he perceived as the "scientism" and the rejection of history that characterize modern analytic philosophy. He rejected internal realism because it assumed a "cognitive interface" model of the relation between the mind and the world. Putnam claimed that the very notion of truth would have to be abandoned by a consistent eliminative materialist. Under the increasing influence of James and the pragmatists, he adopted a direct realist view of this relation. For a time, under the influence of Ludwig Wittgenstein, he adopted a pluralist view of philosophy itself and came to view most philosophical problems as nothing more than conceptual or linguistic confusions created by philosophers by using ordinary language out of its original context. Many of Putnam's most recent works have addressed the concerns of ordinary people, particularly their concerns about social problems. For example, he has written about the nature of democracy, social justice and religion. He has discussed the ideas of the continental philosopher, Jürgen Habermas, and has written articles influenced by "continental" ideas.   == CriticismEdit == Putnam himself may be his own most formidable philosophical adversary. His frequent changes of mind have led him to attack his previous positions. However, many significant criticisms of his views have come from other philosophers and scientists. For example, multiple realizability has been criticized on the grounds that, if it were true, research and experimentation in the neurosciences would be impossible. According to Bechtel and Mundale, to be able to conduct such research in the neurosciences, universal consistencies must either exist or be assumed to exist in brain structures. It is the similarity (or homology) of brain structures that allows us to generalize across species. If multiple realizability were an empirical fact, results from experiments conducted on one species of animal (or one organism) would not be meaningful when generalized to explain the behavior of another species (or organism of the same species). Other criticisms of MR have been proposed by Jaegwon Kim, David Lewis, Robert Richardson and Patricia Churchland. One of the main arguments against functionalism was formulated by Putnam himself: the Twin Earth thought experiment. However, there have been other criticisms. The Chinese room argument by John Searle (1980) is a direct attack on the claim that thought can be represented as a set of functions. The thought experiment is designed to show that it is possible to mimic intelligent action, without any interpretation or understanding, through the use of a purely functional system. In short, Searle describes a situation in which a person who speaks only English is locked in a room with Chinese symbols in baskets and a rule book in English for moving the symbols around. The person is instructed, by people outside the room, to follow the rule book for sending certain symbols out of the room when given certain symbols. Further, suppose that the people outside the room are Chinese speakers and are communicating with the person inside via the Chinese symbols. According to Searle, it would be absurd to claim that the English speaker inside "knows" Chinese based on these syntactic processes alone. This thought experiment attempts to show that systems that operate merely on syntactic processes cannot realize any semantics (meaning) or intentionality (aboutness). Thus, Searle attacks the idea that thought can be equated with the following of a set of syntactic rules. Thus, functionalism is an inadequate theory of the mind. Several other arguments against functionalism have been advanced by Ned Block. Putnam has consistently adhered to the idea of semantic holism, in spite of the many changes in his other positions. The problems with this position have been described by Michael Dummett, Jerry Fodor, Ernest Lepore, and others. In the first place, they suggest that, if semantic holism is true, it is impossible to understand how a speaker of a language can learn the meaning of an expression, for any expression of the language. Given the limits of our cognitive abilities, we will never be able to master the whole of the English (or any other) language, even based on the (false) assumption that languages are static and immutable entities. Thus, if one must understand all of a natural language to understand a single word or expression, language learning is simply impossible. Semantic holism also fails to explain how two speakers can mean the same thing when using the same linguistic expression, and therefore how any communication at all is possible between them. Given a sentence P, since Fred and Mary have each mastered different parts of the English language and P is related in different ways to the sentences in each part, the result is that P means one thing for Fred and something else for Mary. Moreover, if a sentence P derives its meaning from its relations with all of the sentences of a language, as soon as the vocabulary of an individual changes by the addition or elimination of a sentence, the totality of relations changes, and therefore also the meaning of P. As this is a common phenomenon, the result is that P has two different meanings in two different moments in the life of the same person. Consequently, if I accept the truth of a sentence and then reject it later on, the meaning of that which I rejected and that which I accepted are completely different and therefore I cannot change my opinions with regard to the same sentences. The brain in a vat argument has also been subject to criticism. Crispin Wright argues that Putnam's formulation of the brain-in-a-vat scenario is too narrow to refute global skepticism. The possibility that one is a recently disembodied brain in a vat is not undermined by semantic externalism. If a person has lived her entire life outside the vat—speaking the English language and interacting normally with the outside world—prior to her "envatment" by a mad scientist, when she wakes up inside the vat, her words and thoughts (e.g., "tree" and "grass") will still refer to the objects or events in the external world that they referred to before her envatment. In another scenario, a brain in a vat may be hooked up to a supercomputer that randomly generates perceptual experiences. In this case, one's words and thoughts would not refer to anything, and would therefore be devoid of content. Semantics would no longer exist and the argument would be meaningless. In philosophy of mathematics, Stephen Yablo has argued that the Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis does not demonstrate that mathematical entities are truly indispensable. The argumentation is sophisticated, but the upshot is that one can achieve the same logical results by simply replacing all occurrences of the expression "so-and-so exists" (e.g., numbers exist) by occurrences of the expression "so-and-so is assumed (or hypothesized) to exist". For example, one can take the argument for indispensability described above and replace all references to existent entities with references to entities assumed to exist as follows. 1*. One must have ontological commitments to all and only the entities that are assumed to exist and are indispensable to the best scientific theories. 2*. Mathematical entities that are assumed to exist are indispensable to the best scientific theories. Therefore, 3*. One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities that are assumed to exist. Finally, Putnam's internal realism has been accused by Curtis Brown of being a disguised form of subjective idealism. If this is the case, it is subject to the traditional arguments against that position. In particular, it falls into the trap of solipsism. That is, if existence depends on experience, as subjective idealism maintains, and if one's consciousness were to stop existing, then the rest of the universe would stop existing as well.   == Major works and bibliographyEdit == There is a detailed bibliography of Hilary Putnam's writings (with 16 books and 198 articles) compiled by Vincent C. Müller and published in 1993. Online in PhilPapers. A later version of this is on Harvard's Servers. The "Innateness Hypothesis" and Explanatory Models in Linguistics, Synthese, Vol. 17, No. 1, March 1967, pp. 12–22. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Edited with Paul Benacerraf. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964. 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. ISBN 0-521-29648-X Philosophy of Logic. New York: Harper and Row, 1971. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1972. ISBN 0-04-160009-6 Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2nd. ed., 1985 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29550-5 Mind, Language and Reality. Philosophical Papers, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975. 2003 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29551-3 Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978. Reason, Truth, and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 2004 paperback: ISBN 0-521-29776-1 Realism and Reason. Philosophical Papers, vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 2002 paperback: ISBN 0-521-31394-5 Methodology, Epistemology, and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Wolfgang Stegmüller. edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Carl G. Hempel. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1983. Epistemology, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science: Essays in Honour of Carl G. Hempel. edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Wolfgang Stegmüller. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1985. The Many Faces of Realism. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1987. ISBN 0-8126-9043-5 Representation and Reality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1988. ISBN 0-262-66074-1 Realism with a Human Face. edited by James F. Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990. 9780674749450 Description. ISBN 0-674-74945-6 Renewing Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992. 9780674760943 Description. ISBN 0-674-76094-8 Pursuits of Reason: Essays in Honor of Stanley Cavell. edited with Ted Cohen and Paul Guyer. Lubbock: Texas Tech University Press, 1993. ISBN 0-89672-266-X Words and Life. edited by James F. Conant. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1994. 9780674956070 Description. ISBN 0-674-95607-9 Pragmatism: An Open Question. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995. ISBN 0-631-19343-X The Threefold Cord: Mind, Body, and World. New York: Columbia University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-231-10287-9 Enlightenment and Pragmatism. Assen: Koninklijke Van Gorcum, 2001. 48pp. The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. Description. ISBN 0-674-01380-8 Ethics Without Ontology. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002. 9780674018518 Description. ISBN 0-674-01851-6 Jewish Philosophy as a Guide to Life: Rosenzweig, Buber, Levinas, Wittgenstein. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008. Philosophy in an Age of Science. edited by Mario De Caro and David Macarthur. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012. 9780674050136 Description.   == Works about PutnamEdit == Y. Ben-Menahem (ed.), Hilary Putnam, Contemporary Philosophy in Focus, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005. P. Clark-B. Hale (eds.), Reading Putnam, Blackwell, Cambridge (Massachusetts)-Oxford 1995. C. S. Hill (ed.), The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam, Fayetteville, Arkansas 1992. M. Rüdel, Erkenntnistheorie und Pragmatik: Untersuchungen zu Richard Rorty und Hilary Putnam, (Dissertation) Hamburg 1987. Maximilian de Gaynesford, Hilary Putnam, McGill-Queens University Press / Acumen, 2006.   == See alsoEdit ==  American philosophy List of American philosophers Rietdijk–Putnam argument   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit ==  Quotations related to Hilary Putnam at Wikiquote Hilary Putnam at PhilPapers Hilary Putnam at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Harvard University Philosophy Faculty page An extensive bibliography An extensive directory Hilary Putnam at the Mathematics Genealogy Project London Review of Books contributor page Hilary Putnam: On Mind, Meaning and Reality, Interview by Josh Harlan, The Harvard Review of Philosophy, spring 1992. Putnam, Hilary and Ruth Anna, "The Quarrel Between Poetry and Philosophy", read to the Santayana Society at its annual meeting in New York on December 28, 1995. "To Think with Integrity", Hilary Putnam's Farewell Lecture, The Harvard Review of Philosophy, Spring 2000. Putnam, "The Depths and Shallows of Experience", video lecture, UCSB, September 1, 2003. Comments by Hubert Schwyzer and Bruno Latour. Putnam, "The Fact/Value Dichotomy and its critics"; Roundtable on Externalism audio/video lecture, audio discussion, March 2007, University College Dublin. Hilary Putnam - Externalism: Its Motivation And Its Critics, video of a lecture, delivered at Harvard University on October 4, 2007 A short film about the Putnam-Rorty debate and its influence on the pragmatist revival on YouTube The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with Hilary Putnam 2010-04-21 (with transcript)

Hugh MacColl (1831–1909) was a Scottish mathematician, logician and novelist.   == Life == MacColl was the youngest son of a poor Highland family which was at least partly Gaelic-speaking. Hugh's father died when he was still an infant, and Hugh was educated largely thanks to the efforts of his elder brother Malcolm MacColl, an Episcopalian clergyman and friend and political ally of William Ewart Gladstone. Early in his acquaintanceship with Gladstone, Malcolm MacColl persuaded the Liberal politician to provide funds for Hugh's education at Oxford. It was proposed to send him to Oxford University's St. Edmund Hall, but Gladstone made this conditional on Hugh MacColl agreeing to take orders in the Church of England. Hugh MacColl refused this condition and, as a result, never obtained a university education, which may have limited his contribution to philosophy, and certainly prevented him from ever obtaining a formal academic position. After a few years working in different areas of Great Britain, MacColl relocated to Boulogne-sur-Mer, in France on the Channel, where he developed the greater part of his work and became a French citizen. MacColl was not obscure during his time. He was a lifelong regular contributor to the Educational Times. His correspondents included the logicians William Stanley Jevons and Charles Sanders Peirce. He also corresponded, and argued in print, with the young Bertrand Russell, and reviewed Alfred North Whitehead's 1898 Universal Algebra for Mind magazine.   == Works == He is known for three main accomplishments: During 1877-79, while working out a problem involving integration, he published a four-part article establishing the first known variant of the propositional calculus, terming it the "calculus of equivalent statements", preceding Gottlob Frege's Begriffschrifft. He subsequently published 11 articles in Mind magazine, 1880..1908, and a text, in an effort to attract the attention of philosophers to his work. Clarence Irving Lewis credited MacColl's late work on the nature of implication as the source of the basic ideas of Lewis's innovative work in modal logic. MacColl's work represents one of the first treatments of logical pluralism where he explores the possibilities of modal logic, logic of fiction, connexive logic, many-valued logic and probability logic. MacColl also published two novels, Mr. Stranger's Sealed Packet (1889), concerning a journey to Mars and a utopian Martian society, and Ednor Whitlock (1891), dealing with a crisis of faith occasioned by exposure to new scientific ideas. While described by a recent critic as "best left unread", the novels reveal social and moral values to which the author gave full expression in his 1909 publication Man's Origin, Destiny, and Duty, an apology for Christianity.   == Legacy == There is presently a long-term MacColl Project, a joint venture of Greifswald University in Germany and the University of Oslo, which intends to publish a critical edition of his work. Furthermore, the group of logic and epistemology at the University of Lille (France) develop MacColl's suggestions for a dynamic free logic. The December 1999 issue of the magazine Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic published the proceedings of a 1998 conference devoted to MacColl's work.   == References ==  Rahman, S. & Redmond, J., 2008. "Hugh MacColl and the Birth of Logical Pluralism". In: Handbook of History of Logic. Elsevier, vol. 4. Discusses MacColl's contributions to philosophy of language and logic including modal logic, logic of fictions and modal logic. Rahman, S. & Redmond, J., 2007. Hugh MacColl. An Overview of his Logical Work with Anthology. College Publications. Contains a long introduction to MacColl's logic and reprints of his main logical work. Kneebone, G., 2001 (1963). Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. Dover. Contains a brief introduction to the "calculus of equivalent statements." Rahman, S.; Rückert, H. (2001). "Dialogical Connexive Logic". Synthese 127 (1-2): 105–139. doi:10.1023/a:1010351931769.  Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870-1940. Princeton Uni. Press.   == External links == Special Hugh MacColl issue of the Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic (Vol. 3 no. 1) "Symbolic logic and its applications" By Hugh MacColl, full .PDF on Google Books.

Hui Shi (Chinese: 惠施; pinyin: Huì Shī; Wade–Giles: Hui4 Shih1; 380–305 BCE), or Huizi (Chinese: 惠子; pinyin: Huìzǐ; Wade–Giles: Hui4 Tzu3; "Master Hui"), was a Chinese philosopher during the Warring States period. He was a representative of the School of Names (Sophists or Dialecticians), and is famous for ten paradoxes about the relativity of time and space, for instance, "I set off for Yue (southeastern China) today and came there yesterday."   == Works mentioning Hui Shi == The philosophical writings of Hui Shi are no longer extant, but several Chinese classic texts refer to him, including the Zhan Guo Ce, Lüshi Chunqiu, Han Feizi, Xunzi, and most frequently, the Zhuangzi. Nine Zhuangzi chapters mention Hui Shi, calling him "Huizi" 26 times and "Hui Shi" 9 times. "Under Heaven" (chapter 33), which summarizes Warring States philosophies, contains all of the latter 9 references by name.   == The Ten Theses == "Under Heaven" lists Hui Shi's ten theses (sometimes referred to as the ten paradoxes):   == Relation to Zhuangzi == Most of the other Zhuangzi passages portray Hui Shi (Huizi) as a friendly rival of Zhuangzi. Hui Shi acts as an intellectual foil who argues the alternative viewpoint, or criticizes the Daoist perspective, often with moments of humor. The best known of the Zhuang-Hui dialogues concerns the subjectivity of happiness.  According to these ancient Daoist stories, Zhuangzi and Hui Shi remained friendly rivals until death.  Chad Hansen (2003:146) interprets this lament as "the loss of a philosophical partnership, of two like-minded but disagreeing intellectual companions engaged in the joys of productive philosophical argument."   == Notes == ^ Bo Mou, The Routledge History of Chinese Philosophy, Taylor & Francis, 2008, p. 167 ^ "School of Names: 5.1 The Ten Theses", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy   == References == Hansen, Chad. "The Relatively Happy Fish." Asian Philosophy 13 (2003):145-164. Kou Pao-koh. Deux sophistes chinois:Houei Che et Kong -souen Long. Paris, 1953. Lucas Thierry. Hui Shih and Kung Sun Lung: an approach from contemporary logic, Journal of Chinese Philosophy 20: 211-255 (1993). Moritz R. Hui Shi und die Entwicklung des philosophischen Denkens im alten China. Berlin, 1973. Solomon B.S. The assumptions of Hui Shih, Monumenta Serica, 1969, vol.28. P.1-40. Watson, Burton, tr. 1968. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu. New York: Columbia University Press.   == External links == Fraser, Chris. "School of Names: 5. Hui Shi" and "Life of Hui Shi", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005.

Ian Rumfitt is a British philosopher currently serving as Professor of Philosophy at the University of Birmingham.   == Life == He was educated at Victoria College, Jersey, at Balliol College, Oxford, where he was also a Junior Research Fellow, and at Princeton University. His graduate studies at Oxford were supervised by Sir Michael Dummett. He has taught at Keele University, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, University College, Oxford, where he served as a tutorial fellow from 1998 until 2005, and Birkbeck College, University of London, where he was Professor of Philosophy from 2005 until 2013. He delivered the Nelson Lectures in Philosophy at the University of Michigan in 2004. He was founding co-director of the Centre for Logic and Language within the Institute of Philosophy, School of Advanced Study, University of London. He was awarded a Philip Leverhulme Prize in 2001. From January 2016 he will be one of the editors of Philosophers' Imprint. His primary areas of research include the philosophy of logic and the philosophy of language. He also works in metaphysics, model theory, and the philosophy of mathematics, with an interest in the works of Gottlob Frege.   == Works == Rumfitt's work in the philosophy of logic culminated in the publication of "The Boundary Stones of Thought" (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2015). This book presents a sustained defense of classical logic against such philosophers as Michael Dummett and Crispin Wright. What makes Rumfitt's defense unusual is that he joins Dummett and Wright in rejecting the Principle of Bivalence, the keystone of classical semantics. So Rumfitt presents and defends non-classical semantic theories for various problematical areas of discourse which nevertheless validate classical logic. The book also presents a solution to the Sorites Paradox and a defense of Kripke-Platek set theory against the better-known Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. Rumfitt's earlier work in logic includes a 'bilateral' formalization of classical logic which avoids problems that have been held to attend its familiar 'unilateral' formalization. In the philosophy of language, he is also known for his work on plural terms, on conditionals, on ascriptions of know how, on indirect speech reports, and for his views on the relationship between truth-conditional theories of meaning in the style of Donald Davidson and the intention-based theories championed by Paul Grice. "The Boundary Stones Of Thought: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language", (2015)* "Truth and Meaning", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volumes (2014)* "Old Adams Buried", Analytic Philosophy (2013)* "Plural terms: another variety of reference?" in J. L. Bermudez (ed.) Thought, Reference and Experience: Themes from the Philosophy of Gareth Evans, (OUP, 2005) "Savoir Faire", The Journal of Philosophy (2003)* "'Yes' and 'No'", Mind (2001)* "Truth Conditions and Communication", Mind (1995)* "Content and Context: The Paratactic Theory Revisited and Revised", Mind (1993)*   == References ==   == External links == "Ian Rumfitt", Philosophy Papers

Aḥmad ibn Taymiyyah (Arabic: تقي الدين أحمد ابن تيمية) known as Ibn Taymiyyah (22 January 1263 - 26 September 1328) was a Islamic scholar, theologian and logician. He lived during the troubled times of the Mongol invasions, much of the time in Damascus. He was a member of the school founded by Ahmad ibn Hanbal and is considered by his followers, along with Ibn Qudamah, as one of the two most significant proponents of Hanbalism. In the modern era, his adherents often refer to the two as "the two sheikhs" and Ibn Taymiyyah in particular as "Sheikh ul-Islam". Ibn Taymiyyah sought the return of Sunni Islam to what he viewed as earlier interpretations of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, and is considered to have had considerable influence in contemporary Wahhabism, Salafism, and Jihadism. He is renowned for his fatwa issued against the Mongol rulers declaring jihad by Muslims against them compulsory, on the grounds that they did not follow Sharia and as such were not Muslim, their claims to have converted to Islam notwithstanding. His teachings had a profound influence on Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, and other later Wahabi scholars.   == Name == Ibn Taymiyyah's full name is Taqī ad-Dīn Abu 'l-`Abbās Ahmad ibn `Abd al-Ḥalīm ibn `Abd as-Salām ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Khidr ibn Muhammad ibn al-Khidr ibn `Ali ibn ʿAbd Allāh ibn Taymiyyah al-Ḥarrānī (Arabic: تقي الدين أبو العباس أحمد بن عبد الحليم بن عبد السلام بن عبد الله بن الخضر بن محمد بن الخضر بن على بن عبد الله ابن تيمية الحراني‎). Ibn Taymiyyah's name is unusual in that it is derived from a female member of his family as opposed to a male member, which was the normal custom at the time and still is now. Taimiyatu was a woman, famous for her scholarship and piety and the name Ibn Taymiyyah was taken up by many of her male descendents.   == Overview == Ibn Taymiyyah had a simple life, most of which he dedicated to learning, writing, and teaching. He never married nor did he have a female companion, throughout his years. Al-Matroudi says that this may be why he was able to engage fully with the political affairs of his time without holding any official position such as that of a judge. An offer of an official position was made to him but he never accepted. His life was that of a religious scholar and a political activist. In his efforts he was persecuted and imprisoned on six different occasions with the total time spent inside prison coming to over six years. Other sources say that he spent over twelve years in prison. His detentions were due to certain elements of his creed and his views on some jurisprudential issues. However according to Yahya Michot, "the real reasons were more trivial". Michot gives five reasons as to why Ibn Taymiyyah was imprisoned, they being: not complying with the "doctrines and practices prevalent among powerful religious and Sufi establishments, an overly outspoken personality, the jealousy of his peers, the risk to public order due to this popular appeal and political intrigues." Baber Johansen, a professor at the Harvard divinity school says that the reasons for Ibn Taymiyyah's incarcerations were, "as a result of his conflicts with Muslim mystics, jurists, and theologians, who were able to persuade the political authorities of the necessity to limit Ibn Taymiyyah's range of action through political censorship and incarceration." Ibn Taymiyyah's own relationship, as a religious scholar, with the ruling apparatus, who did deviate in application of shari'a law, was not always amicable. It ranged from silence to open rebellion. On occasions when he shared the same views and aims as the ruling authorities, his contributions were welcomed but when Ibn Taymiyyah went against the status quo, he was seen as "uncooperative" and on occasions spent much time in prison. Ibn Taymiyyah's attitude towards his own rulers, was based on the actions of the companions (sahaba) when they made an oath of allegiance to the Islamic Prophet Muhammad as follows; "to obey within obedience to God, even if the one giving the order is unjust; to abstain from disputing the authority of those who exert it; and to speak out the truth, or take up its cause without fear in respect of God, of blame from anyone."   == Early years ==   === Background === Ibn Taymiyyah was born in 1263 in Harran into a well-known Arabian family of theologians. His father had the Hanbali chair in Harran and later at the Great mosque of Damascus (Umayyad Mosque). His tribal root origin from Bani Namir, a tribe from the Arabian Peninsula. Harran was a city part of the Sultanate of Rum in the region of Kurdistan, now Harran is a small city on the border of Syria and Turkey, currently in Şanlıurfa province of modern-day Turkey, a place to which Moses was reportedly sent to provide guidance. Before its destruction by the Mongols, Harran was also well known since the early days of Islam for its Hanbali school and tradition, to which Ibn Taymiyyah's family belonged. His grandfather, Abu al-Barkat Majd ad-Din ibn Taymiyyah al-Hanbali (d. 1255) and his uncle, Fakhr al-Din (d. 1225) were reputable scholars of the Hanbali school of law. Likewise, the scholarly achievements of ibn Taymiyyah's father, Shihab al-deen 'Abd al-Halim ibn Taymiyyah (d. 1284) were also well known.   === Immigration to Damascus === In 1269, Ibn Taymiyyah at the age of seven together with his father, and three brothers left the city of Harran which was completely destroyed by the ensuing Mongol invasion. Ibn Taymiyyah's family moved and settled in Damascus, Syria, which at the time was ruled by the Mamluks of Egypt.   === Education === In Damascus his father served as the director of the Sukkariyya madrasa, a place where Ibn Taymiyyah also received his early education. Ibn Taymiyyah acquainted himself with the religious and secular sciences of his time. His religious studies began in his early teens, when he committed the entire Qur'an to memory and later on came to learn the Islamic disciplines of the Qur'an. From his father he learnt the religious science of Fiqh (jurisprudence) and Usul al-Fiqh (principles of jurisprudence). Ibn Taymiyyah learnt the works of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, al-Khallal, Ibn Qudamah and also the works of his grandfather, Abu al-Barakat Majd ad-Din. His study of jurisprudence was not limited to the Hanbali tradition but he also learnt the other schools of jurisprudence. The number of scholars under which he studied Hadith is said to number more than two hundred, four of whom were women. Those who are known by name amount to forty hadith teachers, as recorded by Ibn Taymiyyah in his book called Arba`un Hadithan. Serajul Haque says, based on this, Ibn Taymiyyah started to hear hadith from the age of five. One of his teachers was the first Hanbali Chief Justice of Syria, Shams ud-Din Al-Maqdisi who held the newly created position instituted by Baibars as part of a reform of the judiciary. Al-Maqdisi later on, came to gave Ibn Taymiyyah permission to issue Fatawa (legal verdicts) when he became a mufti at the age of 17. Ibn Taymiyyah's secular studies led him to devote attention to Arabic language and Arabic literature by studying Arabic grammar and lexicography under Ali ibn `Abd al-Qawi al-Tuft. He went on to master the famous book of Arabic grammar, Al-Kitab, by the Persian grammarian Sibawayhi. He also studied mathematics, algebra, calligraphy, theology (kalam), philosophy, history and heresiography. The knowledge he gained from history and philosophy, he used to refute the prevalent philosopical discourses of his time, one of which was Aristotelian philosophy. Ibn Taymiyyah learnt about Sufism and stated that he had reflected on the works of; Sahl al-Tustari, Junayd of Baghdad, Abu Talib al-Makki, Abdul-Qadir Gilani, Abu Hafs Umar al-Suhrawardi and Ibn Arabi. At the age of 20 in the year 1282, Ibn Taymiyyah completed his education.   == Life as a scholar ==  After his father died in 1284, he took up the then vacant post as the head of the Sukkariyya madrasa and began giving lessons on Hadith. A year later he started giving lessons, as chair of the Hanbali Zawiya on Fridays at the Umayyad Mosque, on Fridays, on the subject of tafsir (exegesis of Qur'an). In November 1292, Ibn Taymiyyah performed the Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca) and when he returned 4 months later, he wrote his first book aged twenty nine called Manasik al-Hajj (Rites of the Pilgrimage), in which he criticized and condemned the bid‘ah's (innovations) which he saw take place there. Ibn Taymiyyah represented the Hanbali school of thought during this time. The Hanbali school was seen as the most traditional school out of the four legal systems (Hanafi, Maliki and Shafii) because it was "suspicious of the Hellenist disciplines of philosophy and speculative theology." He remained faithful throughout his life to this school, whose doctrines he had mastered, but he nevertheless called for ijtihad (independent reasoning by one who is qualified) and discouraged taqlid.   === Relationship with authorities === Ibn Taymiyyah's emergence into the public and political sphere began in 1293 at the age of 30, when he was asked by the authorities to give an Islamic legal verdict (Fatwa) on Assaf al-Nasrani, a Christian cleric accused of insulting the Islamic prophet Muhammad. He accepted the invitation and delivered his fatwa, calling for the man to receive the death penalty. Despite the fact that public opinion was very much on Ibn Taymiyyah's side, the Governor of Syria attempted to resolve the situation by asking Assaf to accept Islam in return for his life, to which he agreed. This resolution was not acceptable to Ibn Taymiyyah who then, together with his followers, protested outside the Governor's palace demanding Assaf be put to death, on the grounds that any person -- Muslim or non-Muslim -- who insults Muhammad must be killed. This unwillingness to compromise coupled with his attempt to protest against the Governor's actions, resulted in him being punished with a prison sentence, the first of many such imprisonments to come. The French orientalist Henri Laoust says that during this incarceration Ibn Taymiyyah "wrote his first great work, al-Ṣārim al-maslūl ʿalā s̲h̲ātim al-Rasūl (The Drawn Sword against those who insult the Messenger)." Ibn Taymiyyah, together with the help of his disciples, continued with his efforts against what, "he perceived to be un-Islamic practices" and to implement what he saw as his religious duty of commanding good and forbidding wrong. Yahya Michot says that some of these incidences included: "shaving children's heads", leading "an anti-debauchery campaign in brothels and taverns", hitting an atheist before his public execution, destroying what was thought to be a sacred rock in a mosque, attacking astrologers and obliging "deviant Sufi Shaykhs to make public acts of contrition and to adhere to the Sunnah." Ibn Taymiyyah and his disciples used to condemn wine sellers and they would attack wine shops in Damascus by breaking wine bottles and pouring them onto the floor. A few years later in 1296, he took over the position of one of his teachers (Zayn al-Din Ibn al-Munadjdjaal), taking the post of professor of Hanbali jurisprudence at the Hanbaliyya madrasa, the oldest such institution of this tradition in Damascus. This is seen by some to be the peak of his scholarly career. The year he began his post at the Hanbaliyya madrasa, was a time of political turmoil. The Mamluk sultan Al-Adil Kitbugha was deposed by his vice-sultan Al-Malik al-Mansur Lajin who then ruled from 1297 to 1299. Lajin had a desire to commission an expedition against the Christians of the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia who formed an alliance with the Mongol Empire and taking part of the military campaign which lead to the destruction of Baghdad the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate and Harran the birth place of Ibn Taymiyyah, for that purpose he urged Ibn Taymiyyah to call the Muslims to Jihad. In 1298 Ibn Taymiyyah wrote an explanation of the ayat al-mutashabihat (the unclear verses of the Qur'an) called Al-`Aqidat al-Hamawiyat al-Kubra (The creed of the great people of Hama). The book is about divine attributes and it served as an answer to a question from the city of Hama, Syria. At that particular time Ash'arites held prominent positions within the Islamic scholarly community in both Syria and Egypt, and they held a certain position on the divine attributes of God. Ibn Taymiyyah in his book strongly disagreed with their views and this heavy opposition to the common Ash'ari position, caused considerable controversy. Ibn Taymiyyah collaborated once more with the Mamluks in 1300, when he joined the expedition against the Alawites , in the Kasrawan region of the Lebanese mountains. Ibn Taymiyyah thought of the Alawites as "more heritical yet than Jews and Christians," (بالنصيرية هم وسائر أصناف القرامطة الباطنية أكفر من اليهود والنصارى ; بل وأكفر من كثير من المشركين), and according to Carole Hillenbrand, the confrontation with the Shia's resulted because they "were accused of collaboration with Christians and Mongols." Ibn Taymiyya had further active involvements in campaigns against the Mongols and their Shia allies.   === Second expedition against the Alawites === Ibn Taymiyyah took part in a second military offensive in 1305 against the Alawites and the Isma`ilis in the Kasrawan region of the Lebanese mountains where they were defeated. The Alawis eventually left the region to settle in southern Lebanon.   == Involvement in Mongol invasion ==   === First invasions === The first invasion took place between December 1299 and April 1300 due to the military campaign by the Mamluks against the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia who were allied with the Mongols. The Ilkhanate army managed to reach Damascus by the end of December 1299. Ibn Taymiyyah went with a delegation of Islamic scholars to talk to Ghazan Khan, who was the Khan of the Mongol Ilkhanate of Iran, to plead clemency and to stop his attack on the Muslims. It is reported that none of the scholars said anything to the Khan except Ibn Taymiyyah who said:  "You claim that you are Muslim and you have with you Mu'adhdhins, Muftis, Imams and Shaykhs but you invaded us and reached our country for what? While your father and your grandfather, Hulagu were non-believers, they did not attack and they kept their promise. But you promised and broke your promise."  By early January 1300 the Mongol allies, the Armenians and Georgians, had caused widespread damage to Damascus and they had taken Syrian prisoners. The Mongols effectively occupied Damascus for the first four months of 1303. Most of the military had fled the city, including most of the civilians. Ibn Taymiyyah however, stayed and was one of the leaders of the resistance inside Damascus and he went to speak directily to the Mongol Ilkhan Mahmud Ghazan and his vizier Rashid al-Din Tabib. He sought the release of Muslim and dhimmi prisoners which the Mongols had taken in Syria, and after discussion, secured their release.   === Second Mongol invasion === The second invasion lasted between October 1300 and January 1301. Ibn Taymiyyah at this time began giving sermons on Jihad at the Umayyad mosque. Ibn Taymiyyah also spoke to and encouraged the Governor of Damscus, al-Afram to achieve a victory against the Mongols. He became involved with al-Afram once more, when he was sent to get reinforcements from Cairo.   === Third invasion and fatwa === The year 1303 saw the third Mongol invasion of Syria by Ghazan Khan. What has been called Ibn Taymiyyah's "most famous" fatwā was issued against the Mongols in the Mamluk's war. Ibn Taymiyyah declared that jihad against the Mongol attack on the Malmuk sultanate was not only permissible, but obligatory. The reason being that the Mongols could not, in his opinion, be true Muslims despite the fact that they had converted to Sunni Islam because they ruled using what he considered 'man-made laws' (their traditional Yassa code) rather than Islamic law or Sharia. Because of this, he reasoned they were living in a state of jahiliyyah, or pre-Islamic pagan ignorance. The fatwa broke new Islamic legal ground because "no jurist had ever before issued a general authorization for the use of lethal force against Muslims in battle," and was to influence modern Islamists in the use of violence against self-proclaimed Muslims. Ibn Taymiyyah called on the Muslims to Jihad once again and he also personally joined the eventual battle of Marj al-Saffar against the Mongol army. The battle began on 20 April of that year. On the same day, Ibn Taymiyyah declared a fatwa which exempted Mamluk soldiers from the fast during the month of Ramadan so that they could maintain their strength. Within two days the Mongols were severely defeated and the battle was won.   == Facing charges against his literalism == Ibn Taymiyah was imprisoned several times for conflicting with the ijma of jurists and theologians of his day. From the city of Wasit, Iraq, a judge requested that Ibn Taymiyyah write a book on creed which led to him writing his book, for which he faced troubles, called Al-Aqidah Al-Waasitiyyah, a work on his view of the creed (`aqidah) of the salaf which included reference to the divine attributes of God. Ibn Taymiyyah adopted the view that God should be described as he was literally described in the Qur'an and in the hadith, and that all Muslims were required to believe this because it was the view held by the early Muslim community (salaf). This created problems for the Islamic scholars of the time as it meant they all had to adhere to it. Within the space of two years (1305-1306) four separate religious council hearings were held to assess the correctness of his creed.   === 1305 hearing === The first hearing was held with the Shafii scholars who accused Ibn Taymiyyah of anthropomorphism. At the time Ibn Taymiyyah was 42 years old. He was protected by the then Governor of Damascus, Aqqush al-Afram, during the proceedings. The scholars suggested that he accept that his creed was simply that of the Hanbalites and offered this as a way out of the charge. The issue being, if Ibn Taymiyyah ascribed his creed to the Hanbali school of law then it would be just one view out of the four schools which one could follow rather than a creed everybody must adhere to. Ibn Taymiyyah was uncompromising and maintained that it was obligatory for all scholars to adhere to his creed.   === 1306 hearings and imprisonment === Two separate councils were held a year later on 22 and 28 of January 1306. The first council was in the house of the Governor of Damascus Aqqush al-Afram, who had protected him the year before when facing the Shafii scholars. A second hearing was held six days later where the Indian scholar Safi al-Din al-Hindi found him innocent of all charges and accepted that his creed was in line with the "Qur'an and the Sunna". Regardless, in April of 1306 the chief Islamic judges of the Mamluk state declared Ibn Taymiyyah guilty and he was incarcerated. He was released four months later in September.   === Further objections after release === After his release in Damascus, the doubts regarding his creed seemed to have resolved but his was not the case. A Shafii scholar, Ibn al-Sarsari, was insistent on starting another hearing against Ibn Taymiyyah which was held once again at the house of the Governor of Damascus, Al-Afram. His book Al-Aqidah Al-Waasitiyyah was still not found at fault. At the conclusion of this hearing, Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn al-Sarsari were sent to Cairo to settle the problem.   == Life in Egypt ==   === Debate on literalism and imprisonment === On arrival of Ibn Taymiyyah and the Shafi'ite scholar in Cairo in 1306, an open meeting was held. The Sultan of Egypt at the time was Al-Nasir Muhammad and his deputy attended the open meeting. Ibn Taymiyyah was found innocent. Despite the open meeting, objections regarding his creed continued and he was summoned to the Citadel in Cairo for a Munazara (legal debate), which took place on 8 April 1306. During the Munazara his views on divine attributes, specifically whether a direction could be attributed to God, were debated by the Indian Scholar Safi al-Din al-Hindi, in the presence of Islamic judges. Ibn Taymiyyah failed to convince the judges of his position and so on the recommendation of Al-Hindi was incarcerated for the charge of anthropomorphism. Thereafter, he together with his two brothers were imprisoned in the Citadel of the mountain (Qal‘at al-Jabal), in Cairo until 25 September 1307. He was freed due the help he received from two Amir's (ruler or military ruler); Salar and Muhanna ibn Isa, but he was not allowed to go back to Syria. He was then, again summoned for a legal debate but this time he convinced the judges of his views and he was allowed to go free.   === Trial for intercession and imprisonment ===  Ibn Taymiyyah continued to face troubles for his views which were found to be at odds with those of his contemporaries. His strong opposition to what he believed to be un-Islamic innovation (bid‘ah), caused upset among the prominent Sufis of Egypt including Ibn `Ata'Allah and Karim al-Din al-Amuli, and the locals who started to protest against Ibn Taymiyyah. The nature of the point under contention was Ibn Taymiyyah's stance on tawassul (intercession). In his view a person could not ask anyone other than God for help except on the day of judgement when intercession in his view would be possible. At the time, the people did not restrict intercession to just the day of judgement but rather they said it was allowed in other cases. Due to this Ibn Taymiyyah, now 45, was ordered to appear before the Shafii judge Badr al-Din in March 1308 and was questioned on his stance regarding intercession. Thereafter, he was incarcerated in the prison of the judges in Cairo for some months. After his release, he was allowed to return to Syria, should he so wish. Ibn Taymiyyah however stayed in Egypt for a further 5 years.   === House arrest in Alexandria === The year after his release in 1309 saw a change of power to a new Sultan in Egypt, Baibars al-Jashnakir whose reign was marked by economical and political unrest. His hold on power was short lived and lasted only a year. During this time, in August of 1309, Ibn Taymiyyah was taken into custody and placed under house arrest for seven months in the new sultan's palace in Alexandria. He was freed when Al-Nasir Muhammad retook the position of sultan on 4 March 1310. Having returned to Cairo a week later, he was received by the sultan Al-Nasir. The sultan would sometimes consult Ibn Taymiyyah on religious affairs and policies during the rest of his three-year stay in Cairo. During this time he continued to teach and wrote his famous book Al-Kitab al-Siyasa al-shar'iyya (Treatise on the Government of the Religious Law), a book noted for its account of the role of religion in politics.   == Return to Damascus and later years == He spent his last fifteen years in Damascus. Ibn Taymiyyah at the age of 50 returned to Damascus on 28 February 1313 by way of Jerusalem. Damascus was now under the governorship of Tankiz. In Damascus Ibn Taymiyyah continued his teaching role as professor of Hanbali fiqh. This is when he taught his most famous student, Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya, who went on to become a noted scholar in Islamic history. Ibn Qayyim was to share in Ibn Taymiyyah's renewed persecution. Three years after his arrival in the city, Ibn Taymiyyah became involved in efforts to deal with the increasing Shia influence amongst the Muslims. An agreement had been made in 1316 between the amir of Mecca and the Ilkhanate ruler Öljaitü, brother of Ghazan Khan, to allow a favourable policy towards Shi'ism in Mecca, a city that houses the holiest site in Islam, the Kaaba. Around the same time the Shia theologian Al-Hilli, who had played a crucial role in the Mongol rulers decision to make Shi'ism the state religion of Persia, wrote the book, Minhaj al-Karamah (The way of charisma), which dealt with the Shia doctrine of the Imamate and also served as a refutation of the Sunni doctrine of the caliphate. To counter this Ibn Taymiyyah wrote his famous book, Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah, as a refutation of Al-Hilli's work.   === Fatwa on divorce and imprisonment === In 1318 Ibn Taymiyyah wrote a treatise that would curtail the ease with which a Muslim man could divorce his wife. Ibn Taymiyyah's fatwa on divorce was not accepted by the majority of scholars of the time and this continued into the Ottoman era. However, almost every modern Muslim nation-state has come to adopt Ibn Taymiyyah's position on this issue of divorce. At the time he issued the fatwa, Ibn Taymiyyah revived an edict by the sultan not to issue fatwa's on this issue but he continued to do so, saying, "I cannot conceal my knowledge". As in previous instances, he stated that his fatwa was based on the Qur'an and hadith. His view on the issue was at odds with the Hanbali doctrine. This proved controversial among the people in Damascus as well as the Islamic scholars and the authorities who were against him on the issue. According to the scholars of the time, an oath of divorce counted as a full divorce and they were also of the view that three oaths of divorce taken under one occasion counted as three separate divorces. The significance of this was, that a man who divorces the same partner three times is no longer allowed to remarry that person until and if that person marries and divorces another man. Only then could the man, who took the oath, remarry his previous wife. Ibn Taymiyyah accepted this but rejected the validity of three oaths taken under one sitting, to count as three separate divorces as long as the intention was not to divorce. Moreover, Ibn Taymiyyah was of the view that a single oath of divorce uttered but not intended, also does not count as an actual divorce. He stated that since this is an oath much like an oath taken in the name of God, a person must expiate for an unintentional oath in a similar manner. Due to his views and also by not abiding to the sultan's letter two years before forbidding him from issuing a fatwa on the issue, three council hearing were held, in as many years (1318, 1319 and 1320), to deal with this matter. The hearing were overseen by the Viceroy of Syria, Tankiz. This resulted in Ibn Taymiyyah being imprisoned on 26 August 1320 in the Citadel of Damascus. He was released about five months and 8 days later, on 9 February 1321, by order of the Sultan Al-Nasir. Ibn Taymiyyah was reinstated as teacher of Hanbali law and he resumed teaching.   === Risāla on visiting tombs and final imprisonment === Ibn Taymiyyah had written a risāla (a treatise) in 1310 called Ziyārat al-ḳubūr or according to another source, Shadd al-rihal. It dealt with the validity and permissibility of making a journey to visit the tombs of prophets and saints (Wali). It is reported that in the book "he condemned the cult of saints". He declared that, the one who visits the Prophet's grave commits innovation (bidah). Criticism of the book arose after nearly 16 years of Ibn Taymiyyah writing it. and he was arrested and imprisoned at the age of 63, on 18 July 1326, in the Citadel of Damascus with an order from the sultan also prohibiting him from issuing any further fatwa's. The reason for his arrest was his declaration that the one who travels to visit the Prophet's grave commits innovation (bidah). His student Ibn Qayyim was also imprisoned with him in the Citadel.   === Life in prison ===  Ibn Taymiyyah referred to prison as "a divine blessing". During his incarceration he wrote that, "when a scholar forsakes what he knows of the Book of God and of the sunnah of his messenger and follows the ruling of a ruler which contravenes a ruling of God and his messenger, he is a renegade, an unbeliever who deserves to be punished in this world and in the hereafter." Whilst in prison he faced opposition from the Maliki and Shafii Chief Justices of Damascus, Taḳī al-Dīn al-Ik̲h̲nāʾī He remained in prison for over two years and ignored the sultan's prohibition, by continuing to deliver fatwa's. During his incarceration Ibn Taymiyyah wrote three works which are extanct; Kitāb Maʿārif al-wuṣūl, Rafʿ al-malām, and Kitāb al-Radd ʿala ’l-Ik̲h̲nāʾī (The response to al-Ik̲h̲nāʾī). The last book was an attack on Taḳī al-Dīn al-Ik̲h̲nāʾī, and explained his views, on saints (wali).   == Death == Ibn Taymiyyah fell ill in early September 1328 and died at the age of 65, on 26 September of that year, whilst in prison at the Citadel in Damascus. Once this news reached the public, there was a strong show of support for him from the people. After the authorities had given permission, it is reported that thousands of people came to show their respects. They gathered in the Citadel and lined the streets up to the Umayyad mosque which was and is still close by. A Janaza (funeral prayer) was held in the citadel by the sheikh, Muhammad Tammam, and a second was held in the mosque. A third and final funeral prayer was held by Ibn Taymiyyah's brother, the sheikh, Zain al-Din. He was buried in Damascus, in Maqbara Sufiyya (the cemetery of the Sufis), of whom he was a severe critic. His brother Sharafuddin had been buried in that cemetery before him. Oliver Leaman says that being deprived of the means of writing, led to Ibn Taymiyyah's death. It is reported that two hundred thousand men and fifteen to sixteen thousand women attended his funeral prayer. Ibn Kathir says that in the history of Islam, only the funeral of Ahmad ibn Hanbal received a larger attendance. This is also mentioned by Ibn `Abd al-Hadi. Caterina Bori says that, "In the Islamic tradition, wider popular attendance at funerals was a mark of public reverence, a demonstration of the deceased's rectitude, and a sign of divine approbation." Ibn Taymiyya is said to have "spent a lifetime objecting to tomb veneration, only to cast a more powerful posthumous spell than any of his Sufi contemporaries." On his death, his personal effects were in such demand "that bidders for his lice-killing camphor necklace pushed its price up to 150 dirhams, and his skullcap fetched a full 500." A few mourners sought and succeeded in "drinking the water used for bathing his corpse." His tomb received "pilgrims and sightseers" for 600 years. Almost 600 years after his death, the large Sufi cemetery where he was buried in was razed for redevelopment by French colonial authorities. His grave alone was left untouched after the Arab demolition teams "insisted" that his grave "was too holy to touch." His resting place is now "in the parking lot of a maternity ward", though as of 2009 its headstone was broken, according to author Sadakat Kadri.   == Students == Among those Ibn Taymiyyah taught, some went on to become accomplished Islamic Scholars. His students came from different backgrounds and belonged to various different schools (madhabs). His most famous students were Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya and Ibn Kathir. Ibn Qayyim wrote the famous poem "O Christ-Worshipper" which examined the dogma of the Trinity propounded by many Christian sects. Ibn Kathir became an influential scholar who wrote one of the most famous tafsīr's of the Qur'an called, Tafsir Ibn Kathir. His other students include: Al-Dhahabi Al-Mizzi Ibn Abd al-Hadi Ibn Muflih Imad al-din al-wasiti Najm al-Din al-Tufi   == Legacy == Al-Matroudi says that Ibn Taymiyyah, "was perhaps the most eminent and influential Ḥanbalī jurist of the Middle Ages and one of the most prolific among them. He was also a renowned scholar of Islam whose influence was felt not only during his lifetime but extended through the centuries until the present day." Ibn Taymiyyah's admirers often deemed him as Sheikh ul-Islam, an honorific title with which he is sometimes still termed today. The medieval Shafiite scholar Ibn Hajar al-`Asqalani said that calling Ibn Taymiyyah "Sheikh ul-Islam, will continue tomorrow just as it was yesterday". In reference to this Al-Matroudi says, "Ibn Hajar has been right so far and will most likely continue to be so in the future." The Ash'ari historian Al-Maqrizi said, regarding the rift between the Ash'ari's and Ibn Taymiyyah, "People are divided into two factions over the question of Ibn Taymiyyah; for until the present, the latter has retained admirers and disciples in Syria and Egypt." Rapoport and Ahmad say that, "Ibn Taymiyya was, by almost universal consensus, one of the most original and systematic thinkers in the history of Islam." Both his supporters and rivals grew to respect Ibn Taymiyyah because he was uncompromising in his views. Al-Dhahabi praised him as "the brilliant shaykh, imam, erudite scholar, censor, jurist, mujtahid, and commentator of the Qur'an," but acknowledged that Ibn Taymiyyah's cantankerous and disparaging manners alienated even his admirers because even his opponents noted his "genius and the rarity of his faults". Ibn Taymiyyah's works served as an inspiration for later Muslim scholars and historical figures, who have been regarded as his admirers or disciples. One such person was Ibn Rajab, who wrote a book called Al-Qawa'id al-Fiqhiyyah, on the history of Hanbalism. Others include; the Hajib of Damascus Katbugha al-Mansuri, the viceroy of Egypt Arghun al-Nasiri and the sixteenth century Jerusalemite qadi and Palestinian historian Mujir al-Din. In the contemporary world, he may be considered at the root of Wahhabism, the Senussi order and other later reformist movements. Ibn Taymiyyah has been noted to have influenced Rashid Rida, Abul A`la Maududi, Sayyid Qutb, Hassan al-Banna, Abdullah Azzam, and Osama bin Laden. The militant organization Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant used a fatwa of Ibn Taymiyyah to justify the burning alive of Jordanian pilot Muath al-Kasasbeh. Ibn Taymiyya's fatwa on Alawites as "more infidel than Christians and Jews" has been recited by Muslim Brotherhood affiliated scholar Yusuf al-Qaradawi and the Syrian rebel Islamist leader of Jaysh al-Islam Zahran Alloush.   == Influences == Ibn Taymiyyah was taught by scholars who were renowned in their time. However, there is no evidence that any of the contemporary scholars influenced him. A strong influence on Ibn Taymiyyah was the founder of the Hanbali school of Islamic jurisprudence, Ahmad ibn Hanbal. Ibn Taymiyyah was trained in this school and he had studied Ibn Hanbal's Musnad in great detail, having studied it over multiple times. Though he spent much of his life following this school, in the end he renounced taqlid (blind following). His work was most influenced by the sayings and actions of the Salaf (first 3 generation of Muslims) and this showed in his work where he would give preference to the Salaf over his contemporaries. The modern Salafi movement derives its name from this school of thought.   == Views ==   === God's Attributes === Ibn Taymiyyah said that God should be described as he has described himself in the Qur'an and the way Prophet Muhammad has described God in the Hadith. He rejected; the Ta'tili's who denied these attributes, those who compare God with the creation (Tashbih) and those who engage in esoteric interpretations (ta'wil) of the Qur'an or use symbolic exegesis. Ibn Taymiyyah said that those attributes which we know about from the two above mentioned sources, should be ascribed to God. Anything regarding God's attributes which people have no knowledge of, should be approached in a manner, according to Ibn Taymiyyah, where the mystery of the unknown is left to God (called tafwid) and the Muslim's submit themselves to the word of God and the Prophet (called taslim). Henri Laoust says that through this framework, this doctrine, "provides authority for the widest possible scope in personal internationalization of religion." In 1299 Ibn Taymiyyah wrote the book Al-Aqida al-hamawiyya al-kubra, which dealt with, among other topics, theology and creed. When he was accused of anthropomorphism, a private meeting was held between scholars in the house of Al-Din `Umar al-Kazwini who was a Shafii judge. After careful study of this book, he was cleared of those charges. Ibn Taymiyyah also wrote another book dealing with the attributes of God called, Al-Aqidah Al-Waasitiyyah. He faced considerable hostility towards these views from the Ash'ari's of whome the most notable were, Taqi al-Din al-Subki and his son Taj al-Din al-Subki who were influential Islamic jurists and also chief judge of Damascus in their respective times. Ibn Taymiyyah's highly intellectual discourse at explaining "The Wise Purpose of God, Human Agency, and the Problems of Evil & Justice" using God's attributes as a means has been illustrated by Dr. Jon Hoover in his work "Ibn Taymiyyah's Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism".   === On the Division of Tawhid === Ibn Taymiyyah supported the academic division of tawhid into three classifications; Rububiyyah (Allah is the Lord of all existence and disposer of all affairs), Uluhiyyah (singling out the oneness of Allah in worship) and Asmaa wa sifaat (the affirmation of the Names and Attributes of Allah). His works discuss the pagans at the time of revelation as accepting Allah's Rububiyyah but rejecting His Uluhiyyah, whereby they continued to worship idols.   === Sources of Shari'a === Of the four fundamental sources of the sharia accepted by thirteenth century Sunni jurists — Qur'an, sunnah, consensus of jurists (ijma), and qiyas (analogical reasoning), — Ibn Taymiyyah opposed the use of consensus of jurists, replacing it with the consensus of the "companions" (sahaba). Like all Islamic jurists Ibn Taymiyyah believed in a hierarchy sources for the Sharia. Most important was the Quran, and the sunnah or any other source could not abrogate a verse of the Qur'an. (For him, an abrogation of a verse, known in Arabic as Naskh, was only possible through another verse in the Qur'an.) Next was sunnah which other sources (besides the Quran) must not contradict.   ==== Consensus (ijma) ==== Concerning Consensus (ijma), he believed that consensus of any Muslims other than that of the companions of Muhammad could not be "realistically verifiable" and so was speculative, and thus not a legitimate source of Islamic law (except in certain circumstances). The consensus (ijma) used must be that of the companions found in their reported sayings or actions. According one supporter, Serajul Haque, his rejection of the consensus of other scholars was justified, on the basis of the instructions given to the jurist Shuraih ibn al-Hârith from the Caliph Umar, one of the companions of Muhammad; to make decisions by first referring to the Qur'an, and if that is not possible, then to the sayings of the Prophet and finally to refer to the agreement of the companions like himself. An example of Ibn Taymiyyah use of his interpretation was in defense of the (temporary) closing of all Christian churches in 1299 in the Mamluk Sultanate of Egypt. The closing was in violation of a the 600-year-old covenant with Christian dhimmi known as the Pact of Umar. But as Ibn Taymiyyah pointed out, while venerable, the pact was written 60 years or so after the time of the companions and so had no legal effect.   ==== Analogy (qiyas) ==== Ibn Taymiyyah considered the use of analogy (qiyas) based on literal meaning of scripture as a valid source for deriving legal rulings. Analogy is the primary instrument of legal rationalism in Islam. He acknowledged its use as one of the four fundamental principles of Islamic jurisprudence. Ibn Taymiyyah argued against the certainty of syllogistic arguments and in favour of analogy (qiyas). He argues that concepts founded on induction are themselves not certain but only probable, and thus a syllogism based on such concepts is no more certain than an argument based on analogy. He further claimed that induction itself depends on a process of analogy. His model of analogical reasoning was based on that of juridical arguments. Work by John F. Sowa have, for example, have used Ibn Taymiyyah's model of analogy. He attached caveats however to the use of analogy because he considered the use of reason to be secondary to the use of revelation. Ibn Taymiyyah's view was that analogy should be used under the framework of revelation, as a supporting source. There were some jurists who thought rulings derived through analogy could contradict a ruling derived from the Qur'an and the authentic hadith. However, Ibn Taymiyyah disagreed because he thought a contradiction between the definitive canonical texts of Islam, and definitive reason was impossible and that this was also the understanding of the salaf. Racha el-Omari says that on an epistemological level, Ibn Taymiyyah considered the Salaf to be better than any other later scholars in understanding the agreement between revelation and reason. One example for this is the use of analogy in the Islamic legal principle of maslaha (public good) about which Ibn Taymiyya believed, if there were to be any contradiction to revelation then it is due to a misunderstanding or misapplication of the concept of utility. He said that to assess the utility of something, the criteria for benefit and harm should come from the Qur'an and sunnah, a criteria which he also applied to the establishment of a correct analogy. An example of Ibn Taymiyyah's use of analogy was in a fatwa forbidding the use of hashish one the grounds that it was analogous to wine, and users should be given 80 lashes in punishment. "Anyone who disagreed was an apostate, he added, whose corpse ought not to be washed or given a decent burial."   ==== Reason (`Aql) ==== Issues surrounding the use of reason ('Aql) and rational came about in relation to the attributes of God for which he faced much resistance. At the time the Islamic scholars thought the attributes of God as stated in the Qur'an were contradictory to reason so sought other explanations instead. Ibn Taymiyyah believed that reasons itself validated the entire Qur'an as being reliable and in light of that he argued, if some part of the scripture was to be rejected then this would render the use of reason as an unacceptable avenue through which to seek knowledge. He thought that the most perfect rational method and use of reason was contained within the Qur'an and sunnah and that the theologians of his time had used rational and reason in a flawed manner.   === Criticism of the Grammarians === Ibn Taymiyyah had mastered the grammar of Arabic and one of the books which he studied was the book of Arabic grammar called Al-Kitab, by Sibawayh. In later life he met the Qur'an commentator Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati to whom he expressed that, "Sibawayh was not the Prophet of Syntax nor was he infallible. He committed eighty mistakes in his book which are not intelligible to you." Ibn Taymiyyah is thought to have severely criticized Sibawayh but the actual substance of those criticisms is not known because the book that Ibn Taymiyyah wrote, al-Bahr, within which he wrote the criticisms has been lost. He stated that when there is an explanation of an Ayah of the Qur'an or a Hadith, from the Prophet himself, the use of philology or a grammatical explanation becomes obsolete. He also said one should refer only to the understanding of the Salaf (first three generations of Muslims) when interpreting a word within the scriptural sources. However he did not discount the contributions of the grammarians completely. Ibn Taymiyyah stated that the Arabic nouns within the scriptural sources have been divided by the fuqaha (Islamic jurists) into three categories; those that are defined by the shari'a, those defined by philology (lugha) and finally those that are defined by social custom (`urf). For him each of these categories of nouns had to be used in their own appropriate manner.   === Madh'hab === Ibn Taymiyyah censured the scholars for blindly conforming to the precedence of early jurists without any resort to the Qur'an and Sunnah. He contended that although juridical precedence has its place, blindly giving it authority without contextualization, sensitivity to societal changes, and evaluative mindset in light of the Qur'an and Sunnah can lead to ignorance and stagnancy in Islamic Law. Ibn Taymiyyah likened the extremism of Taqlid (blind conformity to juridical precedence or school of thought) to the practice of Jews and Christians who took their rabbis and ecclesiastics as gods besides God. In arguing against taqlid, he said the salaf, who in order to better understand and live according to the commands of God, had to make ijtihad using the scriptural sources. The same approach, in his view, was needed in modern times. Ibn Taymiyyah believed that the best role models for Islamic life were the first three generations of Islam (Salaf); which constitute Muhammad's companions, referred to in Arabic as Sahaba (first generation), followed by the generation of Muslims born after the death of Muhammad known as the Tabi'un (second generation) which is then followed lastly by the next generation after the Tabi'un known as Tabi' Al-Tabi'in (third generation). Ibn Taymiyyah gave precedence to the ideas of the Sahaba and early generations, over the founders of the Islamic schools of jurisprudence. For Ibn Taymiyyah it was the Qur'an, the sayings and practices of Muhammad and the ideas of the early generations of Muslims that constituted the best understanding of Islam. Any deviation from their practice was viewed as bid‘ah, or innovation, and to be forbidden. He also praised and wrote a commentary on some speeches of Abdul-Qadir Gilani. He criticized the views and actions of the Rafaiyah.   === Islamic law and polity === Ibn Taymiyya believed that Islamic policy and management was based on Quran 4:58, and that the goal of al-siyasa (politics, the political) should be to protect al-din (religion) and to manage al-dunya (worldly life and affairs). Religion and the State should be inextricably linked, in his view, as the state was indispensable in providing justice to the people, enforcing Islamic law by enjoining good and forbidding evil, unifying the people and preparing a society conducive to the worship of God. He believed that "enjoining good and forbidding wrong" was the duty of every state functionary with charge over other Muslims, from the caliph to "the schoolmaster in charge of assessing children's handwriting exercises." Ibn Taymiyyah supported giving broad powers to the state. In Al-siyasa al-Shar`iyah, he focused on duties of individuals and punishments rather than rules and procedural limits of authorities. Suspected highway robbers who would not reveal their accomplices or the location of their loot, for example should be held in detention and lashed for indefinite periods. He also allowed the lashing of imprisoned debtors, and "trials of suspicion" (da`sawi al-tuham) where defendants could be convicted without witnesses or documentary proof. Henri Laoust said that Ibn Taymiyyah never propagated the idea of a single caliphate but believed the Muslim ummah or community would form into a confederation of states. Laoust further stated that Ibn Taymiyyah called for obedience only to God, and the Islamic Prophet Muhammad, and he did not put a limit on the number of leaders a Muslim community could have. However Mona Hassan, in her recent study of the political thoughts of Ibn Taymiyyah, questions this and says laoust has wrongly claimed that Ibn Taymiyyah thought of the caliphate as a redundant idea. Hassan has shown that Ibn Taymiyyah considered the Caliphate that was under the Rashidun Caliphs; Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali, as the moral and legal ideal. The Caliphate in his view could not be ceded "in favour of secular kingship (mulk).   === Jihad === Ibn Taymiyyah was noted for emphasis he put on the importance of jihad and for the "careful and lengthy attention" he gave "to the questions of martyrdom" in jihad, such as benefits and blessings to be had for martyrs in the afterlife. He asserted that martyrdom and eternal rewards and blessings ,. He wrote that, "It is in jihad that one can live and die in ultimate happiness, both in this world and in the Hereafter. Abandoning it means losing entirely or partially both kinds of happiness." He defined jihad as:  "It comprehends all sorts of worship, whether inward or outward, including love for Allah, being sincere to Him, relying on Him, relinquishing one’s soul and property for His sake, being patient and austere, and keeping remembrance of Almighty Allah. It includes what is done by physical power, what is done by the heart, what is done by the tongue through calling to the way of Allah by means of authoritative proofs and providing opinions, and what is done through management, industry, and wealth."  He gave a broad definition of what constituted "aggression" against Muslims and what actions by non-believers made jihad against them permissible. He declared  "It is allowed to fight people for (not observing) unambiguous and generally recognized obligations and prohibitions, until they undertake to perform the explicitly prescribed prayers, to pay zakat, to fast during the month of Ramadan, to make the pilgrimage to Mecca and to avoid what is prohibited, such as marrying women in spite of legal impediments, eating impure things, acting unlawfully against the lives and properties of Muslims and the like. It is obligatory to take the initiative in fighting those people, as soon as the Prophet's summons with the reasons for which they are fought has reached them. But if they first attack the Muslims then fighting them is even more urgent, as we have mentioned when dealing with the fighting against rebellious and aggressive bandits."  In the modern context, his rulings have been used by some Islamist groups to declare jihad against various governments.   === Innovation (Bid`ah) ===  Even though Ibn Taymiyyah has been called a "theologian", he totally rejected `ilm al-kalam, known as "Islamic theology", as well as some aspects of Sufism and Peripatetic philosophy, as an innovation (Bid‘ah). Ibn Taymiyyah opposed giving any undue religious honors to mosques (even that of Jerusalem, the Al-Aqsa Mosque), to approach or rival in any way the Islamic sanctity of the two most holy mosques within Islam, Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca) and Al-Masjid al-Nabawi (in Madina). As to the practice of making journey for the sole purpose of visiting a mosque, Ibn Taymiyyah has said in his books; Majmu'at al-Rasail al-Kubra, Minhaj al-Sunna and Majmu'at Fatawa, that, "Journey must not be made except to three mosques; Masjid al-Haram, Masjid al-Nabawi and Masjid Al-Aqsa". Regarding this Serajul Haque says that, "In the opinion of Ibn Taymiyyah only these three mosques have been accepted by the Prophet as the object of journeys, on account of their excellence over all other mosques and places of prayer. Ibn Taymiyyah uses a saying (hadith) of the Islamic prophet Muhammad in Bukhari and Muslim to justify his view that it is not permitted to journey exclusively to any mosque than Mecca, Medina, or Jerusalem. The ruler Sabuktegin was praised by Ibn Taymiyyah for censuring groups that he considered heretical. Ibn Taymiyyah stated that Sabuktegin, "commanded that Ahlul Bidah be publicly cursed on the minbars, and as a result the Jahmiyyah, Rafida, Hululiyah, Mu'tazilah, and Qadariyah were all publicly cursed, along with the Asharites."   ==== Pilgrimage to tombs and intercession ==== Ibn Taymiyyah considered the veneration and making pilgrimage to the tomb of saints (ziyārat al-qubūr) as an innovation. Ibn Taymiyyah said that to make a pilgrimage or journey to the tomb of a Sufi, Wali or the Prophets, is comparable to worshipping something besides God (Shirk). To make a pilgrimage to Muhammad's grave for the sole purpose of seeking intercession or aassistance was deemed by Ibn Taymiyyah as impermissable. He said that only God should be asked for help and that it is only God that can give assistance. He uses passages from the Qur'an to support his view and uses a hadith of the Prophet where he advised his companion Ibn Abbas that when a person requires anything, he should ask God. Ibn Taymiyyah said that seeking the assistance of God through intercession is allowed, as long as the other person is still alive. The evidence he uses for this is another hadith, where the people due to the lack of rain, asked Muhammad to pray to God to provide rain, to which he agreed and rain did fall but after the Prophet had died and a similar circumstance arose, the people did not go to his grave. Ibn Taymiyyah, regarding those who ask assistance from a Sufi or a wali, says that, "those who do so are kuffar, infidels." As for those who ask assistance from the grave of the Prophet or a Sheikh, he called them mushrik, someone who is engaged in shirk. Howerver, Ibn Taymiyyah was not completely against the visitation of tombs, provided that they only go to pray for the dead person and that they seek benefit from God alone.   === Mutakallimun === The mutakallimun are scholars who engage in ilm al-Kalam (rationalst theology) and they were criticised by Ibn Taymiyyah for their use of rationalist theology and philosophy. He said that the method of kalam was used by the Mu`tazilites, Jahmites and Ash`ari's. Ibn Taymiyyah considered the use of philosophical proofs and kalam to be redundant because he saw the Qur'an and the Sunna as superior rational proofs. Ibn Taymiyyah said that these explanations were not grounded in scriptural evidence such as the philosophical explanation of the divine attributes of God or the proof of God using the cosmological argument. He said that the call to Islam was not made using such methods by the Qur'an or the Prophet and that these theories have only caused errors and corruption. The mutakallimun called their use of rationalst theology usul al-din (principles of religion) but Ibn Taymiyyah said that the use of rationalist theology has nothing to do with the true usul al-din which comes from God and to state otherwise is to say that the Prophet neglected an important aspect of Islam. Ibn Taymiyyah says that the usul al-din of the mutakallimun, deserve to be named usul din al-shaytan (principles of Satanic religion). Ibn Taymiyyah's attempts to focus attention onto Qur'anic rationality was taken up by his student Ibn Qayyim, to the exception of his other followers. This focus on traditionlist rationlism was also taken up by Musa Bigiev.   === Sufism === Ibn Taymiyyah rejected two views associated with Sufism. For one he said that some Sufis insulted God with their monism, a doctrine (seemingly similar to pantheism) that God "encompasses all things". This rejection included denouncing the views of the monist Ibn Arabi. For the second he said that the view that spiritual enlightenment is of a greater importance than obeying the sharia was a failure to properly follow the example of Muhammad. On Ibn Arabi, and Sufism in general, Henri Laoust says that Ibn Taymiyyah mentions that, "he allowed himself to be deluded, in his youth, by the Futuhat of Ibn al-Arabi, before discovering how subtly heretical they were. He never condemned Ṣūfism in itself, but only that which he considered to be, in the case of too many Ṣūfis, inadmissible deviations in doctrine, ritual or morals, such as monism, antinomianism or esotericism." Ibn Taymiyyah's own writing in his book Majmu Fatawa shows that he did not completely discount Sufism when he said, "the right attitude towards Sufism, or any other thing, is to accept what is in agreement with the Qur'an and the Sunna, and reject what does not agree". He did write positively about some Sufis such as Abdul-Qadir Gilani.   === Shi'a Islam ===  Ibn Taymiyyah's severe critique of Twelver Shi'as in his book, Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah, was written in response to the book, Minhaj al-karama fi ma'rifat al-imama, by the Shi'a theologian al-`Allama al-Hilli. He focused his criticisms to the similarity between Shi'as, and Christians and Jews.   === Christianity ===  He wrote polemics against Christians.   === Non-Muslims ===  Ibn Taymiyyah strongly opposed borrowing from Christianity or other non-Muslim religions. In his text On the Necessity of the Straight Path (kitab iqtida al-sirat al-mustaqim) he preached that the beginning of Muslim life was the point at which "a perfect dissimilarity with the non-Muslims has been achieved." To this end he opposed the celebration of the observance of the birthday of the Islamic prophet Muhammad or the construction of mosques around the tombs of Sufi saints saying: "Many of them (the Muslims) do not even know of the Christian origins of these practices."   === Economic views === He elaborated a circumstantial analysis of market mechanism, with a theoretical insight unusual in his time. Regarding the power of supply and demand, Ibn Taymiyyah said, "If desire for goods increases while its availability decreases, its price rises. On the other hand, if availability of the good increases and the desire for it decreases, the price comes down." His discourses on the welfare advantages and disadvantages of market regulation and deregulation, have an almost contemporary ring to them.   == Assessment ==   === Salafism === Ibn Taymiyyah is thought by some to be the main influence behind the emergence of Salafism. He placed an emphasis on understanding Islam as it was understood by the salaf (first three generations of Muslims).   === Modern Islamism === Various concepts within modern Islamism can be attributed to Ibn Taymiyyah. His influence is noted by Yahya Mochet who says Ibn Taymiyyah "has thus become a sort of forefather of al-Qaeda." One reason for this was his categorising the world into distinct territories: the domain of Islam (dar al-Islam), where the rule is of Islam and sharia law is enforced; the domain of unbelief (dar-al-kufr) ruled by unbelievers; and the domain of war (dar al-harb) which is territory under the rule of unbelievers who are involved in an active or potential conflict with the domain of Islam. (Ibn Taymiyyah included a fourth. When the Mongols, whom he considered unbelievers, took control of the city of Mardin the population included many Muslims. Believing Mardin was neither the domain of Islam, as Islam was not legally applied with an armed forces consisting of Muslims, nor the domain of war because the inhabitants were Muslim, Ibn Taymiyyah created a new "composite" category, known as dar al-`ahd.) A second concept is making a declaration of apostasy (takfir) against a Muslim who does not obey Islam. But at the same time Ibn Taymiyyah maintained that no one can question anothers faith and curse them as based on one's own desire, because faith is defined by God and the Prophet. He said, rather than cursing or condemning them, an approach should be taken where they are educated about the religion. A further concept attributed to Ibn Taymiyyah is, "the duty to oppose and kill Muslim rulers who do not implement the revealed law (shari'a). Ibn Taymiyyah's role in the Islamist movements of the twentieth and twenty first century have also been noted by, the previous Coordinator for Counterterrosims at the United States Department of State, Daniel Benjamin who labels the chapter on the history of modern Islamic movements in his book The Age of Sacred Terror, as "Ibn Taymiyya and His children". Yossef Rapoport, a reader in Islamic history at Queen Mary, however, says this is not a probable narrative.   === Mardin fatwa and the Mardin Conference === One of Ibn Taymiyyah's most famous fatwa's is regarding the Mongols who had conquered and destroyed the Abbasid caliphate in 1258 and had, then converted to Islam. Once they were in control of Mardin, they behaved unjustly with their subjects so the people of Mardin asked Ibn Taymiyyah for a legal verdict regarding the classification of the territory under which they live. He categorized the territory as dar al-`ahd which in some ways is similar to dar al-kufr (domain of unbelievers). Included in his verdict was declaring the Mongol ruler Ghazan and other Mongols who did not accept shari'a in full, as unbelievers. According to Nettler and Kéchichian, Ibn Taymiyyah affirmed that Jihad against the Mongols, " was not only permissible but obligatory because the latter ruled not according to Sharīʿah but through their traditional, and therefore manmade, Yassa code. This essentially meant that Mongols were living in a state of jāhilīyah (ignorance)." The authors further state that his two famous student, Ibn Qayyim and Ibn Kathir, agreed with this ruling. He called for a defensive jihad to mobilise the people to kill the Mongol rulers and any one who supported them, Muslim or non-Muslim. Ibn Taymiyyah when talking about those who support the Mongols said, "Everyone who is with them (Mongols) in the state over which they rule has to be regarded as belonging to the most evil class of men. He is either an atheist (zindīq) or a hypocrite who does not believe in the essence of the religion of Islam. This means that he (only) outwardly pretends to be Muslim or he belongs to the worst class of all people who are the people of the bida` (heretical innovations)." Yahya Mochet says that, Ibn Taymiyyah's call to war was not simply to cause a "rebellion against the political power in place" but to repel an "external enemy". In 2010 a group of Islamic Scholars at the Mardin conference argued that Ibn Taymiyyah's famous fatwa about the residents of Mardin when it was under the control of the Mongols was misprinted into an order to "fight" the people living under their territory, whereas the actual statement is, "The Muslims living therein should be treated according to their rights as Muslims, while the non-Muslims living there outside of the authority of Islamic Law should be treated according to their rights." They have based their understanding on the original manuscript in the Al-Zahiriyah Library, and the transmission by Ibn Taymiyyah's student Ibn Muflih. The particapents of the Mardin conference also rejected the categorization of the world into different domains of war and peace, stating that the division was a result of the circumstances at the time. The participants further stated that the division has become irrelevant with the existence of nation states.   == Works == Ibn Taymiyyah left a considerable body of work, ranging from 350 according to his student Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya to 500 according to his student al-Dhahabi. Oliver Leaman says that Ibn Taymiyyah produced some 700 works in the field of Islamic sciences. His scholarly output has been described as immense with a wide scope and its contents "bear the marks of brilliant insights hastility jotted down". It is the case however, that his works are not yet fully understood but efforts are being made, at least in the western languages to gain an adequate understanding of his writings. In his early life, his work was mostly based on theology and the use of reason in interpretation of scriptural evidences, with later works focusing on; refutation of Greek logic, questioning the prevalent practices of the time, and anti-Christian and anti-Shi'i polemics. Ibn Taymiyyah's total works have not all survived and his extant works of thirty five volumes, are incomplete. Extant books and essays written by ibn Taymiyyah include: A Great Compilation of Fatwa (Majmu al-Fatwa al-Kubra) This was collected centuries after his death, and contains several of the works mentioned below - Thirty six volumes. Minhaj as-Sunnah an-Nabawiyyah (The way of the Prophet's Sunna) - Four volumes. al-Aqidah al-Waasitiyyah (The Creed to the People of Wāsiṭ) Al-Jawāb al-Ṣaḥīḥ li-man baddala dīn al-Masīh (Literally,"The Correct Response to those who have Corrupted the Deen (Religion) of the Messiah"; A Muslim theologian's response to Christianity) - Seven Volumes. Darʾ taʿāruḍ al-ʿaql wa al-naql ("Averting the Conflict between Reason and [religious] Tradition"). Also, called Al-Muwāfaqa (Harmony) - Ten volumes. al-Aqeedah Al-Hamawiyyah (The Creed to the People of Hama, Syria) al-Asma wa's-Sifaat (Allah's Names and Attributes) - Two volumes Kitbal al-Iman (Book of faith) as-Sarim al-Maslul ‘ala Shatim ar-Rasul—The Drawn Sword against those who insult the Messenger. Written in response to an incident in which Ibn Taymiyyah heard a Christian insulting Muhammad. Fatawa al-Kubra Fatawa al-Misriyyah ar-Radd 'ala al-Mantiqiyyin (The refutation of the Logicians) Naqd at-Ta'sis al-Uboodiyyah (Subjection to God) Iqtida' as-Sirat al-Mustaqim' (Following The Straight Path) al-Siyasa al-shar'iyya (The book of governance according to the shari'a) at-Tawassul wal-Waseela Sharh Futuh al-Ghayb (Commentary on Revelations of the Unseen by Abdul-Qadir Gilani) al-Hisba fi al-Islam (The Hisba in islam) - A book on economics Some of his other works have been translated to English. They include: The Friends of Allah and the Friends of Shaytan Kitab al Iman: The Book of Faith Diseases of the Hearts and their Cures The Relief from Distress Fundamentals of Enjoining Good & Forbidding Evil The Concise Legacy The Goodly Word The Madinan Way Ibn Taymiyya against the Greek logicians Muslims Under Non-Muslim Rule   === Lost works === Many of Ibn Taymiyyah's books are thought to be lost. Their existence is known through various reports written by scholars throughout history as well as some treatises written by Ibn Taymiyyah. Some of his notable lost works include: al-Bahr al-Muhit - Forty volumes tafsir of the Qur'an (written in the prison of Damascus) - Ibn Hajar al`Asqalani mentions the existence of this work in his book, al-Durar al-Kamina.   == See also ==  Islam and Antinomianism   == Bibliography == Rapoport, Yossef (9 April 2010). "Ibn Taymiyya and his Times." OUP Pakistan. ISBN 0195478347. Hoover, Jon (28 May 2007). "Ibn Taymiyya's Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism." Brill. ISBN 9004158472.   === Encyclopaedias === P. J. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs (ed.). Encyclopaedia of Islam Online. Brill Academic Publishers. ISSN 1573-3912.    == References ==   == Further reading == Kepel, Gilles – Muslim extremism in Egypt: The Prophet and pharaoh. With a new preface for 2003. Translated from French by Jon Rothschild. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2003. See pp. 194–199. Little, Donald P. – "Did Ibn Taymiyya have a screw loose?", Studia Islamica, 1975, Number 41, pp. 93–111. Makdisi, G. – "Ibn Taymiyya: A Sufi of the Qadiriya Order", American Journal of Arabic Studies, 1973 Sivan, Emmanuel – Radical Islam: Medieval theology and modern politics. Enlarged edition. New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 1990. See pp. 94–107. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya: Against Extremisms. Texts translated, annotated and introduced. With a foreword by Bruce B. LAWRENCE. Beirut & Paris: Albouraq, 2012, xxxii & 334 p. — EAN 9782841615551. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya: Muslims under non-Muslim Rule. Texts translated, annotated and presented in relation to six modern readings of the Mardin fatwa. Foreword by James Piscatori. Oxford & London: Interface Publications, 2006. ISBN 0-9554545-2-2. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya’s "New Mardin Fatwa". Is genetically modified Islam (GMI) carcinogenic?, in "The Muslim World", 101/2, April 2011, pp. 130–181. Michot, Yahya – From al-Ma’mūn to Ibn Sab‘īn, via Avicenna: Ibn Taymiyya’s Historiography of Falsafa, in F. OPWIS & D. REISMAN (eds.), "Islamic Philosophy, Science, Culture, and Religion". Studies in Honor of Dimitri Gutas (Leiden – Boston: Brill, 2012), pp. 453–475. Michot, Yahya – Between Entertainment and Religion: Ibn Taymiyya’s Views on Superstition, in "The Muslim World", 99/1, January 2009, pp. 1–20. Michot, Yahya – Misled and Misleading… Yet Central in their Influence: Ibn Taymiyya’s Views on the Ikhwān al-Safā’, in "The Ikhwān al-Safā’ and their Rasā’il. An Introduction". Edited by Nader EL-BIZRI. Foreword by Farhad DAFTARY (Oxford: Oxford University Press, in association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies, " Epistles of the Brethren of Purity "), 2008, pp. 139–179. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya’s Commentary on the Creed of al-Hallâj, in A. SHIHADEH (ed.), "Sufism and Theology" (Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press, 2007), pp. 123–136. Michot, Yahya – A Mamlûk Theologian’s Commentary on Avicenna’s "Risāla Aḍḥawiyya". Being a Translation of a Part of the "Dar’ al-Ta‘āruḍ" of Ibn Taymiyya, with Introduction, Annotation, and Appendices, Part I, in "Journal of Islamic Studies", 14:2, Oxford, 2003, pp. 149–203. Michot, Yahya – A Mamlûk Theologian’s Commentary on Avicenna’s "Risāla Aḍḥawiyya". Being a Translation of a Part of the "Dar’ al-Ta‘āruḍ" of Ibn Taymiyya, with Introduction, Annotation, and Appendices, Part II, in "Journal of Islamic Studies", 14:3, Oxford, 2003, pp. 309–363. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya on Astrology. Annotated Translation of Three Fatwas, in "Journal of Islamic Studies", 11/2, Oxford, May 2000, pp. 147–208. Michot, Yahya – Ibn Taymiyya’s Critique of Shī‘ī Imāmology. Translation of Three Sections of his "Minhāj al-Sunna", in "The Muslim World", 104/1-2, Hartford, Jan. - April 2014, pp. 109–149. Michot, Yahya – An Important Reader of al-Ghazālī : Ibn Taymiyya, in "The Muslim World", 103/1, Hartford, January 2013, pp. 131–160.   == External links == Why Study...Ibn Taymiyya, with Jon Hoover, University of Nottingham Ibn Taymiyyah, Salafi calls "Sheikh-ul-Islam" - Hidaya Research Britannica Concise Encyclopedia Fatwa of Mardin by Ibn Taymiyya Books by Ibn Taymiyyah Collection of internet articles/resources The Life, Struggles, Works and Impact of Shaikh ul-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah Shaykh ul-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah's letters from prison Between Shaykul-Islaam Ibn Taymiyyah and Contemporary Takfiris On The Issue of Rebellion Against Tyranny and Injustice Diagram of teachers and students of Ibn Taymiyah

Isaac Richard Jay Malitz (born 1947, Cleveland, Ohio) is a logician who introduced the subject of positive set theory in his 1976 Ph.D. Thesis at UCLA.   == References == Isaac (Richard) Jay Malitz – entry in the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Isaac Watts (/wɒts/; 17 July 1674 – 25 November 1748) was an English Christian hymnwriter, theologian and logician. A prolific and popular hymn writer, his work was part of evangelization. He was recognized as the "Father of English Hymnody", credited with some 750 hymns. Many of his hymns remain in use today and have been translated into numerous languages.   == LifeEdit == Born in Southampton, England, in 1674, Watts was brought up in the home of a committed religious Nonconformist; his father, also Isaac Watts, had been incarcerated twice for his views. At King Edward VI School, Watts had a classical education, learning Latin, Greek and Hebrew. From an early age, Watts displayed a propensity for rhyme. Once, he responded when asked why he had his eyes open during prayers:  Receiving corporal punishment for this, he cried:  Because he was a Nonconformist, Watts could not attend Oxford or Cambridge, which were each restricted to Anglicans, as were government positions at the time. He went to the Dissenting Academy at Stoke Newington in 1690. Much of the remainder of his life centred around that village, which is now part of Inner London. Following his education, Watts was called as pastor of a large independent chapel in London, where he helped train preachers, despite his poor health. Isaac Watts held religious opinions that were more non-denominational or ecumenical than was at that time common for a Nonconformist; he had a greater interest in promoting education and scholarship than preaching for any particular sect. Taking work as a private tutor, Watts lived with the Nonconformist Hartopp family at Fleetwood House, on Church Street in Stoke Newington. Through them he became acquainted with their immediate neighbours, Sir Thomas Abney and Lady Mary. Invited for a week to Hertfordshire, Watts eventually lived for a total of 36 years in the Abney household, most of the time at Abney House, their second residence. (Lady Mary had inherited the Manor of Stoke Newington in 1701 from her late brother, Thomas Gunston.) On the death of Sir Thomas Abney in 1722, the widow Lady Mary and her last unmarried daughter, Elizabeth, moved all her household to Abney Hall from Hertfordshire. She invited Watts to continue with their household. He lived at Abney Hall until his death in 1748. Watts particularly enjoyed the grounds at Abney Park, which Lady Mary planted with two elm walks leading down to an island heronry in the Hackney Brook. Watts often sought inspiration there for the many books and hymns he wrote. Watts died in Stoke Newington in 1748, and was buried in Bunhill Fields. He left an extensive legacy of hymns, treatises, educational works and essays. His work was influential amongst Nonconformist independents and religious revivalists of the 18th century, such as Philip Doddridge, who dedicated his best-known work to Watts.   == Watts and hymnodyEdit == Sacred music scholar Stephen Marini (2003) describes the ways in which Watts contributed to English hymnody. Notably, Watts led by including new poetry for "original songs of Christian experience" to be used in worship. The older tradition was based on the poetry of the Bible, notably the Psalms. This had developed from the teachings of the 16th-century Reformation leader John Calvin, who initiated the practice of creating verse translations of the Psalms in the vernacular for congregational singing. Watts' introduction of extra-Biblical poetry opened up a new era of Protestant hymnody as other poets followed in his path. Watts also introduced a new way of rendering the Psalms in verse for church services. The Psalms were originally written in Biblical Hebrew within Judaism. In early Christendom, they were affirmed in the Biblical canon as part of the Old Testament. Watts proposed that the metrical translations of the Psalms as sung by Protestant Christians should give them a specifically Christian perspective. While he granted that David [to whom authorship of many of the Psalms is traditionally ascribed] was unquestionably a chosen instrument of God, Watts claimed that his religious understanding could not have fully apprehended the truths later revealed through Jesus Christ. The Psalms should therefore be "renovated" as if David had been a Christian, or as Watts put it in the title of his 1719 metrical Psalter, they should be "imitated in the language of the New Testament." Marini discerns two particular trends in Watts' verses, which he calls "emotional subjectivity" and "doctrinal objectivity". By the former he means that "Watts' voice broke down the distance between poet and singer and invested the text with personal spirituality." As an example of this, he cites "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross". By "doctrinal objectivity," Marini means that Watts verse achieved an "axiomatic quality" that "presented Christian doctrinal content with the explicit confidence that befits affirmations of faith." As examples, Marini cites the hymns "Joy to the World" as well as "From All That Dwell Below the Skies":  Besides writing hymns, Isaac Watts was also a theologian and logician, writing books and essays on these subjects.   === LogicEdit ===  Watts wrote a text book on logic which was particularly popular; its full title was, Logic, or The Right Use of Reason in the Enquiry After Truth With a Variety of Rules to Guard Against Error in the Affairs of Religion and Human Life, as well as in the Sciences. This was first published in 1724, and it was printed in twenty editions. Watts wrote this work for beginners of logic, and arranged the book methodically. He divided the content of his elementary treatment of logic into four parts: perception, judgement, reasoning, and method, which he treated in this order. Each of these parts is divided into chapters, and some of these chapters are divided into sections. The content of the chapters and sections is subdivided by the following devices: divisions, distributions, notes, observations, directions, rules, illustrations, and remarks. Every contentum of the book comes under one or more of these headings, and this methodical arrangement serves to make the exposition clear. In Watts' Logic, there are notable departures from other works of the time, and some notable innovations. The influence of British empiricism may be seen, especially that of contemporary philosopher and empiricist John Locke. Logic includes several references to Locke and his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, in which he espoused his empiricist views. Watts was careful to distinguish between judgements and propositions, unlike some other logic authors. According to Watts, judgement is "to compare... ideas together, and to join them by affirmation, or disjoin then by negation, according as we find them to agree or disagree". He continues, "when mere ideas are joined in the mind without words, it is rather called a judgement; but when clothed with words it is called a proposition". Watts' Logic follows the scholastic tradition and divides propositions into universal affirmative, universal negative, particular affirmative, and particular negative. In the third part, Watts discusses reasoning and argumentation, with particular emphasis on the theory of syllogism. This was considered a centrally important part of classical logic. According to Watts, and in keeping with logicians of his day, Watts defined logic as an art (see liberal arts), as opposed to a science. Throughout Logic, Watts revealed his high conception of logic by stressing the practical side of logic, rather than the speculative side. According to Watts, as a practical art, logic can be really useful in any inquiry, whether it is an inquiry in the arts, or inquiry in the sciences, or inquiry of an ethical kind. Watts' emphasis on logic as a practical art distinguishes his book from others. By stressing a practical and non-formal part of logic, Watts gave rules and directions for any kind of inquiry, including the inquiries of science and the inquiries of philosophy. These rules of inquiry were given in addition to the formal content of classical logic common to text books on logic from that time. Watts' conception of logic as being divided into its practical part and its speculative part marks a departure from the conception of logic of most other authors. His conception of logic is more akin to that of the later, nineteenth-century logician, C.S. Peirce. Isaac Watts' Logic became the standard text on logic at Oxford, Cambridge, Harvard and Yale, being used at Oxford for well over 100 years. C.S. Peirce, the great nineteenth-century logician, wrote favorably of Watts' Logic. When preparing his own text book, entitled A Critick of Arguments: How to Reason (also known as the Grand Logic), Peirce wrote, 'I shall suppose the reader to be acquainted with what is contained in Dr Watts' Logick, a book... far superior to the treatises now used in colleges, being the production of a man distinguished for good sense.'  Watts followed the Logic in 1741 by a supplement, The Improvement of the Mind. This also went through numerous editions and later inspired Michael Faraday. It was also widely used as a moral textbook in schools.   == Legacy, honours and memorialsEdit ==  On his death, Isaac Watts' papers were given to Yale University in the Colony of Connecticut, which Nonconformists had established. King Edward VI School, which he attended, named one of its houses "Watts" in his honour. The Church of England and Lutheran Church remember Watts (and his priestly service) annually in the Calendar of Saints on November 25, and the Episcopal Church on the following day. The earliest surviving built memorial to Isaac Watts is at Westminster Abbey; this was completed shortly after his death. His much-visited chest tomb at Bunhill Fields, dates from 1808, replacing the original that had been paid for and erected by Lady Mary Abney and the Hartopp family. A stone bust of Watts is installed at the Nonconformist Dr Williams's Library, in central London. The earliest public statue, erected in 1845, stands at Abney Park, where Watts had lived for more than 30 years at the manor house, where he also died. The park was later devoted to uses as a cemetery and public arboretum. A later, rather similar statue was funded by public subscription and erected in a new Victorian public park named for Watts in Southampton, the city of his birth. In the mid-nineteenth century, the Congregational Dr Watts Memorial Hall was built in Southampton and named for him. After World War II, it was lost to redevelopment. The Isaac Watts Memorial United Reformed Church was built on the site and named for him. One of the earliest built memorials may also now be lost: a bust to Watts that was commissioned on his death for the London chapel with which he was associated. The chapel was demolished in the late 18th century; remaining parts of the memorial were rescued at the last minute by a wealthy landowner for installation in his chapel near Liverpool. It is unclear whether the bust survives. The stone statue in front of the Abney Park Chapel at Dr Watts' Walk, Abney Park Cemetery, was erected in 1845 by public subscription. It was designed by the leading British sculptor, Edward Hodges Baily RA FRS. A scheme for a commemorative statue on this spot had first been promoted in the late 1830s by George Collison, who in 1840 published an engraving as the frontispiece of his book about cemetery design in Europe and America; and at Abney Park Cemetery in particular. This first cenotaph proposal was never commissioned, and Baily's later design was adopted in 1845. In 1974, the City of Southampton (Watts' home city) commemorated the 300 year anniversary of his birth by commissioning the biography Isaac Watts Remembered, written by David G. Fountain, who like Watts, was also a non-conformist minister from Southampton.   == Cultural or contemporary influencesEdit == One of Watts' best-known poems was an exhortation "Against Idleness and Mischief" in Divine Songs for Children. This was parodied by Lewis Carroll in the poem "How Doth the Little Crocodile", included in his book Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. His parody is better known than the original Watts' poem. In his novel, David Copperfield (1850), Charles Dickens has school master Dr. Strong quote from Watts' "Against Idleness and Mischief". The 1884 comic opera Princess Ida includes a punning reference to Watts in Act I. At Princess Ida's women's university, no males are allowed. Her father King Gama says that "She'll scarcely suffer Dr. Watts' 'hymns'".   == WorksEdit ==   === BooksEdit === The Improvement of the Mind - first three chapters as text from Wikisource - 1815 Edition s:The Improvement of the Mind The Improvement of the Mind Vol 1 Vol 2 at The Internet Archive The Knowledge of the Heavens and the Earth Made Easy ..., first edition, 1726; 1760 edition at Google Books Logic, or The Right Use of Reason in the Enquiry After Truth With a Variety of Rules to Guard Against Error in the Affairs of Religion and Human Life, as well as in the Sciences[1] A Short View of the Whole Scripture History: With a Continuation of the Jewish Affairs From the Old Testament Till the Time of Christ; and an Account of the Chief Prophesies that Relate to Him[2] Watts is thought to be the author of the tract: An Essay on the Freedom of Will in God and Creatures (copy on The Internet Archive). Divine Songs Attempted in Easy Language for the Use of Children (1715).   === HymnsEdit === Watts' hymns include: Joy to the world (based on Psalm 98, arranged in the 19th century by American Lowell Mason to an older melody of Handel) Come ye that love the Lord (often sung with the chorus [and titled] "We’re marching to Zion") Come Holy Spirit, heavenly Dove Jesus shall reign where’er the sun (based on Psalm 72) O God, Our Help in Ages Past (based on Psalm 90) When I survey the wondrous cross Alas! and did my Saviour bleed This is the day the Lord has made 'Tis by Thy strength the mountains stand I sing the mighty power of God (originally entitled "Praise for Creation and Providence" from Divine Songs Attempted in Easy Language for the Use of Children) My shepherd will supply my need (based on Psalm 23) Bless, O my soul! the living God (based on Psalm 103) Many of Watts' hymns are included in the Christadelphian hymnal, the Evangelical Lutheran Worship Hymnal, the Baptist Hymnal, the Presbyterian Trinity Hymnal, and the Methodist Hymns and Psalms. Many of his texts are also used in the American hymnal, The Sacred Harp, using what is known as the shape note notation used for teaching non-musicians. Several of his hymns are used in the hymnals of the Church of Christ, Scientist and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.   == See alsoEdit ==  Puritan English Dissenter Independent (religion) Congregational church Africa (William Billings)   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Jones, J. A., ed. (1849). Bunhill Memorials: sacred reminiscences of three hundred ministers and other persons of note, who are buried in Bunhill Fields, of every denomination. London: James Paul. pp. 298–304.  Marini, Stephen A. (2003). Sacred Song in America: Religion, Music, and Public Culture. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.  Thorncroft, Michael (1958). "The Fertile Soil; The Church is Built; The Early Years (1714–1758); The Age of Richard Price; New Causes for Old; The Ideal of Service; The Lights Go Out; The Present Day". Trust in Freedom: The Story of Newington Green Unitarian Church 1708–1958. Privately printed for church trustees. . Watts, Isaac (1825). Logic or the Right Use of Reason in the Inquiry After Truth; with a Variety of Rules to Guard Against Error in the Affairs of Religion and Human Life, as well as in the sciences (reprint ed.). US: Kessinger. .   == External linksEdit == Works by Isaac Watts at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Isaac Watts at Internet Archive Works by Isaac Watts at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Works by Isaac Watts at Post-Reformation Digital Library A Solemn Address to the Great and Ever Blessed God (1802), originally published as A Faithful Inquiry after the Ancient and Original Doctrine of the Trinity (1745) The Isaac Watts Fan Club at the Wayback Machine (archived October 27, 2009) background info and midi files Hymns by Isaac Watts O God our help in ages past (school hymn of King Edward VI School, Southampton, Watts' alma mater) Isaac Watts Remembered (David G. Fountain, 1974) Biography commissioned by Southampton City Council (his home city) to commemorate 300 years of his birth (ISBN 978-0903556576) Monergism.com Isaac Watts Links to works of Isaac Watts Logic by Isaac Watts Improvement of the Mind by Isaac Watts The Harmony of all the Religions which God ever Prescribed to Men and all his Dispensations towards them by Isaac Watts The Ruin and Recovery of Mankind by Isaac Watts

Ivan Orlov may refer to: Ivan Orlov (philosopher) (1886–1936), Russian philosopher and industrial chemist Ivan Orlov (aviator) (1895–1917), Russian World War I flying ace Ivan Grigoryevich Orlov (1733–1791), brother of Grigory Grigoryevich Orlov

John Barkley Rosser Sr. (December 6, 1907 – September 5, 1989) was an American logician, a student of Alonzo Church, and known for his part in the Church–Rosser theorem, in lambda calculus. He also developed what is now called the Rosser sieve, in number theory. He was later director of the Army Mathematics Research Center at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. Rosser wrote mathematical textbooks as well. In 1936, he proved Rosser's trick, a stronger version of Gödel's first incompleteness theorem which shows that the requirement for ω-consistency may be weakened to consistency. Rather than using the liar paradox sentence equivalent to "I am not provable," he used a sentence that stated "For every proof of me, there is a shorter proof of my negation". In prime number theory, he proved Rosser's theorem. The Kleene–Rosser paradox showed that the original lambda calculus was inconsistent. Rosser died of an aneurysm September 5, 1989, at his home in Madison, Wisconsin. Rosser's son, John Barkley Rosser, Jr., is a mathematical economist and professor at James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Virginia.   == Selected publications == A mathematical logic without variables by John Barkley Rosser, Univ. Diss. Princeton, NJ 1934, p. 127–150, 328–355 Logic for mathematicians by John B. Rosser, McGraw-Hill 1953; 2nd ed., Chelsea Publ. Co. 1978, 578 p., ISBN 0-8284-0294-9 Highlight of the History of Lambda calculus, by J. Barkley Rosser, Annals of the History of Computing, 1984, vol 6, n 4, pp. 337–349 Simplified Independence Proofs: Boolean Valued Models of Set Theory, by J. Barkley Rosser, Academic Press, 1969 See Barkley Rosser papers for a complete list of Rosser's publications.   == References ==   == External links == J. Barkley Rosser at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Interview with Rosser and Stephen Kleene about their experiences at Princeton

Kaarlo Jaakko Juhani Hintikka (12 January 1929 – 12 August 2015) was a Finnish philosopher and logician. Hintikka was born in Helsingin maalaiskunta (now Vantaa). After teaching for a number of years at Florida State University, Stanford, University of Helsinki, and the Academy of Finland, he ended his career as a Professor of Philosophy at Boston University. The prolific author or co-author of over 30 books and over 300 scholarly articles, Hintikka contributed to mathematical logic, philosophical logic, the philosophy of mathematics, epistemology, language theory, and the philosophy of science. His works have appeared in over nine languages. Hintikka is regarded as the founder of formal epistemic logic and of game semantics for logic. Early in his career, he devised a semantics of modal logic essentially analogous to Saul Kripke's frame semantics, and discovered the now widely taught semantic tableau, independently of Evert Willem Beth. Later, he worked mainly on game semantics, and on independence-friendly logic, known for its "branching quantifiers", which he believed do better justice to our intuitions about quantifiers than does conventional first-order logic. He did important exegetical work on Aristotle, Immanuel Kant, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and Charles Sanders Peirce. Hintikka's work can be seen as a continuation of the analytic tendency in philosophy founded by Franz Brentano and Peirce, advanced by Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell, and continued by Rudolf Carnap, Willard Van Orman Quine, and by Hintikka's teacher Georg Henrik von Wright. For instance, in 1998 he wrote The Principles of Mathematics Revisited, which takes an exploratory stance comparable to that Russell made with his The Principles of Mathematics in 1903. Professor Hintikka was a student of G.H. von Wright, a Junior Fellow at Harvard (1956-9), and held several professorial appointments at the University of Helsinki, the Academy of Finland, Florida State University and finally Boston University from 1990 until his death. Hintikka edited the academic journal Synthese from 1962 to 2002, and was a consultant editor for more than ten journals. He was the first vice-president of the Fédération Internationale des Sociétés de Philosophie, the Vice-President of the Institut International de Philosophie (1993–1996), as well as a member of the American Philosophical Association, the International Union of History and Philosophy of Science, Association for Symbolic Logic, and a member of the governing board of the Philosophy of Science Association. In 2005, he won the Rolf Schock prize in logic and philosophy "for his pioneering contributions to the logical analysis of modal concepts, in particular the concepts of knowledge and belief". In 1985, he was president of the Florida Philosophical Association. He was a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters.   == Selected books == For a bibliography, see Auxier and Hahn (2006). Primary 1962. Knowledge and Belief – An Introduction to the Logic of the Two Notions ISBN 1-904987-08-7 1969. Models for Modalities: Selected Essays ISBN 978-90-277-0598-3 1975. The intentions of intentionality and other new models for modalities ISBN 978-90-277-0634-8 1976. The semantics of questions and the questions of semantics: case studies in the interrelations of logic, semantics, and syntax ISBN 978-95-1950-535-0 1989. The Logic of Epistemology and the Epistemology of Logic ISBN 0-7923-0040-8 1996. Ludwig Wittgenstein: Half-Truths and One-and-a-Half-Truths ISBN 0-7923-4091-4 1996. Lingua Universalis vs Calculus Ratiocinator ISBN 0-7923-4246-1 1996. The Principles of Mathematics Revisited ISBN 0-521-62498-3 1998. Paradigms for Language Theory and Other Essays ISBN 0-7923-4780-3 1998. Language, Truth and Logic in Mathematics ISBN 0-7923-4766-8 1999. Inquiry as Inquiry: A Logic of Scientific Discovery ISBN 0-7923-5477-X 2004. Analyses of Aristotle ISBN 1-4020-2040-6 2007. Socratic Epistemology: Explorations of Knowledge-Seeking by Questioning ISBN 978-0-521-61651-5  Secondary Auxier, R.E., and Hahn, L., eds., 2006. The Philosophy of Jaakko Hintikka (The Library of Living Philosophers). Open Court. Includes a complete bibliography of Hintikka's publications. ISBN 0-8126-9462-7 Bogdan, Radu, ed., 1987 Jaakko Hintikka, Kluwer Academic Publishers ISBN 90-277-2402-4 Daniel Kolak, 2001 On Hintikka, Wadsworth ISBN 0-534-58389-X Daniel Kolak and John Symons, eds., 2004 Quantifiers, Questions and Quantum Physics: Essays on the Philosophy of Jaakko Hintikka Springer ISBN 1-4020-3210-2   == See also ==  Rudolf Carnap Saul Kripke Charles Sanders Peirce Willard Van Orman Quine Alfred Tarski Ludwig Wittgenstein Doxastic logic   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Philosopher Jaakko Hintikka reveals love affair between his wife and JFK   == References == Jaakko Hintikka's personal website   == External links ==  Media related to Jaakko Hintikka at Wikimedia Commons Jaakko Hintikka in 375 humanists – 20 May 2015. Faculty of Arts, University of Helsinki.

Brian Jack Copeland (born 1950) is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand, and author of books on computing pioneer Alan Turing. His education includes a BPhil and a DPhil from the University of Oxford in philosophy, where he undertook research on modal and non-classical logic under the supervision of Dana Scott. Jack Copeland is the Director of the Turing Archive for the History of Computing, an extensive online archive on the computing pioneer Alan Turing. He has also written and edited books on Turing. He is one of the people responsible for identifying the concept of hypercomputation and machines more capable than Turing machines. Copeland has held visiting professorships at the University of Sydney, Australia (1997, 2002), the University of Aarhus, Denmark (1999), the University of Melbourne, Australia (2002, 2003), and the University of Portsmouth, United Kingdom (1997–2005). In 2000, he was a Senior Fellow in the Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States. He is also President of the US Society for Machines and Mentality and a member of the UK Bletchley Park Trust Heritage Advisory Panel. He is the founding editor of The Rutherford Journal, established in 2005. Copeland was awarded Lecturer of the Year 2010 by the University of Canterbury's student union.   == Books == Artificial Intelligence: A Philosophical Introduction (Blackwell, 1993, 2nd edition due) ISBN 0-631-18385-X Logic and Reality Essays on the Legacy of Arthur Prior (Oxford University Press, 1996) ISBN 0-19-824060-0 The Essential Turing (Oxford University Press, 2004) ISBN 0-19-825080-0 Alan Turing’s Automatic Computing Engine: The Master Codebreaker's Struggle to Build the Modern Computer (Oxford University Press, 2005) ISBN 0-19-856593-3 Colossus: The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers (Oxford University Press, 2006) ISBN 0-19-284055-X   == References ==   == External links == Home page AlanTuring.net Alan Turing: Father of the Modern Computer List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search Jack Copeland's publications indexed by the DBLP Bibliography Server at the University of Trier

Giacomo (or Jacopo) Zabarella (5 September 1533 – 15 October 1589) was an Italian Aristotelian philosopher and logician.   == Life == Zabarella was born into a noble Paduan family. He received a humanist education and entered the University of Padua, where he received a doctorate in 1553. His teachers included Francesco Robortello in humanities, Bernardino Tomitano in logic, Marcantonio Genua in physics and metaphysics, and Pietro Catena in mathematics. In 1564 he succeeded Tomitano in a chair of logic. In 1577 he was promoted to the first extraordinary chair of natural philosophy. He died in Padua at the age of 56 in 1589. His entire teaching career was spent at his native university. His successor was Cesare Cremonini.   == Work ==  Zabarella's work reflects his teaching in the Aristotelian tradition. His first published work was Opera logica (Venice 1578), followed by Tabula logicae (1578). His commentary on Aristotle's Posterior Analytics appeared in 1582. His great work in natural philosophy was De rebus naturalibus, published posthumously in 1590. It constituted 30 treatises on Aristotelian natural philosophy, the introduction to which was written only weeks before his death. His two sons edited his incomplete commentaries on Aristotle's texts, also published posthumously (the commentary on the Physics in 1601 and the commentary on On the Soul (1605). Zabarella consulted newly recovered Greek commentators such as Alexander of Aphrodisias, Philoponus, Simplicius, and Themistius, as well as medieval commentators like Thomas Aquinas, Walter Burley, and Averroes. Unlike some earlier scholastic philosophers, he was literate in Greek, and was therefore able to use the Greek texts of Aristotle. He devoted much effort to presenting what he considered to be the true meaning of Aristotle's texts.   == Writings == Opera Logica, (first edition Venise, 1578; second Venise, 1586; third Francfort, 1586–87) contains: 1. De natura logicae; 2. De quarta figura syllogismorum; 3. De methodis; 4. De conversione demonstrationi in definitionem; 5. De propositionibus necessariis; 6. De speciebus demonstrationis; /. De regressu; 8. De tribus praecognitis; 9. De medio demonstrationis.  Opera Logica, (fourth edition Kōln, 1597) with the addition of: 10. In II libros Posteriores analyticos commentarii (Venise, 1582); 11. De doctrinae ordine apologia (Padova, 1585); 12. Tabulae logicae (Venise, 1578).  Opera Logica, anastatic reprint of the Kōln 1597 edition by Wilhelm Risse, Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1966. De rebus naturalibus libri XXX (Venise, 1590). De mente agente. De rebus naturalibus liber XXIX. Edited by J. M. García Valverde, Fragmentos de Filosofía, 9(2011). De sensu gente. De rebus naturalibus liber XXIV. Edizione a cura di J.M. García Valverde, Rivista di Storia della Filosofia, 2012. De inventione aeterni motoris. De rebus naturalibus liber IV. Edición de J.M. García Valverde, Bruniana & Campanelliana, 2012. In libros Aristotelis Physicorum commentarii, (Venise, 1601). Commentarii in Meteora, In Commentarii in Aristotelis libros physicorum, item In libros De generatione et corruptione, item In Meteora, (Frankfurt, 1602). Commentarii in III libros De anima, (Venise, 1605).   == Editions and translations == Iacobus Zabarella, Tables de logique. Sur l'Introduction de Porphyre, les Catégories, le De l'interprétation et les Premiers Analytiques d'Aristote: Petite synopse introductive à la logique aristotélicienne. Paris: L'Harmattan, 2003, translated by Michel Bastit. Jacques Zabarella, La nature de la logique, Paris: Vrin 2009, translated by Dominique Bouillon. Jacopo Zabarella, On Methods and On Regressus, edited and translated by John P. McCaskey (I Tatti Renaissance Library; Harvard University Press, 2014). Volume 1, On Methods, Books I–II. Volume 2, On Methods, Books III–IV and On Regressus.   == Bibliography == Edwards, William F. (1960): The Logic of Iacopo Zabarella (1533–1589). Unpublished Ph.D.thesis, Columbia University. H. Mikkeli (1992): An Aristotelian Response to Renaissance Humanism. Jacopo Zabarella on the Nature of Arts and Sciences, Helsinki: The Finnish Historical Society. Randall, J.H. (1961): The School of Padua and the Emergence of Modern Science. Padova: Editrice Antenore.   == References ==   == External links == Giacomo Zabarella entry by Heikki Mikkeli in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Biography at The Galileo Project Ulrich G. Leinsle (1998). "Jacopo Zabarella". In Bautz, Traugott. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 14. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 292–295. ISBN 3-88309-073-5. , biography of Jacopo Zabarella Philosophy Institute of the Düsseldorf University: Philosophengalerie, article "Jacobus Zabarella (Giacomo Zabarella)" (in German) online : with picture Texts of Zabarella German translation of De ordine intelligendi, by Rudolf Schicker German translation of Zabarella's De natura, by Rudolf Schicker Opera Logica (PDF)

Jacques Herbrand (12 February 1908 – 27 July 1931) was a French mathematician. Although he died at only 23 years of age, he was already considered one of "the greatest mathematicians of the younger generation" by his professors Helmut Hasse, and Richard Courant. He worked in mathematical logic and class field theory. He introduced recursive functions. Herbrand's theorem refers to either of two completely different theorems. One is a result from his doctoral thesis in proof theory, and the other one half of the Herbrand–Ribet theorem. The Herbrand quotient is a type of Euler characteristic, used in homological algebra. He contributed to Hilbert's program in the foundations of mathematics by providing a constructive consistency proof for a weak system of arithmetic. The proof uses the above-mentioned, proof-theoretic Herbrand's Theorem.   == Biography == Herbrand finished his doctorate at École Normale Supérieure in Paris under Ernest Vessiot in 1929. He joined the army in October 1929, however, and so did not defend his thesis at the Sorbonne until the following year. He was awarded a Rockefeller fellowship that enabled him to study in Germany in 1931, first with John von Neumann in Berlin, then during June with Emil Artin in Hamburg, and finally with Emmy Noether in Göttingen. He submitted his principal study of proof theory and general recursive functions "On the consistency of arithmetic" early in 1931. While the essay was under consideration, Gödel's "On formally undecidable sentences of Principia Mathematica and related systems I" announced the impossibility of formalizing within a theory that theory's consistency proof. Herbrand studied Gödel's essay and wrote an appendix to his own study explaining why Gödel's result did not contradict his own. In July of that year he was mountain-climbing in the French Alps with two friends when he fell to his death in the granite mountains of Massif des Écrins. "On the consistency of arithmetic" was published posthumously.   == Quotation == "Jacques Herbrand would have hated Bourbaki" said French mathematician Claude Chevalley quoted in Michèle Chouchan "Nicolas Bourbaki Faits et légendes" Edition du choix, 1995.   == Bibliography == Primary literature: 1967. Jean van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. 1930. "Investigations in proof theory," 525-81. 1931. "On the consistency of arithmetic," 618-28.  1968. Jean van Heijenoort (ed.), Jacques Herbrand, Écrits logiques. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 1971. Warren David Goldfarb (transl., ed.), Logical Writings of Jacques Herbrand Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.   == See also == Herbrand universe Herbrand base Herbrand interpretation Herbrand structure Herbrand theory Herbrand–Ribet theorem Herbrand quotient   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Jacques Herbrand", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Jacques Herbrand at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

James Earl Baumgartner (March 23, 1943 – December 28, 2011) was an American mathematician who worked in set theory, mathematical logic and foundations, and topology. Baumgartner was born in Wichita, Kansas, began his undergraduate study at the California Institute of Technology in 1960, then transferred to the University of California, Berkeley, from which he received his PhD in 1970 from for a dissertation entitled Results and Independence Proofs in Combinatorial Set Theory. His advisor was Robert Vaught. He became a professor at Dartmouth College in 1969, and there spent his entire career. One of Baumgartner's results is the consistency of the statement that any two -dense sets of reals are order isomorphic (a set of reals is -dense if it has exactly  points in every open interval). With András Hajnal he proved the result (Baumgartner–Hajnal theorem) that the partition relation  holds for . He died of a heart attack in 2011.   == See also == Baumgartner's axiom   == Selected publications == Baumgartner, James E., A new class of order types, Annals of Mathematical Logic, 9:187–222, 1976 Baumgartner, James E., Ineffability properties of cardinals I, Infinite and Finite Sets, Keszthely (Hungary) 1973, volume 10 of Colloquia Mathematica Societatis János Bolyai, pages 109–130. North-Holland, 1975 Baumgartner, James E.; Harrington, Leo; Kleinberg, Eugene, Adding a closed unbounded set, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41(2):481–482, 1976 Baumgartner, James E., Ineffability properties of cardinals II, Robert E. Butts and Jaakko Hintikka, editors, Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability Theory, pages 87–106. Reidel, 1977 Baumgartner, James E.; Galvin, Fred, Generalized Erdős cardinals and 0#, Annals of Mathematical Logic 15, 289–313, 1978 Baumgartner, James E.; Erdős, Paul; Galvin, Fred; Larson, J., Colorful partitions of cardinal numbers, Can. J. Math. 31, 524–541, 1979 Baumgartner, James E.; Erdős, Paul; Higgs, D., Cross-cuts in the power set of an infinite set, Order 1, 139–145, 1984 Baumgartner, James E. (Editor), Axiomatic Set Theory (Contemporary Mathematics, Volume 31), 1990   == References == ^ "James E. Baumgartner Obituary". Rand-wilson.com. Retrieved 2012-01-06.  ^ James Earl Baumgartner at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ [1] Valley News obituary

Jan Łukasiewicz (Polish: [ˈjan wukaˈɕɛvʲitʂ]; 21 December 1878 – 13 February 1956) was a Polish logician and philosopher born in Lwów, which, before the Polish partitions, was in Poland, Galicia, then Austria-Hungary. His work centred on analytical philosophy, mathematical logic, and history of logic. He thought innovatively about traditional propositional logic, the principle of non-contradiction and the law of excluded middle. Modern work on Aristotle's logic builds on the tradition started in 1951 with the establishment by Lukasiewicz of a revolutionary paradigm. The Lukasiewicz approach was reinvigorated in the early 1970s in a series of papers by John Corcoran and Timothy Smiley--which inform modern translations of Prior Analytics by Robin Smith in 1989 and Gisela Striker in 2009. Lukasiewicz is still regarded as one of the most important historians of logic.   == Life == He grew up in Lwów and was the only child of Paweł Łukasiewicz, a captain in the Austrian army, and Leopoldina (née Holtzer), the daughter of a civil servant. His family was Roman Catholic. He finished his gymnasium studies in philology and in 1897 went on to Lwów University, which, before the Polish partitions was in Poland, where he studied philosophy and mathematics. In philosophy he was a pupil of Kazimierz Twardowski. In 1902, he received a Doctor of Philosophy degree under the patronage of emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria who gave him a special doctor ring with diamonds. He spent three years as a private teacher, and in 1905 he received a scholarship to complete his philosophical studies at the University of Berlin and the University of Louvain in Belgium. Łukasiewicz continued studying for his habilitation qualification and in 1906 submitted his thesis to the University of Lwów. In 1906 he was appointed a lecturer at the University of Lwów where he was eventually appointed Extraordinary Professor by Emperor Franz Joseph I. He taught there until the First World War. In 1915 he was invited to lecture as a full professor at the University of Warsaw which had re-opened after being closed down by the Tsarist government in the 19th century. In 1919 Łukasiewicz left the university to serve as Polish Minister of Religious Denominations and Public Education in the Paderewski government until 1920. Łukasiewicz led the development of a Polish curriculum replacing the Russian, German and Austrian curricula previously used in partitioned Poland. The Łukasiewicz curriculum emphasized the early acquisition of logical and mathematical concepts. In 1928 he married Regina Barwińska. He remained a professor at the University of Warsaw from 1920 until 1939 when the family house was destroyed by German bombs and the university was closed under German occupation. He had been a rector of the university twice. In this period Lukasiewicz and Stanisław Leśniewski founded the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic which was later made internationally famous by Alfred Tarski who had been Leśniewski's student. At the beginning of World War II he worked at the Warsaw Underground University as part of the secret system of education in Poland during World War II. He and his wife wanted to move to Switzerland but couldn't get permission from the German authorities. Instead, in the summer of 1944, they left Poland with the help of Heinrich Scholz and spent the last few months of the war in Münster, Germany hoping to somehow go on further, perhaps to Switzerland. Following the war, he emigrated to Ireland and worked at University College Dublin (UCD) until his death.   == Work == A number of axiomatizations of classical propositional logic are due to Łukasiewicz. A particularly elegant axiomatization features a mere three axioms and is still invoked down to the present day. He was a pioneer investigator of multi-valued logics; his three-valued propositional calculus, introduced in 1917, was the first explicitly axiomatized non-classical logical calculus. He wrote on the philosophy of science, and his approach to the making of scientific theories was similar to the thinking of Karl Popper. Łukasiewicz invented the Polish notation (named after his nationality) for the logical connectives around 1920. There is a quotation from his paper, Remarks on Nicod's Axiom and on "Generalizing Deduction", page 180;  "I came upon the idea of a parenthesis-free notation in 1924. I used that notation for the first time in my article   The reference cited by Łukasiewicz above is apparently a lithographed report in Polish. The referring paper by Łukasiewicz Remarks on Nicod's Axiom and on "Generalizing Deduction", originally published in Polish in 1931, was later reviewed by H. A. Pogorzelski in the Journal of Symbolic Logic in 1965. In Łukasiewicz 1951 book, Aristotle's Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic, he mentions that the principle of his notation was to write the functors before the arguments to avoid brackets and that he had employed his notation in his logical papers since 1929. He then goes on to cite, as an example, a 1930 paper he wrote with Alfred Tarski on the sentential calculus. This notation is the root of the idea of the recursive stack, a last-in, first-out computer memory store proposed by several researchers including Turing, Bauer and Hamblin, and first implemented in 1957. In 1960, Łukasiewicz notation concepts and stacks were used as the basis of the Burroughs B5000 computer designed by Robert S. Barton and his team at Burroughs Corporation in Pasadena, California. The concepts also led to the design of the English Electric multi-programmed KDF9 computer system of 1963, which had two such hardware register stacks. A similar concept underlies the reverse Polish notation (RPN, a postfix notation) of the Friden EC-130 calculator and its successors, many Hewlett Packard calculators, the Forth programming language, or the PostScript page description language.   == Recognition == In 2008 the Polish Information Processing Society established the Jan Łukasiewicz Award, to be presented to the most innovative Polish IT companies. From 1999-2004, the Department of Computer Science building at UCD was called the Łukasiewicz Building, until all campus buildings were renamed after the disciplines they housed.   == Chronology == 1878 born 1890–1902 studies with Kazimierz Twardowski in Lemberg (Lwów, L'viv) 1902 doctorate (mathematics and philosophy), University of Lemberg with the highest distinction possible 1906 habilitation thesis completed, University of Lemberg 1906 becomes a lecturer 1910 essays on the principle of non-contradiction and the excluded middle 1911 extraordinary professor at Lemberg 1915 invited to the newly reopened University of Warsaw 1916 new Kingdom of Poland declared 1917 develops three-valued propositional calculus 1919 Polish Minister of Education 1920–1939 professor at Warsaw University founds with Stanisław Leśniewski the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic (see also Alfred Tarski, Stefan Banach, Hugo Steinhaus, Zygmunt Janiszewski, Stefan Mazurkiewicz) 1928 marries Regina Barwińska 1944 flees to Germany and settles in Hembsen, where he was brought for his own safety. 1946 exile in Belgium 1946 offered a chair by the Royal Irish Academy, held at University College Dublin 1953 writes autobiography 1956 dies in Dublin   == Selected works ==   === Books === Łukasiewicz, Jan (1951). Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic. Oxford University Press.  2nd Edition, enlarged, 1957. Reprinted by Garland Publishing in 1987. ISBN 0-8240-6924-2 Łukasiewicz, Jan (1958). Elementy logiki matematycznej (in Polish). Warsaw, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe. OCLC 11322101.  Łukasiewicz, Jan (1964) [1963]. Elements of Mathematical Logic. Translated from Polish by Olgierd Wojtasiewicz. New York, Macmillan. OCLC 671498.  Łukasiewicz, Jan (1970). Ludwik Borkowski, ed. Selected Works. North-Holland Pub. Co. ISBN 0-7204-2252-3. OCLC 115237.  Łukasiewicz, Jan (1998). Jacek Jadacki, ed. Logika i metafizyka. Miscellanea (in Polish). Warsaw, WFiS UW. ISBN 83-910113-3-X.    === Papers === 1903 "On Induction as Inversion of Deduction" 1906 "Analysis and Construction of the Concept of Cause" 1910 "On Aristotle's Principle of Contradiction" 1913 "On the Reversibility of the Relation of Ground and Consequence" 1920 "On Three-valued Logic" 1921 "Two-valued Logic" 1922 "A Numerical Interpretation of the Theory of Propositions" 1928 "Concerning the Method in Philosophy" 1929 "Elements of Mathematical Logic" 1929 "On Importance and Requirements of Mathematical Logic" 1930 "Philosophical Remarks on Many-Valued Systems of Propositional Logic" 1930 "Investigations into the Sentential Calculus" ["Untersuchungen über den Aussagenkalkül"], with Alfred Tarski 1931 "Comments on Nicod's Axiom and the 'Generalizing Deduction'" 1934 "On Science" 1934 "Importance of Logical Analysis for Knowledge" 1934 "Outlines of the History of the Propositional Logic" 1936 "Logistic and Philosophy" 1937 "In Defense of the Logistic" 1938 "On Descartes's Philosophy" 1943 "The Shortest Axiom of the Implicational Calculus of Propositions" 1951 "On Variable Functors of Propositional Arguments" 1952 "On the Intuitionistic Theory of Deduction" 1953 "A System of Modal Logic" 1954 "On a Controversial Problem of Aristotle's Modal Syllogistic"   == See also == Łukasiewicz logic History of philosophy in Poland Stanisław Leśniewski List of Poles 27114 Lukasiewicz   == Notes ==   == References == "Curriculum Vitae of Jan Łukasiewicz", Rome, Italy: Metalogicon journal, (1994) VII, 2 (July–December issue). Craig, Edward (general editor), "Article: Jan Łukasiewicz", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1998, Volume 5, pp. 860–863.   == Further reading == Borkowski, L.; Słupecki, J., "The logical works of J. Łukasiewicz", Studia Logica 8 (1958), 7–56. Kotarbiński, T., "Jan Łukasiewicz's works on the history of logic", Studia Logica 8 (1958), 57–62. Kwiatkowski, T., "Jan Łukasiewicz – A historian of logic", Organon 16–17 (1980–1981), 169–188. Marshall, D., "Łukasiewicz, Leibniz and the arithmetization of the syllogism", Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 18 (2) (1977), 235–242. Seddon, Frederick (1996). Aristotle & Łukasiewicz on the Principle of Contradiction. Ames, Iowa: Modern Logic Pub. ISBN 1-884905-04-8. OCLC 37533856.  Woleński, Jan (1994). Philosophical Logic in Poland. Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 0-7923-2293-2. OCLC 27938071.  Woleński, Jan, "Jan Łukasiewicz on the Liar Paradox, Logical Consequence, Truth and Induction", Modern Logic 4 (1994), 394–400.   == External links == Jan Lukasiewicz entry by Peter Simons in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Jan Łukasiewicz", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Łukasiewicz entry at Polish Philosophy Page, ed. by F. Coniglione (University of Catania) Jan Łukasiewicz at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Jean-Yves Beziau (born January 15, 1965 in Orléans, France) is a professor and researcher of the Brazilian Research Council — CNPq — at the University of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Beziau is a dual citizen of France and Switzerland (Ropraz, VD). He is a fluent speaker of English and Portuguese as well as his native French, and has published works in all of these three languages. A former student of (and frequent collaborator with) Newton da Costa, he works in the field of logic—in particular, paraconsistent logic, the square of opposition and universal logic. He holds a Master's degree in Philosophy from Pantheon-Sorbonne University on the Allegory of the cave (advisor: Sarah Kofman), a PhD in Philosophy from the University of São Paulo on Logical truth (advisor: Newton da Costa), a MSc and a PhD in Logic and Foundations of Computer Science from Denis Diderot University (advisor: Daniel Andler). He has been working in France, Switzerland, Brazil, Poland and USA (UCLA, Stanford and UCSD ). He is the Editor-in-Chief and founder of the journal Logica Universalis, the South American Journal of Logic, the Springer book series Studies in Universal Logic, the College Publication book series Logic PhDs and book Encyclopaedia of Logic as well as the area editor of logic of the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy He is the organizer of various series of events in logic around the world: UNILOG - World Congress and School on Universal Logic (Montreux 2005, Xi'an 2007, Lisbon 2010, Rio de Janeiro 2013, Istanbul 2015), Square of Opposition (Montreux 2007, Corsica 2010, Beirut 2012, Vatican 2014), Logic in Question (Sorbonne, Paris 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015).   == Selected publications == "What is paraconsistent logic?" In D. Batens et al. (eds.), Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic, Research Studies Press, Baldock, 2000, pp. 95–111. ISBN 0-86380-253-2 Handbook of Paraconsistency (ed. with Walter Carnielli and Dov Gabbay). London: College Publication, 2007. ISBN 978-1-904987-73-4 "Semantic computation of truth based on associations already learned" (with Patrick Suppes), Journal of Applied Logic, 2 (2004), pp. 457–467. "From paraconsistent logic to universal logic", Sorites, 12 (2001), pp.5-32. Logica Universalis: Towards a General Theory of Logic (ed.). Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag, 2005, Second Edition 2007. ISBN 3-7643-7259-1 "Logic is not logic", 'Abstracta' 6 (2010), pp. 73–102. "The power of the hexagon", Logica Universalis, 6 (2012), pp. 1–43. "History of truth-values", in D.M.Gabbay and J.Woods (eds) Handbook of the History of Logic, Vol. 11 - Logic: a history of its central concepts, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2012, pp. 233–305 The Square of Opposition: a General Framework for Cognition (ed. with Gillman Payette). Bern: Peter Lang, 2012. ISBN 978-3-0343-0537-2 "The new rising of the square of opposition", in J.-Y.Béziau and D.Jacquette (eds), Around and Beyond the Square of Opposition, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2012, pp. 6–24. "Preface" of Universal Logic : an Anthology - From Paul Hertz to Dov Gabbay, Birkhäuser, Basel, 2012. La pointure du symbole (ed.). Paris: Petra, 2014. ISBN 978-2-84743-048-6 "The relativity and universality of logic", Synthese, 192 (2015), pp 1939-1954. Conceptual Clarifications - Tributes to Patrick Suppes (1922-2014) (ed. with Décio Krause and Jonas R. Becker Arenhart). London: College Publication, 2015. ISBN 978-1-84890-188-9   == External links == Jean-Yves Beziau's personal homepage The Road to Universal Logic - Festschrift for 50th Birthday of Jean-Yves Béziau Volume I The Road to Universal Logic - Festschrift for 50th Birthday of Jean-Yves Béziau Volume II Logical Autobiography 50 Logica Universalis Studies in Universal Logic Logic PhDs Encyclopaedia of Logic South American Journal of Logic World Congress and School on Universal Logic World Congress on the Square Opposition Logic in Question

Jean-Yves Girard (born 1947) is a French logician working in proof theory. He is the research director (emeritus) at the mathematical institute of Luminy. He obtained the CNRS Silver medal in 1983 and is a member of the French Academy of Sciences.   == BiographyEdit == Jean-Yves Girard is an alumnus of the École normale supérieure de Saint-Cloud. He made a name for himself in the 1970s with his proof of strong normalization in a system of second-order logic called System F. This result gave a new proof of Takeuti's conjecture, which was proven a few years earlier by William W. Tait, Moto-o Takahashi and Dag Prawitz. For this purpose, he introduced the notion of reducibility candidate ("candidat de réducibilité"). He is also credited with the invention of linear logic; the geometry of interaction; ludics; and the mustard watch.   == BibliographyEdit == Ernest Nagel; James R. Newman; Kurt Gödel; Jean-Yves Girard (1989). Le théorème de Gödel. Éditions du Seuil.  Jean-Yves Girard; P. Taylor; Yves Lafont (1989). Proofs and Types. Cambridge University Press.  Jean-Yves Girard (2007). Le Point Aveugle, Cours de Logique. Hermann.    == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Girard's home page Jean-Yves Girard at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Girard's bibliography (via DBLP) Journées Jean-Yves Girard web site of 2007 conference in honour of Girard's 60th birthday

Jean Buridan (French: [byʁidɑ̃]; Latin Johannes Buridanus; c. 1295 – 1363) was a French priest who sowed the seeds of the Copernican revolution in Europe. He developed the concept of impetus, the first step toward the modern concept of inertia, and an important development in the history of medieval science. His name is most familiar through the thought experiment known as Buridan's ass (a thought experiment which does not appear in his extant writings).   == Career == Born, most probably, in Béthune, France, Buridan studied and later taught at the University of Paris. Unusually, he spent his academic life in the faculty of arts, rather than obtaining the doctorate in Theology that typically prepared the way for a career in Philosophy. He further maintained his intellectual independence by remaining a secular cleric, rather than joining a religious Order. By 1340, his confidence had grown sufficiently for him to launch an attack on his predecessor, William of Ockham. Buridan also wrote on solutions to paradoxes such as the liar paradox. An ordinance of Louis XI., in 1473, directed against the nominalists, prohibited the reading of his works. The bishop Albert of Saxony, himself renowned as a logician, was among the most notable of his students.   == Impetus theory ==  The concept of inertia was alien to the physics of Aristotle. Aristotle, and his peripatetic followers, held that a body was only maintained in motion by the action of a continuous external force. Thus, in the Aristotelian view, a projectile moving through the air would owe its continuing motion to eddies or vibrations in the surrounding medium, a phenomenon known as antiperistasis. In the absence of a proximate force, the body would come to rest almost immediately. Jean Buridan, following in the footsteps of John Philoponus and Avicenna, proposed that motion was maintained by some property of the body, imparted when it was set in motion. Buridan named the motion-maintaining property impetus. Moreover, he rejected the view that the impetus dissipated spontaneously (this is the big difference between Buridan's theory of impetus and his predecessors), asserting that a body would be arrested by the forces of air resistance and gravity which might be opposing its impetus. Buridan further held that the impetus of a body increased with the speed with which it was set in motion, and with its quantity of matter. Clearly, Buridan's impetus is closely related to the modern concept of momentum. Buridan saw impetus as causing the motion of the object. Buridan anticipated Isaac Newton when he wrote: ...after leaving the arm of the thrower, the projectile would be moved by an impetus given to it by the thrower and would continue to be moved as long as the impetus remained stronger than the resistance, and would be of infinite duration were it not diminished and corrupted by a contrary force resisting it or by something inclining it to a contrary motion (Questions on Aristotle's Metaphysics XII.9). Buridan used the theory of impetus to give an accurate qualitative account of the motion of projectiles but he ultimately saw his theory as a correction to Aristotle, maintaining core peripatetic beliefs including a fundamental qualitative difference between motion and rest. The theory of impetus was also adapted to explain celestial phenomena in terms of circular impetus.   == Apocryphal stories and anecdotes about personal life == Apocryphal stories abound about his reputed amorous affairs and adventures which are enough to show that he enjoyed a reputation as a glamorous and mysterious figure in Paris life. In particular, a rumour held that he was sentenced to be thrown in a sack into the River Seine, but was ultimately saved through the ingenuity of a student. François Villon alludes to this in his famous poem Ballade des Dames du Temps Jadis. Buridan also seems to have had an unusual facility for attracting academic funding which suggests that he was indeed a charismatic figure.   == Selected works in English translation == Hughes, G.E. (1982). John Buridan on Self-Reference: Chapter Eight of Buridan's Sophismata. An edition and translation with an introduction, and philosophical commentary. Cambridge/London/New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-28864-9. King, Peter (1985). John Buridan's Logic: The Treatise on Supposition; The Treatise on Consequences. Translation from the Latin with a Philosophical Introduction, Dordrecht: Reidel. Zupko, John Alexander, ed. and tr. (1989). John Buridan's Philosophy of Mind: An Edition and Translation of Book III of His Questions on Aristotle's De Anima (Third Redaction), with Commentary and Critical and Interpretative Essays. Doctoral dissertation, Cornell University. Klima, Gyula, tr. (2001). John Buridan: 'Summulae de Dialectica'. Yale Library of Medieval Philosophy. New Haven, Conn./London: Yale University Press. John Buridan (2014). Treatise on Consequences, translated, with an Introduction by Stephen Read. New York: Fordham University Press.   == See also == List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics Buridan's bridge   == Notes ==   == Further reading == Michael, Bernd (1985). Johannes Buridan: Studien zu seinem Leben, seinen Werken und zu Rezeption seiner Theorien im Europa des späten Mittelalters [Jean Buridan: His life, his works and the reaction to his theories in the Europe of the late Middle Ages]. 2 Vols. Doctoral dissertation. University of Berlin.  Klima, Gyula (2008). John Buridan. New York: Oxford University Press. Landi, Marcello (2007). "Un contributo allo studio della scienza nel Medio Evo. Il trattato Il cielo e il mondo di Giovanni Buridano e un confronto con alcune posizioni di Tommaso d'Aquino" [A contribution to the study of science in the Middle Ages. The sky and the world of Jean Buridan and a comparison with some positions of St. Thomas Aquinas]. Divus Thomas 110 (2): 151–185.  Thijssen, J. M. M. H., and Jack Zupko (ed.) (2001). The Metaphysics and Natural Philosophy of John Buridan Leiden: Brill. Zupko, Jack (2003). John Buridan. Portrait of a Fourteenth-Century Arts Master. Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press.   == External links == John Buridan entry by Jack Zupko in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bibliography by Fabienne Pironet (up to 2001) Buridan's Logic and Metaphysics: an annotated bibliography (updates the bibliography of Fabienne Pironet to 2014) Buridan's Logical Works. I. An Overview of the Summulae de dialectica a detailed summary of the nine treatises of the Summulae de dialectica Buridan's Logical Works. II. The Treatise on Consequences and other writings a summary of the other logical writings Buridan: Editions, Translations and Studies on the Manuscript Tradition Complete bibliography of the logical and metaphysical works

Jean George Pierre Nicod (c. 1893 – 16 February 1924) was a French philosopher and logician. In his best known work, he showed that the classical propositional calculus could be derived from one axiom and one rule, both expressed using the Sheffer stroke. He also developed Nicod's criterion. Nicod died at the age of 31 from tuberculosis. See also Carl Hempel's raven paradox.   == Legacy == The Institut Jean Nicod (Paris) — a branch of the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) -- is research laboratory at the interface between philosophy, cognitive science, and the social sciences — was named in honour of Nicod's memory. Jean Nicod's name is also commemorated by the prestigious Jean Nicod Lectures, delivered annually in Paris by a leading philosopher of mind or philosophically oriented cognitive scientist, and published as a series by the MIT Press. The lecturer is awarded the Jean Nicod Prize by the CNRS.   == Main works == 1917, "A Reduction in the Number of Primitive Propositions of Logic", Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 19: 32-41. 1921, "La géométrie des sensations de mouvement", Revue de métaphysique et de morale 28: 537-43. 1922, "Les tendances philosophiques de M. Bertrand Russell", Revue de métaphysique et de morale 29: 77-84. 1922, "Mathematical Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics" in Encyclopædia Britannica: The New Volumes, vol. 3, 12th ed. 874-76. 1923. La géométrie dans le monde sensible. Thèse, Univ. de Paris. 1923. Le problème logique de l'induction. Thèse complémentaire, Univ. de Paris. 1924. "Les relations des valeurs et les relations de sens en logique formelle", Revue de métaphysique et de morale 31: 467-80. 1924, "Freedom of Association and Trade Unionism: An Introductory Survey", International Labor Review 9: 467-80. 1930. Foundations of Geometry & Induction, Containing Geometry in a Sensible World and the Logical Problem of Induction, with prefaces by Bertrand Russell and André Lalande. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co. Reprinted 2000, London: Routledge.   == References ==   == External links == Jean Nicod (1893-1924): Biographical note and works (in French) Institut Jean Nicod (CNRS)

This is a redirect from a title with another method of capitalisation. It leads to the title in accordance with the Wikipedia naming conventions for capitalisation, or it leads to a title that is associated in some way with the conventional capitalisation of this redirect title. This may help writing, searching and international language issues. For more information follow the bold category link. If this redirect is an incorrect capitalization (a typo), then it is made available to aid searches, so pages that use this link should be updated to link directly to the target. Use this rcat to tag only mainspace redirects; when other capitalisations are in other namespaces, use {{R from modification}} instead.

Jeffrey Bruce Paris (/ˈpærɪs/; born 1944) is British a mathematician and Professor of Logic in the School of Mathematics at the University of Manchester.    == Education == Paris gained his doctorate under Robin Gandy at Manchester in 1969 with a dissertation entitled Large Cardinals and the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis.   == Research == Paris known for his work on mathematical logic, in particular provability in arithmetic, uncertain reasoning and inductive logic with an emphasis on rationality and common sense principles.   == Awards and honours == Paris was elected Fellow of the British Academy in 1999.   == References ==

Jeroen Antonius Gerardus Groenendijk (Dutch pronunciation: [ˈχʁunəndɛik]) (born 20 July 1949, Amsterdam), is a Dutch logician, linguist and philosopher, working on philosophy of language, formal semantics, pragmatics. Groenendijk wrote a joint Ph.D. dissertation with Martin Stokhof on the formal semantics of questions, under the supervision of Renate Bartsch and Johan van Benthem. He was also an important figure in the development of dynamic semantics (together with Stokhof, Veltman and others). His current work is mainly focused on studying and developing the recently founded framework of Inquisitive Semantics. He is a former director of the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation (ILLC) at the University of Amsterdam and a member of the group collectively publishing under the pseudonym L. T. F. Gamut.   == References ==   == External links == Groenendijk's university homepage Inquisitive Semantics project homepage

Jerzy Łoś (born March 22, 1920 in Lwów, Poland (now Lviv, Ukraine)-June 1, 1998 in Warsaw) (Polish pronunciation: [ˈjɛʐɨ ˈwɔɕ]) was a Polish mathematician, logician, economist, and philosopher. He is best known for his work on ultraproducts, in particular for "Łoś's theorem", which states that any first-order formula is true in an ultraproduct if and only if it is true in "most" factors (see ultraproduct for details). He was faculty at academies in Wrocław, Toruń, and Warsaw. In 1996 Łoś suffered from a severe brain stroke. He was thenceforward ill until his death in 1998.   == Selected publications == Łoś, Jerzy (1955) Quelques remarques, théorèmes et problèmes sur les classes définissables d'algèbres. Mathematical interpretation of formal systems, pp. 98--113. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam.   == See also == Transfer principle Łoś's theorem   == External links == Jerzy Łoś's biography

Jin Yuelin (Chinese: 金岳霖) (1895–1984) was a Chinese philosopher and logician.   == Biography == He was born in Changsha, Hunan and attended Tsinghua University from 1911 until 1914. He obtained Ph.D. in Political Science from Columbia University in 1920. In 1926, Jin founded the Department of Philosophy at Tsinghua University. Jin was an active participant in the May 4th movement as a young, intellectual revolutionary. He helped to incorporate the scientific method into philosophy. He died in Beijing.   == Philosophical context: Eastern vs. Western thought == Among the first to systematically introduce modern logic into China, Jin also founded a new philosophical system combining elements from Western and Chinese philosophical traditions (especially the concept of Tao). Not much work on Jin’s philosophy has been done in the West in English, although a decent amount has been done in Chinese. Jin does not advocate a traditional, historical approach to philosophy, but rather presents philosophy as a practicing approach to solving problems – philosophy as goal in and of itself. This is quite different from how Chinese philosophers at the time viewed the study of philosophy. At the risk of oversimplifying, Jin’s approach can be viewed as a hybrid between Western and Eastern philosophical ideologies – influenced both by his Western education in logic and science, and by his Chinese roots. He was particularly interested in Bertrand Russell’s work, which is based partly upon New Realism in British Philosophy. Russell worked with two main concepts: breaking down the complex into smaller parts, and rebuilding the logic method, both of which affected Jin’s thinking and philosophy. However Jin can be considered a Chinese philosopher because he was most informed by Chinese philosophy, and concerned himself most with Chinese concepts, such as Tao. “However,” Zinda writes, “Jin used discursive structures borrowed from both Chinese and Western thought as modes of persuasion”.   === Jin's views on Chinese philosophy === Jin’s writing is intertwined with his desire to navigate the space between Chinese and Western philosophy. In his essay “Chinese Philosophy”, Jin highlights the differences he sees between the two spheres regarding the study of philosophy. He sees the Western approach to philosophy as being more of a meticulous scientific and logical approach that he traces back to the Hellenistic thought in Ancient Greece. In contrast, he explains Chinese philosophy as having “underdevelopment of what might be called logico-epistemological consciousness”. He explains Chinese philosophy as being more poetic in that it has “bareness and disconnectedness”, where Western philosophy is more verbose. This lack of extended explanation in Chinese philosophy leads, Jin notes, to Chinese philosophy being more about interpreting old philosopher’s work, rather than presenting new original ways of thinking. In contrast, Jin does not attribute ideas to past thinkers or quote past thinkers in his own philosophy. Additionally, he did not pursue the nationalistic aims of China in his philosophy, as many of his colleagues did. Jin notes that China has a long history of the study of philosophy and political science being intertwined; the philosophy of today is a more specialized and differentiated discipline. This detachment from the discipline, while it creates objective knowledge, distances the philosopher from the philosophy. Jin advocates for living philosophy, rather than just knowing it. Thus, he works to take advantage of the emotional attachment of Chinese words. For example, Jin chooses not to translate the word “Dao” to English, but keeps its Chinese origin.   == Works == 1936: Logic (《逻辑》/《邏輯》) 1940: On Tao (《论道》/《論道》) 1965: Criticism of Russell's Philosophy (《罗素哲学批判》/《羅素哲學批判》) 1983: A Theory of Knowledge (《知识论》/《知識論》)   === Basic writings and concepts === Jin’s most accomplished philosophical writings are his three principal publications written in Chinese: Logic (1935), On Tao (1940), and A Theory of Knowledge (1983). His English publication, "Tao, Nature, and Man" draws heavily on thought from "On Dao", which he considers to be one of the most central parts of his philosophical work. Jin’s metaphysics is focused mostly on Tao, which he argues is what life is made up of. It is composed of two main elements that Jin coins as Stuff and Form. In short, Stuff refers to the inexpressible matter that fills everything, while Form refers to all of reality that is being filled. Essentially, Tao is the result of when Form is filled with Stuff. Jin uses his definition of Tao to posit a universal sympathy: everything – including humans – is one in the same, and we should appreciate life as such.   ==== Stuff ==== Stuff is inexpressible. In fact, the word “Stuff” itself is simply a word Jin uses to approximate the definition because, he posits, no word or human will ever fully grasp the concept. Scholar Hu Jun writes, “What is required in order to grasp matter [Stuff] is a sort of intellectual projection, in which recognition of the limits of one’s intellect is accompanied by a leave out of the intellectual process...”. Stuff refers to the capacity of all things to change – pure activity and potentiality. It is composed of two categories – Universals and Possibilities.   ==== Universals and possibilities ==== Jin explains the notions of Universals and Possibilities as stemming from the ideal version of concepts, which in turn stems from abstracting the concrete. The Universal refers to a concept which a group of things have in common. Jin writes, “Each universal is an aspect shared by a class of objects, for example… horseness which is shared by a class of quadrupeds”. Universals are groupings that we are familiar with. A Possibility, therefore, is a concept that is not a Universal. It is that which has not been imagined yet, but could be imagined. Thus, Jin writes, “we are able to define an universal as a realized possibility… A universal is merely a Stuffed possibility”. Jin posits that the reality we feel with regard to events and objects is the realization of possibilities of those events and objects. Hu writes, “The realization of contingent possibilities gives us the richness, variety, and completeness of Tao, whereas the eternally unrealized possibilities supply us with the implements in the realm of thinking and thought”.   ==== Form ==== Form is what Stuff must remain inside of. Hu writes, “Whether or not matter [Stuff] enters into or withdraws from possibilities, it must stay within Form”. Everything is inside of Form. Jin explains that unlike Universals, it does not have “a boundary line dividing what belongs to it from what doesn’t”. Thus Form is formless – it incorporates everything and is nothing at the same time. It is what is left when there are no possibilities – there is nothing outside of Form. Form and Stuff are inescapably intertwined. Stuff fills Form, and Form contains Stuff. Jin writes, “Un-Stuffed Form or Un-formed Stuff is a contradiction”. Jin defines their relationship as, “Stuff as a sort of raw material and Form as a kind of mould”.   ==== Tao ==== Tao is Jin’s most basic concept, but is also his highest ideal realm. Tao is the coming together of Stuff and Form to create the universe. If Tao were only Stuff then it would be fluid, and if it were only Form then it would be empty. Jin writes, “Tao is simply Stuffed Form or Formed Stuff. It is therefore neither pure Form nor pure Stuff”. Tao is all-pervasive and incorporates everything. Therefore, Jin posits that humans are part of Tao, and urges us to be “conscious of the fundamental oneness at which we are with the universe and everything there is in it”. He presents a universe where everything has the same status because everything is made up of the same fabric. Scholar Yvonne Schulz Zinda writes, “he established a kind of ontological certainty that integrates individuals the evolutionary process of dao, through which they are interrelated with each other”. While different things have different jobs – Jin gives the example of a mosquito’s job being to bite a human, and a human’s job to kill the mosquito – one thing not innately superior to the other.   == See also == Feng Youlan   == References ==  On Jin Yuelin's Metaphysics   == References ==

Joachim Jungius (22 October 1587 – 23 September 1657) was a German mathematician, logician and philosopher of sciences.   == Life == He was a native of Lübeck. He studied metaphysics at the Universities of Rostock and Giessen, where he earned in 1608 his degree. Beginning in 1609, he was a professor of mathematics at the University of Giessen, and in 1614–15, with Wolfgang Ratke (1571–1635) and Christoph Helvig (1581–1617), he took part in studies of educational reform. In 1616, he returned to Rostock in order to study medicine, later obtaining his medical doctorate from the University of Padua (1619). From 1619 to 1623, he practiced medicine in Lübeck. In 1622 at Rostock, he founded an early scientific society known as Societas Ereunetica sive Zetetica. From 1624 to 1628, Jungius worked as a professor of mathematics at Rostock, his service here being briefly interrupted in 1625, when he spent time as professor of medicine at the University of Helmstedt. From 1629 until 1657, he was professor of natural sciences at the Akademisches Gymnasium, a secondary school in Hamburg. Jungius believed that science was based on mathematics, and at Hamburg stressed the importance of critical thinking to his students. He also felt that mathematics and logic served as a remedy to metaphysical and mystical speculation.   == Works == Jungius was an important figure of 17th century atomism, and was an advocate of a "corpuscular chemistry" that assumed the conservation of mass. He also demonstrated that a catenary was not a parabola. In 1638 he published the textbook Logica Hamburgensis, which presented late medieval theories and techniques of logic. Here he demonstrated oblique cases of arguments that did not adhere to simpler forms of inference; An example being: "The square of an even number is even; 6 is even; therefore, the square of 6 is even". His double position as connected to scholastic logic, but also to innovations, earns him the classification Semi-Ramist. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz wrote, "While Jungius of Lübeck is a man little known even in Germany itself, he was clearly of such judiciousness and such capacity of mind that I know of no other mortal, including even Descartes himself, from whom we could better have expected a great restoration of the sciences, had Jungius been either known or assisted."   == Citations ==   == Bibliography ==   === Editions === Joachim Jungius, 1957. Logica Hamburgensis, facsimile reproduction of the original edition (Hamburg, 1638) edited by Rudolf W. Meyer, Hamburg: J.J. Augustin. Joachim Jungius, 1977. Logica Hamburgensis additamenta, edited by Wilhelm Risse, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Joachim Jungius, 1988. Disputationes Hamburgenses, critical edition by Clemens Müller-Glauser, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.   === Studies === Ariew, Roger and Daniel Garber, 1989. G. W. Leibniz: Philosophical Essays. Indianapolis: Hackett. Ashworth, Earline Jennifer, 1967. Joachim Jungius (1587-1657) and the Logic of Relations. Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie 49: 72-85. Clucas, Stephen, 2009. Scientia and inductio scientifica in the 'Logica Hamburgensis' of Joachim Jungius, in Tom Sorell, Jill Kraye and G. A. J. Rogers (eds.), Scientia in Early Modern Philosophy: Seventeenth-Century Thinkers on Demonstrative Knowledge from First Principles, Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 53–70. Klein, Peter (ed.) 1990. Praktische Logik. Traditionen und Tendenzen. 350 Jahre Joachim Jungii 'Logica Hamburgensis' , Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Trevisani, Francesco, 1978. Geometria e logica nel metodo di Joachim Jungius (1587-1657), Rivista Critica di Storia della Filosofia 33: 171-208.   == External links == H. Kangro, Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Joachim Jungius", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . The Galileo Project, Biographical Data

Joachim Lambek (5 December 1922 – 23 June 2014) was Peter Redpath Emeritus Professor of Pure Mathematics at McGill University, where he earned his Ph.D. degree in 1950 with Hans Zassenhaus as advisor.   == Scholarly work == Lambek supervised 16 doctoral students, and has 51 doctoral descendants. He has over 100 publications listed in the Mathematical Reviews, including 6 books. His earlier work was mostly in module theory, especially torsion theories, non-commutative localization, and injective modules. One of his earliest papers, (Lambek & Moser 1954) proved the Lambek-Moser theorem about integer sequences. His more recent work is in pregroups and formal languages; his earliest work in this field were probably (Lambek 1958) and (Lambek 1979). He is noted, among other things, for the Lambek calculus, an effort to capture mathematical aspects of natural language syntax in logical form and a work that has been very influential in computational linguistics. His last works were on pregroup grammar.   == Selected works ==   === Books === Fine, N. J.; Gillman, Leonard; Lambek, Joachim (1966), Rings of quotients of rings of functions, McGill University Press, MR 0200747  Lambek, Joachim (1966), Lectures on rings and modules, With an appendix by Ian G. Connell, Blaisdell Publishing, MR 0206032 ; 3rd edition. 2009.  Lambek, Joachim (1966), Completions of categories, Seminar lectures given in 1966 in Zürich. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, No. 24, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 0209330  Lambek, Joachim (1971), Torsion theories, additive semantics, and rings of quotients, With an appendix by H. H. Storrer on torsion theories and dominant dimensions. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 177, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, MR 0284459  Lambek, J.; Scott, P.J. (1986), Introduction to Higher Order Categorical Logic, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-35653-4, MR 856915  Anglin, W. S.; Lambek, Joachim (1995), The heritage of Thales, Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-0-387-94544-6, MR 1369087  Casadio, Claudia; Lambek, Joachim (2008), Computational Algebraic Approaches to Natural Language, Polimetrica, ISBN 978-88-7699-125-7  Lambek, J. (2008), From word to sentence: a computational algebraic approach to grammar, Polimetrica, ISBN 978-88-7699-117-2    === Articles === Lambek, Joachim; Moser, L. (1954), "Inverse and Complementary Sequences of Natural Numbers", The American Mathematical Monthly (The American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 61, No. 7) 61 (7): 454–458, doi:10.2307/2308078, ISSN 0002-9890, JSTOR 2308078, MR 0062777  Lambek, J. (1958), "The Mathematics of Sentence Structure", The American Mathematical Monthly (The American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 65, No. 3) 65 (3): 154–170, doi:10.2307/2310058, ISSN 0002-9890, JSTOR 1480361  Lambek, Joachim (1972), "Bicommutators of nice injectives", Journal of Algebra 21: 60–73, doi:10.1016/0021-8693(72)90034-8, ISSN 0021-8693, MR 0301052  Lambek, Joachim (1972), "Localization and completion", Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 2 (4): 343–370, doi:10.1016/0022-4049(72)90011-4, ISSN 0022-4049, MR 0320047  Lambek, Joachim (1979), "A mathematician looks at Latin conjugation", Theoretical Linguistics 6 (2): 221–234, doi:10.1515/thli.1979.6.1-3.221, ISSN 0301-4428, MR 589163    == References ==  Barr, Michael; Scott, P. J.; Seely, R. A. G., eds. (2000), The Lambek Festschrift: mathematical structures in computer science, Cambridge University Press, MR 1770227    == External links == Joachim Lambek at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Faculty profile of Joachim Lambek at McGill University An appreciation of Jim Lambek at McGill by Michael Barr (a biographical talk given on the occasion of his 75th birthday) Lambek festival (80th anniversary)


Johann Heinrich Lambert (German: [ˈlambɛʁt], Jean-Henri Lambert in French; 26 August 1728 – 25 September 1777) was a Swiss polymath who made important contributions to the subjects of mathematics, physics (particularly optics), philosophy, astronomy and map projections.   == BiographyEdit == Lambert was born in 1728 in the city of Mulhouse (now in Alsace, France), at that time an exclave of Switzerland. Leaving school he continued to study in his free time whilst undertaking a series of jobs. These included assistant to his father (a tailor), a clerk at a nearby iron works, a private tutor, secretary to the editor of Basler Zeitung and, at the age of 20, private tutor to the sons of Count Salis in Chur. Travelling Europe with his charges (1756–1758) allowed him to meet established mathematicians in the German states, The Netherlands, France and the Italian states. On his return to Chur he published his first books (on optics and cosmology) and began to seek an academic post. After a few short posts he was rewarded (1763) by an invitation to a position at the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, where he gained the sponsorship of Frederick II of Prussia, and became a friend of Euler. In this stimulating and financially stable environment, he worked prodigiously until his death in 1777.   == WorkEdit ==   === MathematicsEdit === Lambert was the first to introduce hyperbolic functions into trigonometry. Also, he made conjectures regarding non-Euclidean space. Lambert is credited with the first proof that π is irrational. He used a generalized continued fraction for the function tan x. Euler believed but could not prove that π was irrational, and it is speculated that Aryabhata also believed this, in 500 CE.  Lambert also devised theorems regarding conic sections that made the calculation of the orbits of comets simpler. Lambert devised a formula for the relationship between the angles and the area of hyperbolic triangles. These are triangles drawn on a concave surface, as on a saddle, instead of the usual flat Euclidean surface. Lambert showed that the angles added up to less than π (radians), or 180°. The amount of shortfall, called the defect, increases with the area. The larger the triangle's area, the smaller the sum of the angles and hence the larger the defect CΔ = π — (α + β + γ). That is, the area of a hyperbolic triangle (multiplied by a constant C) is equal to π (in radians), or 180°, minus the sum of the angles α, β, and γ. Here C denotes, in the present sense, the negative of the curvature of the surface (taking the negative is necessary as the curvature of a saddle surface is defined to be negative in the first place). As the triangle gets larger or smaller, the angles change in a way that forbids the existence of similar hyperbolic triangles, as only triangles that have the same angles will have the same area. Hence, instead of expressing the area of the triangle in terms of the lengths of its sides, as in Euclid's geometry, the area of Lambert's hyperbolic triangle can be expressed in terms of its angles.   === Map projectionEdit === Lambert was the first mathematician to address the general properties of map projections. In particular he was the first to discuss the properties of conformality and equal area preservation and to point out that they were mutually exclusive. (Snyder 1993 p77). In 1772, Lambert published seven new map projections under the title Anmerkungen und Zusätze zur Entwerfung der Land- und Himmelscharten, (translated as Notes and Comments on the Composition of Terrestrial and Celestial Maps by Waldo Tobler (1972)). Lambert did not give names to any of his projections but they are now known as: Lambert conformal conic Transverse Mercator Lambert azimuthal equal area Lagrange projection Lambert cylindrical equal area Transverse cylindrical equal area Lambert conical equal area The first three of these are of great importance. Further details may be found at map projections and in several texts.   === PhysicsEdit === Lambert invented the first practical hygrometer. In 1760, he published a book on photometry, the Photometria. From the assumption that light travels in straight lines, he showed that illumination was proportional to the strength of the source, inversely proportional to the square of the distance of the illuminated surface and the sine of the angle of inclination of the light's direction to that of the surface. These results were supported by experiments involving the visual comparison of illuminations and used for the calculation of illumination. In Photometria Lambert also formulated the law of light absorption—the Beer–Lambert law) and introduced the term albedo. He wrote a classic work on perspective and contributed to geometrical optics. The photometric unit lambert is named in recognition of his work in establishing the study of photometry. Lambert was also a pioneer in the development of three-dimensional colour models. Late in life, he published a description of a triangular colour pyramid, which shows a total of 107 colours on six different levels, variously combining red, yellow and blue pigments, and with an increasing amount of white to provide the vertical component. He was assisted in this project by the court painter Benjamin Calau   === PhilosophyEdit === In his main philosophical work, Neues Organon (New Organon, 1764), Lambert studied the rules for distinguishing subjective from objective appearances. This connects with his work in the science of optics. In 1765 he began corresponding with Immanuel Kant who intended to dedicate to him the Critique of Pure Reason but the work was delayed, appearing after his death.   === AstronomyEdit === Lambert also developed a theory of the generation of the universe that was similar to the nebular hypothesis that Thomas Wright and Immanuel Kant had (independently) developed. Wright published his account in An Original Theory or New Hypothesis of the Universe (1750), Kant in Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels, published anonymously in 1755. Shortly afterward, Lambert published his own version of the nebular hypothesis of the origin of the solar system in Cosmologische Briefe über die Einrichtung des Weltbaues (1761). Lambert hypothesized that the stars near the sun were part of a group which travelled together through the Milky Way, and that there were many such groupings (star systems) throughout the galaxy. The former was later confirmed by Sir William Herschel. In astrodynamics he also solved the problem of determination of time of flight along an section of orbit, known now as Lambert's problem. His work in this area is commemorated by the Asteroid 187 Lamberta named in his honour.   === LogicEdit === Johann-Heinrich Lambert is the author of a treatise on logic, which he called Neues Organon (1764), that is to say, the New Organon. The most recent edition of this work named after Aristotle's Organon was issued in 1990 by the Akademie-Verlag of Berlin. To say nothing of the fact that in it one has the first appearance of the term phenomenology, one can find therein a very pedagogical presentation of the various kinds of syllogism. In A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, John-Stuart Mill expresses his admiration for Johann Heinrich Lambert.   == See alsoEdit == Beer-Lambert law (Lambert–Beer law, Beer–Lambert–Bouguer law) lambert (unit) Lambert quadrilateral Lambert's cosine law Lambertian reflectance Lambert cylindrical equal-area projection Lambert conformal conic projection Lambert azimuthal equal-area projection Lambert series, of importance in number theory. Lambert's trinomial equation Lambert's W function Lambert's theorem on the parabola   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == A Short Account of the History of Mathematics, W. W. Rouse Ball, 1908. Asimov's Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, Isaac Asimov, Doubleday & Co., Inc., 1972, ISBN 0-385-17771-2. "La théorie des parallèles de Johann Heinrich Lambert : Présentation, traduction et commentaires", A. Papadopoulos and G. Théret, Collection Sciences dans l'histoire, Librairie Albert Blanchard, Paris, 2014. ISBN 978-2-85367-266-5. Max E. Eisenring (Nov 1941). Johann Heinrich Lambert und die wissenschaftliche Philosophie der Gegenwart (PDF) (Ph.D. thesis) (in German). ETH Zürich.    == External linksEdit == Johann Heinrich Lambert (1728-1777): Collected Works - Sämtliche Werke Online O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Johann Heinrich Lambert", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Entry from "A Short Account of the History of Mathematics". Britannica NNDB Rouse Ball Digitized works at Université de Strasbourg Sarah Lowengard "Number, Order, Form: Color Systems and Systematization" and Johann Heinrich Lambert The Creation of Color in Eighteenth-Century Europe (New York: Columbia University Press, 2006) "Mémoire sur quelques propriétés remarquables..." (1761), demonstration of irrationality of π, online and analyzed BibNum (PDF).

John Corcoran is the name of: John Corcoran (martial arts), is an American non-fiction book author, newsstand magazine editor, screenwriter and martial arts historian John Corcoran (author), spokesman for literacy programs, and he has set up his own foundation to help people learn to read John Corcoran (attorney), former Clinton White House aide, former speechwriter in the California Governor's office, attorney, and blogger John Corcoran (logician) (born 1937), American philosopher and logician, University of Buffalo (SUNY) John Corcoran (Medal of Honor) (1842–1919), American soldier who received the Medal of Honor for valor during the American Civil War John H. Corcoran (1897–1945), Massachusetts politician who served as the Mayor of Cambridge, Massachusetts John Corcoran (baseball) (1873–1901), American infielder in Major League Baseball Jack Corcoran (1858–1935), [John H. Corcoran], American catcher in Major League Baseball

John of Dumbleton (Lat. Ioannes De Dumbleton) (ca.1310 – ca. 1349) was a member of the Dumbleton village community in Gloucestershire, a southwestern county in England. Although obscure, he is considered a significant English fourteenth-century philosopher for his contributions to logic, natural philosophy, and physics. Dumbleton’s masterwork is his Summa Logicae et Philosophiae Naturalis (Summary of Logic and Natural Philosophy), likely to have been composed just before the time of his death.   == Life == John of Dumbleton is recorded to have become a fellow at Merton College, Oxford (ca. 1338–9) and to have studied with the likes of William Heytesbury, Thomas Bradwardine, and Richard Swineshead. These four medieval scholastics held a common bond in that their study interests were in a similar field, but the method of study which brought these fellows into the same sphere of learning was of a more esoteric bent than modern university methods. They were interested in mathematics and logical analysis for the purposes of natural philosophy, theology, and an a priori type of mathematical physics (not to be confused with modern, empirical, experimental physics). Thus, the physics postulations and conjectures made by Dumbleton and his Oxford contemporaries were primarily done without any application of physical experimentation. Dumbleton, along with the other three Merton philosophers, received the moniker 'Calculators' for their adherence to mathematics and logical disputation when solving philosophical and theological problems. After being named a fellow at The Queen's College, Oxford (1340) and making a return to Merton College (1344–45) Dumbleton is recorded to have studied theology in Paris (ca. 1345–47) for a brief period before returning to finish his studies at Merton College (1347–1348). The fact that no extant copy of Dumbleton's Summa Logicae et Philosophiae Naturalis is complete (nor edited) leads one to wonder if his death (ca. 1349) abruptly terminated the possibility of its completion.   == Philosophical Contributions == Though there was a considerable reverence for Platonism in Oxford during the fourteenth century, the rebirth of Aristotelianism held sway in the higher Parisian learning circuits. Dumbleton, who studied in Paris for a brief time, was not immune to this spell. In fact, his compendium Summa Logica et Philosophiae Naturalis, has an overview of many principles found in Aristotle's Physics. The Summa is broken into ten different sections. The ninth section is uncompleted in all extant manuscripts. The tenth section, which, according to Dumbleton, was supposed to examine "universals and signification," shows no evidence of ever being worked on. Although this is the case, the other sections of Dumbleton's Summa are filled with medieval philosophical gems. A couple emphasized topics to be found in the first section are "certitude and the psychology of logic." It includes a medieval examination of epistemological issues; such as the certainty of knowledge. A strong Aristotelian appreciation is felt in the remaining sections, since the majority of the work is dedicated to commenting on the first eight chapters of Aristotle's Physics, and his treatises On Generation and Corruption & On the Soul. In those sections of the Summa will be found discussions and commentary on such topics as: alteration, change (i.e., the measure of motion), properties of natural bodies and their forms (parts II and III); questions dealing with classification (e.g., "whether light belongs to some element"; motions and changes of bodies/forms (parts IV – VI); and in the final sections an examination of the intellect and matters of the soul (parts VII – IX). It is difficult to assess why Dumbleton's Summa did not have a significant following, but it may have been because it was never completed or that it was not circulated well enough.   == Scientific Contributions == The four Merton ‘Calculators’ were not only well versed in the current issues of philosophy during the fourteenth century; they actually initiated new groundbreaking scientific postulations. John of Dumbleton was no exception. Because he concurred with many of the positions held by William Ockham (1288–1348)—especially the idea that is commonly referred to as Ockham’s razor, which states that the most simplistic explanations are ideal—he may have learned how to succinctly formulate his scientific conjectures. Of Dumbleton’s many scientific theories there is one in particular that is worth mentioning here. By making the assumption that bodies are finite, Dumbleton was able to conjecture that contraction or expansion, as in cases of condensation or rarefaction, does not eliminate any parts of a body; rather, a “denumerable number of parts” always exists. Though the idea of molecules was not theorized at this time, Dumbleton’s speculation helped to tame the view that bodies have infinitely divisible parts. Dumbleton was one of the first to express functional relationships in graphical form. He gave a proof of the mean speed theorem stating that "the latitude of a uniformly difform movement corresponds to the degree of the midpoint" and used this method to study the quantitative decrease in intensity of illumination, stating that it was not linearly proportional to the distance, but was unable to expose the Inverse-square law, which was postponed nearly 250 years until its discovery by Johannes Kepler in 1604.   == Criticism == It is difficult to determine what methodology the Oxford 'Calculators' used when they were conjecturing and postulating theorems by way of abstraction (i.e., without empirical investigation). This criticism is not expressly made toward Dumbleton's conjectures but more broadly aimed at the methodology of the whole group of Mertonian physicists. One suggestion is that they may have been trying to create a mathematical picture of the Aristotelian world-view. If this were true, it would show why empirical investigation was not their modus operandi. In other words, the Oxford Calculators' works show respect for quantitative reasoning; opposed to a posteriori evaluations. Regardless of whether they opted against empirical investigation for theological reasons or simply because the debut of the scientific method was not ready to be revealed, one ought to regard John of Dumbleton and his contemporaries as exemplary pioneers in mathematics, physics, and logical discourse.   == Writings == Summa Logica et Philosophiae Naturalis (c. 1349; There are at least twenty extant manuscripts) Compendium Sex Conclusionum Expositio Capituli Quarti Bradwardini de Proportionibus (1332; Exposition of the Fourth Chapter of Bradwardine's De Proportionibus)   == See also == Medieval European scientists   == References ==   == Bibliography == Norman Kretxmann, Anthony Kenny, and Jan Pinborg (eds.). The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy: From the Rediscovery of Aristotle to the Disintegration of Scholasticism (1100–1600). (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982). Jorge J.E. Gracia & Timothy B. Noone (eds.). Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages. (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2003). James Weisheipl, "The Place of John Dumbleton in the Merton School", Isis, 50, 1959, pp. 439-454.



John W. Etchemendy (born 1952 in Reno, Nevada) is Stanford University's twelfth and current Provost. He succeeded John L. Hennessy to the post on September 1, 2000. John Etchemendy received his bachelor's and master's degrees at the University of Nevada, Reno before earning his PhD in philosophy at Stanford in 1982. He has been a faculty member in Stanford's Department of Philosophy since 1983, prior to which he was a faculty member in the Philosophy Department at Princeton University. He is also a faculty member of Stanford's Symbolic Systems Program and a senior researcher at the Center for the Study of Language and Information at Stanford. Etchemendy's research interests include logic, semantics and the philosophy of language. He has challenged orthodox views on the central notions of truth, logical consequence and logical truth. His most well-known book, The Concept of Logical Consequence (1990, 1999), criticizes Alfred Tarski's widely accepted analysis of logical consequence. The Liar: An essay on truth and circularity (1987, 1992), co-authored with the late Jon Barwise, develops a formal account of the liar paradox modelled using a version of set theory incorporating the so-called Anti-Foundation Axiom. Etchemendy's recent work has focused on the role of diagrams and other nonlinguistic forms of representation in reasoning. His latest book, written with Jon Barwise and Dave Barker-Plummer, is Language, Proof and Logic (2000, 2006), a popular introductory logic textbook. He has also developed numerous pieces of instructional software, including Turing's World, Tarski's World, Fitch, and Hyperproof, software that allows computers to support the reasoning process. At Stanford, Etchemendy served as director of the Center for the Study of Language and Information from 1990 to 1993, senior associate dean in the School of Humanities and Sciences from 1993 to 1997, and chair of the Department of Philosophy from 1998 to 2000. He is a member of the American Philosophical Association, on the editorial boards of Synthese and Philosophia Mathematica, and a former editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic. His wife is the writer Nancy Etchemendy and they have one son Max Etchemendy.   == External links == Stanford Provost's office Etchemendy's Biography from Stanford

John Lane Bell (born March 25, 1945) is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Western Ontario in Canada. He has made contributions to mathematical logic and philosophy, and is the author of a number of books. His research includes such topics as set theory, model theory, lattice theory, modal logic, quantum logic, constructive mathematics, type theory, topos theory, infinitesimal analysis, spacetime theory, and the philosophy of mathematics. He is the author of more than 70 articles and of 11 books. In 2009, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. He was awarded a scholarship to Oxford University at the age of 15, and graduated with a D.Phil. in Mathematics: his dissertation supervisor was John Crossley. During 1968-89 he was Lecturer in Mathematics and Reader in Mathematical Logic at the London School of Economics. John Bell's students include Graham Priest (Ph.D. Mathematics LSE, 1972), Michael Hallett (Ph.D. Philosophy LSE, 1979), Elaine Landry (Ph.D. Philosophy UWO, 1997), David DeVidi (Ph.D. Philosophy UWO, 1994) and Richard Feist (Ph.D. Philosophy UWO, 1999).   == Bibliography ==   === Books === Intuitionistic Set Theory. College Publications, 2013. Set Theory: Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs. Oxford University Press 2011. The Axiom of Choice. College Publications, 2009. The Continuous and the Infinitesimal in Mathematics and Philosophy. Polimetrica, 2005. (With D. DeVidi and G. Solomon) Logical Options: An Introduction to Classical and Alternative Logics. Broadview Press, 2001. The Art of the Intelligible: An Elementary Survey of Mathematics in its Conceptual Development. Kluwer, 1999. A Primer of Infinitesimal Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 1998. Second Edition, 2008. Toposes & Local Set Theories: An Introduction. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1988. Reprinted by Dover, 2008. Boolean-Valued Models and Independence Proofs in Set Theory. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1977. 2nd edition, 1985. 3rd edition, 2005. (With M. Machover). A Course in Mathematical Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1977. 4th printing, 2003. (With A. B. Slomson). Models and Ultraproducts: An Introduction. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969. Reprinted by Dover, 2006.   === Journal articles === The Axiom of Choice in the Foundations of Mathematics, forthcoming in volume on Foundations of Mathematics, Giovanni Sommaruga, ed., University of Western Ontario Series, Springer Cohesiveness, Intellectica, 41, 2009. Types, Sets and Categories, Handbook of the History of Logic (Elsevier), forthcoming. Hermann Weyl, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2009 "The Axiom of Choice and the Law of Excluded Middle in Weak Set Theories", Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 54, no. 2, 2008. "The Axiom of Choice", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2008. Contribution to "Philosophy of Mathematics: 5 Questions", V. Hendricks and H. Leitgeb, eds., Automatic Press, 2007. "Incompleteness in a General Setting". Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 13, 2007. "Cover Schemes, Frame-Valued Sets and Their Potential Uses in Spacetime Physics". Spacetime Physics Research Trends, Horizons in World Physics, Volume 248, Nova Science Publishers, New York, 2007. "Cosmological Theories and the Question of the Existence of a Creator". Religion and the Challenges of Science, Ashgate Publishers, 2007. "Abstract and Variable Sets in Category Theory". In What is Category Theory?, Polimetrica, 2006. "Divergent Concepts of the Continuum in 19th and Early 20th Century Mathematics and Philosophy". Axiomathes 15, 2005. "The Development of Categorical Logic", Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Volume 12. Springer, 2005. "Continuity and Infinitesimals". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2005. "Choice Principles in Intuitionistic Set Theory.", A Logical Approach to Philosophy, Essays in Honour of Graham Solomon, D. DeVidi and T. Kenyon, eds., Springer, 2006. "Oppositions and Paradoxes in Mathematics and Philosophy." Axiomathes 15, 2005. "Observations on Mathematics", Mathematics as Story, Proceedings of 2003 Fields Institute Conference, UWO, 2004. Whole and Part in Mathematics. Axiomathes 14, 2004. (With Geoffrey Hellman) "Pluralism and the Foundations of Mathematics". Proceedings of Workshop on Scientific Pluralism, University of Minnesota, 2002. Minnesota University Press, 2006. "Some New Intuitionistic Equivalents of Zorn's Lemma", Archive for Mathematical Logic, 42, Number 8, 2003. "Russell's Paradox and Diagonalization in a Constructive Context", 100 Years of Russell's Paradox, Munich 2001, Walter de Gruyter, 2004. "Hermann Weyl's Later Philosophical Views: His Divergence from Husserl", Husserl and the Sciences, R. Feist, ed. U. of Ottawa Press, 2003. "The Development of Categorical Logic", Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Volume 12. Springer, 2005. "Time and Causation in Gödel's Universe", Transcendent Philosophy 3, 2002. "Observations on Category Theory", Axiomathes 12, 2001 "The Continuum in Smooth Infinitesimal Analysis". In Reuniting the Antipodes-Constructive and Nonstandard Views of the Continuum. Symposion Proceedings, San Servolo/Venice, Italy, 1999. U. Berger, H. Osswald and P. Schuster, eds. Kluwer, 2001. "Continuity and the Logic of Perception", Transcendent Philosophy 1, no. 2, 2000. "Hermann Weyl on Intuition and the Continuum", Philosophia Mathematica (3), 8, 2000. "Sets and Classes as Many", Journal of Philosophical Logic, 29, 2000. "Infinitary Logic", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2000 "Finite Sets and Frege Structures", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, no. 4,1999. "Frege's Theorem in a Constructive Setting", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 64, no. 2, 1999. "Boolean Algebras and Distributive Lattices Treated Constructively", Math. Logic Quarterly 45, 1999. "Boolean Algebras", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1998. "Zorn's Lemma and Complete Boolean Algebras in Intuitionistic Type Theories", Journal of Symbolic Logic 62, no. 4, 1997. (With S. Gebellato) "Precovers, Modalities, and Universal Closure Operators in a Topos", Math. Logic Quarterly 42, 1996. "Polymodal Lattices and Polymodal Logic", Math. Logic Quarterly 42, 1996. (With W. Demopoulos) "Elementary Propositions and Independence", Notre Dame J. of Formal Logic, 37, no. 1, 1996. "Logical Reflections on the Kochen-Specker Theorem", in Perspectives on Quantum Reality, R. Clifton, ed., Kluwer, 1996. (With R.Clifton†) "Quasi Boolean Algebras and Simultaneously Definite Properties in Quantum Mechanics", Int. Journal of Theoretical Physics, 34, 12, 1995. "Infinitesimals and the Continuum", Mathematical Intelligencer, 17, no. 2, 1995. "Type-Reducing Correspondences and Well-Orderings: Frege's and Zermelo's Constructions Re-examined", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 60, no. 1, 1995. "Frege's Theorem and the Zermelo-Bourbaki Lemma". Appendix to Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics, W. Demopoulos, ed. Harvard U.P., 1995 "Fregean Extensions of First-Order Theories", Math. Logic Quarterly, 40, 1994. (Also reprinted in W. Demopoulos, ed. Frege's Philosophy of Mathematics, Harvard U.P. 1995) "Hilbert's Epsilon Operator in Intuitionistic Type Theories", Math. Logic Quarterly, 39, 1993. (with W. Demopoulos) "Frege's Theory of Concepts and Objects and the Interpretation of Second-Order Logic", Philosophia Mathematica, (3), 1, 1993. "Hilbert's Epsilon-Operator and Classical Logic", Journal of Philosophical Logic, 22, 1993. "Some Propositions Equivalent to the Sikorski Extension Theorem for Boolean Algebras", Fundamenta Mathematicae 130 (1988). "Infinitesimals", Synthese, 75, 1988. "Logic, the Paradoxes, and the Foundations of Mathematics", LSE Quarterly Vol.I, No.3, 1987. "From Absolute to Local Mathematics", Synthese 69, 1986. "A New Approach to Quantum Logic", Brit. J. Phil. Sc., 37, 1986. "Orthospaces and Quantum Logic", Foundations of Physics 15, 1985. "Orthologic, Forcing and the Manifestation of Attributes", Proceedings of 1981 S.E. Asian Conference in Mathematical Logic. North Holland, Amsterdam, 1983. "The Strength of the Sikorski Extension Theorem for Boolean Algebras", Journal of Symbolic Logic 48, 1983. (With M.F. Hallett), "Logic, Quantum Logic, and Empiricism", Philosophy of Science 49, 1982. "Categories, Toposes and Sets", Synthese, 51, No.3, 1982. "Some Aspects of the Category of Subobjects of Constant Objects in a Topos", Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 24, 1982. "Category Theory and the Foundations of Mathematics", Brit.J.Phil.Sci. 32, 1981. "Isomorphism of Structures in S-Toposes", Journal of Symbolic Logic, 46, 1981. "The Infinite Past Regained: A Reply to Whitrow", Brit.J.Phil.Sci. Sci, 1979 "Boolean Extensions as Toposes", Bull. de la Soc. Francaise de Logique, Methodologie et Phil.des Sci. 6, 1979. "Uncountable Standard Models of ZFC + V = L", in Set Theory and Hierarchy Theory, a Memorial Tribute to Andrzej Mostowski, Springer Lecture Notes in Math. 537,1976. "A Note on Generic Ultrafilters", Zeitschr. f. Math.Logik und Grund.der Math. 22, 1976. "Universal Complete Boolean Algebras and Cardinal Collapsing", Zeitsch. f. Math.Logik und Grund. der Math. 22, 1976. "A Characterization of Universal Complete Boolean Algebras", J. London Math.Soc. (2), 12, 1975. "On Compact Cardinals", Zeitschr.f. Math.Logik und Grund.der Math. 20.1974. (With D.H. Fremlin), "A Geometric Form of the Axiom of Choice", Fund. Math. LXXVII, 1972. (With D.H. Fremlin), "The Maximal Ideal Theorem for Lattices of Sets", Bull. London Math. Soc., 4, 1972. "On the Relationship between Weak Compactness and Restricted Second- Order Languages", Arch. Math. Logik 15, 1972. "Some Remarks on Current Mathematical Practice", in Proceedings of the Bertrand Russell Memorial Logic Conference, Denmark, 1971. (With F. Jellett). "On the Relationship between the Boolean Prime Ideal Theorem and Two Principles of Functional Analysis", Bull. de l'Acad. Pol. des Sci., XIX, No.3, 1971. "Weak Compactness in Restricted Second-Order Languages", Bull. de l'Acad. Pol. des Sci., No.3, 1970.   == References ==   == External links == John Bell's webpage John Bell at the Mathematics Genealogy Project



John of St. Thomas, (family name João Poinsot or Johannes Poinsot, since the 1980s in American texts also John Poinsot; 9 June 1589 – 17 June 1644), was a theologian and philosopher, born at Lisbon. Of noble parentage, he was sent early to the University of Coimbra, displayed talents of the first order, completed his humanities and philosophy, and obtained the degree of Master of Arts. He then entered the University of Louvain. Here, too, he showed remarkable ability, and won the title of Bachelor of Theology at an early age. He joined the Dominicans at Madrid in 1612 or 1613, taking the name of John of St. Thomas, by which he is known to history. As professor of philosophy and theology in a monastery at Alcalá, he soon took rank among the most learned men of the time, and was placed successively (1630 and 1640) in charge of the two principal chairs of theology in the university of that city. His renown drew the largest number of scholars that had ever attended its theological faculties. No man enjoyed a greater reputation in Spain, or was more frequently consulted on points of doctrine and ecclesiastical matters. His theological and philosophical writings, which have gone through many editions, are among the best expositions of Thomas Aquinas's doctrine, of which he is acknowledged to be one of the foremost interpreters. Though he took an active part in the scholastic discussions of his times, his courtesy was such that he is said never to have hurt an opponent's feelings. So faithful was he to the traditions of his order and the principles of the Angelic Doctor that in his last illness he could declare that, in all the thirty years he had devoted to teaching and writing, he had not taught or written anything contrary to St. Thomas. His humility and his devotion to education caused him to refuse many dignities offered him by the Church and his order. In 1643 Philip IV offered him the office of royal confessor, a position which only religious obedience could induce him to accept. His writings comprise: Cursus philosophicus Thomisticus (9 vols.); Cursus Theologici (9 vols.), which is a commentary on the Summa Theologica of St. Thomas; Tractatus de Approbatione, Auctoritate, et Puritate Doctrinae D. Thomae Aquinatis; A Compendium of Christian Doctrine (in Spanish); and A Treatise on a Happy Death (in Spanish), written at the command of Philip IV. He died at Fraga, Spain.   == Works == By John of St. Thomas Ioannes a S. Thoma, O. P. (1883). Cursus philosophicus Thomisticus (in Latin). Paris: Ludovicus Vivès. OCLC 7132509. Retrieved 2011-06-17. Volumes 1, 2, and 3 available gratis online.  Ioannes a S. Thoma, O. P. (1931–1964). Cursus theologici (in Latin). Paris, Rome: Desclée. OCLC 18001569. Retrieved 2011-06-17. 5 volumes. Volumes 1, 2a, and 2b of another edition available gratis online.  John of St. Thomas (2004). Introduction to the Summa Theologiae of Thomas Aquinas: The Isagogue of John of St. Thomas. Trans. McInerny, Ralph. South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine's Press. OCLC 46928729.  John of St. Thomas (1950). The Gifts of the Holy Ghost. foreword by Walter Farrell. London: Sheed and Ward. OCLC 224205817.  Poinsot, John (1985) [1632]. Tractatus de Signis. The semiotic of John Poinsot. Trans. Deely, John. Berkely: California University Press. OCLC 277224194. Retrieved 2011-06-17.  On John of St. Thomas Deely, John (1994). "What happened to philosophy between Aquinas and Descartes?". The Thomist 58 (4): 543–568. Retrieved 2011-06-17.   Deely, John (2008). Descartes and Poinsot: The Crossroad of Signs and Ideas. Scranton, PA: University of Scranton Press. ISBN 9781589661745.  Deely, John (2009). Augustine and Poinsot: The Protosemiotic Development. Scranton, PA: University of Scranton Press. ISBN 9781589661738.    == References == ^ Quétif and Echard, Scriptores Ord. Praed., II (Paris, 1721), 538; Touron, Hommes illustres de l'ordre de St. Dominique, V (Paris, 1749), 248; Hurter, Nomenclator, I (2nd ed., Innsbruck, 1892), 375; Année Dominicaine, II June, 358-365. ^  "John of St. Thomas". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913.    == Sources ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "John of St. Thomas". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company.    == External links == General Bibliography by Marco Forlivesi The rediscovery of John Poinsot Annotated bibliography about the contributions of John of St. Thomas to semiotics Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus Latin text by John of St. Thomas

John Pagus (active first half of the 13th century) was a scholastic philosopher at the University of Paris, generally considered the first logician writing at the Arts faculty at Paris.   == Life == He is thought to have been a Master of Arts in the 1220s and to have taught Peter of Spain. at that time he was writing on syncategorematic terms.   == Works == Appellationes Commentary on the Sentences Rationes super Predicamenta Aristotelis Syncategoremata   == References == Hein Hansen (ed.) John Pagus on Aristotle's Categories. A Study and Edition of the Rationes super Praedicamenta, Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2012. Alain De Libera, Les Appellationes de Jean le Page, in Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen âge, 51, 1984 pp. 193–255.   == Notes == ^ John Le Page, Johannes Pagus, Jean Le Page, Jean Lepage. ^ Bertil Malmberg, Histoire de la Linguistique, Paris: Presses universitaires de France, 1991, p. 127. ^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, article Peter of Spain ^ Sten Ebbesen, Russell L. Friedman (editors), Medieval Analyses in Language and Cognition (1999), p. 36. ^ Parts published in H. A. G. Braakhuis, De 13de Eeuwse Tractaten over Syncategorematische Termen. Vol. I, Ph. Diss., Leiden University, 1979.   == External links == Jakob Hans Josef Schneider (1992). "Johannes Pagus (Pagius, Jean le Page, John Page)". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 3. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 505–507. ISBN 3-88309-035-2. (German) Works listed

John Robert Steel (born October 30, 1948) is an American set theorist at University of California, Berkeley (formerly at UCLA). He has made many contributions to the theory of inner models and determinacy. With Donald A. Martin, he proved projective determinacy, assuming the existence of sufficient large cardinals. He earned his Ph.D. in Logic & the Methodology of Science at Berkeley in 1977. In 2015 the European Set Theory Society awarded him and Ronald Jensen the Hausdorff medal for their paper "K without a measurable".   == External links == Home page at Berkeley John R. Steel at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

John Stuart Mill (20 May 1806 – 8 May 1873) was an English philosopher, political economist, feminist, and civil servant. He was an influential contributor to social theory, political theory and political economy. He has been called "the most influential English-speaking philosopher of the nineteenth century". Mill's conception of liberty justified the freedom of the individual in opposition to unlimited state control. Mill expresses his view on freedom by illustrating how an individual's drive to better their station, and for self-improvement, is the sole source of true freedom. Only when an individual is able to attain such improvements, without impeding others in their own efforts to do the same, can true freedom prevail. Mill's linking of freedom and self-improvement has inspired many. By establishing that individual efforts to excel have worth, Mill was able to show how they should achieve self-improvement without harming others, or society at large. He was a proponent of utilitarianism, an ethical theory developed by Jeremy Bentham. He worked on the theory of the scientific method. Mill was also a Member of Parliament belonging to the Liberal Party, as well as an important figure in liberal political philosophy.   == BiographyEdit == John Stuart Mill was born on Rodney Street in the Pentonville area of London, the eldest son of the Scottish philosopher, historian and economist James Mill, and Harriet Burrow. John Stuart was educated by his father, with the advice and assistance of Jeremy Bentham and Francis Place. He was given an extremely rigorous upbringing, and was deliberately shielded from association with children his own age other than his siblings. His father, a follower of Bentham and an adherent of associationism, had as his explicit aim to create a genius intellect that would carry on the cause of utilitarianism and its implementation after he and Bentham had died. Mill was a notably precocious child. He describes his education in his autobiography. At the age of three he was taught Greek. By the age of eight, he had read Aesop's Fables, Xenophon's Anabasis, and the whole of Herodotus, and was acquainted with Lucian, Diogenes Laërtius, Isocrates and six dialogues of Plato. He had also read a great deal of history in English and had been taught arithmetic, physics and astronomy. At the age of eight, Mill began studying Latin, the works of Euclid, and algebra, and was appointed schoolmaster to the younger children of the family. His main reading was still history, but he went through all the commonly taught Latin and Greek authors and by the age of ten could read Plato and Demosthenes with ease. His father also thought that it was important for Mill to study and compose poetry. One of Mill's earliest poetry compositions was a continuation of the Iliad. In his spare time, he also enjoyed reading about natural sciences and popular novels, such as Don Quixote and Robinson Crusoe. His father's work, The History of British India was published in 1818; immediately thereafter, about the age of twelve, Mill began a thorough study of the scholastic logic, at the same time reading Aristotle's logical treatises in the original language. In the following year he was introduced to political economy and studied Adam Smith and David Ricardo with his father, ultimately completing their classical economic view of factors of production. Mill's comptes rendus of his daily economy lessons helped his father in writing Elements of Political Economy in 1821, a textbook to promote the ideas of Ricardian economics; however, the book lacked popular support. Ricardo, who was a close friend of his father, used to invite the young Mill to his house for a walk in order to talk about political economy. At the age of fourteen, Mill stayed a year in France with the family of Sir Samuel Bentham, brother of Jeremy Bentham. The mountain scenery he saw led to a lifelong taste for mountain landscapes. The lively and friendly way of life of the French also left a deep impression on him. In Montpellier, he attended the winter courses on chemistry, zoology, logic of the Faculté des Sciences, as well as taking a course of the higher mathematics. While coming and going from France, he stayed in Paris for a few days in the house of the renowned economist Jean-Baptiste Say, a friend of Mill's father. There he met many leaders of the Liberal party, as well as other notable Parisians, including Henri Saint-Simon. This intensive study however had injurious effects on Mill's mental health, and state of mind. At the age of twenty he suffered a nervous breakdown. In chapter V of his Autobiography, he claims that this was caused by the great physical and mental arduousness of his studies which had suppressed any feelings he might have developed normally in childhood. Nevertheless, this depression eventually began to dissipate, as he began to find solace in the Mémoires of Jean-François Marmontel and the poetry of William Wordsworth. Mill had been engaged in a pen-friendship with Auguste Comte, the founder of positivism and sociology, since Mill first contacted Comte in November 1841. Comte's sociologie was more an early philosophy of science than we perhaps know it today, and the positive philosophy aided in Mill's broad rejection of Benthamism. As a nonconformist who refused to subscribe to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, Mill was not eligible to study at the University of Oxford or the University of Cambridge. Instead he followed his father to work for the East India Company until 1858, and attended University College, London, to hear the lectures of John Austin, the first Professor of Jurisprudence. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1856. In 1851, Mill married Harriet Taylor after 21 years of an intimate friendship. Taylor was married when they met, and their relationship was close but generally believed to be chaste during the years before her first husband died. Brilliant in her own right, Taylor was a significant influence on Mill's work and ideas during both friendship and marriage. His relationship with Harriet Taylor reinforced Mill's advocacy of women's rights. He cites her influence in his final revision of On Liberty, which was published shortly after her death. Taylor died in 1858 after developing severe lung congestion, after only seven years of marriage to Mill. Between the years 1865 and 1868 Mill served as Lord Rector of the University of St. Andrews. During the same period, 1865–68, he was a Member of Parliament for City and Westminster, sitting for the Liberal Party. During his time as an MP, Mill advocated easing the burdens on Ireland. In 1866, Mill became the first person in the history of Parliament to call for women to be given the right to vote, vigorously defending this position in subsequent debate. Mill became a strong advocate of such social reforms as labour unions and farm cooperatives. In Considerations on Representative Government, Mill called for various reforms of Parliament and voting, especially proportional representation, the Single Transferable Vote, and the extension of suffrage. He was godfather to the philosopher Bertrand Russell. In his views on religion, Mill was an atheist. Mill died in 1873 of erysipelas in Avignon, France, where he was buried alongside his wife.   == WorksEdit ==   === Theory of libertyEdit ===  Mill's On Liberty addresses the nature and limits of the power that can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual. However Mill is clear that his concern for liberty does not extend to all individuals and all societies. He states that "Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians". Mill states that it is acceptable to harm oneself as long as the person doing so is not harming others. He also argues that individuals should be prevented from doing lasting, serious harm to themselves or their property by the harm principle. Because no one exists in isolation, harm done to oneself may also harm others, and destroying property deprives the community as well as oneself. Mill excuses those who are "incapable of self-government" from this principle, such as young children or those living in "backward states of society". Though this principle seems clear, there are a number of complications. For example, Mill explicitly states that "harms" may include acts of omission as well as acts of commission. Thus, failing to rescue a drowning child counts as a harmful act, as does failing to pay taxes, or failing to appear as a witness in court. All such harmful omissions may be regulated, according to Mill. By contrast, it does not count as harming someone if – without force or fraud – the affected individual consents to assume the risk: thus one may permissibly offer unsafe employment to others, provided there is no deception involved. (Mill does, however, recognise one limit to consent: society should not permit people to sell themselves into slavery). In these and other cases, it is important to bear in mind that the arguments in On Liberty are grounded on the principle of Utility, and not on appeals to natural rights. The question of what counts as a self-regarding action and what actions, whether of omission or commission, constitute harmful actions subject to regulation, continues to exercise interpreters of Mill. It is important to emphasise that Mill did not consider giving offence to constitute "harm"; an action could not be restricted because it violated the conventions or morals of a given society. On Liberty involves an impassioned defence of free speech. Mill argues that free discourse is a necessary condition for intellectual and social progress. We can never be sure, he contends, that a silenced opinion does not contain some element of the truth. He also argues that allowing people to air false opinions is productive for two reasons. First, individuals are more likely to abandon erroneous beliefs if they are engaged in an open exchange of ideas. Second, by forcing other individuals to re-examine and re-affirm their beliefs in the process of debate, these beliefs are kept from declining into mere dogma. It is not enough for Mill that one simply has an unexamined belief that happens to be true; one must understand why the belief in question is the true one. Along those same lines Mill wrote, "unmeasured vituperation, employed on the side of prevailing opinion, really does deter people from expressing contrary opinions, and from listening to those who express them."   ==== Social liberty and tyranny of majorityEdit ==== Mill believed that "the struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous feature in the portions of history." For him, liberty in antiquity was a "contest... between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the government." Mill defined "social liberty" as protection from "the tyranny of political rulers." He introduced a number of different concepts of the form tyranny can take, referred to as social tyranny, and tyranny of the majority. Social liberty for Mill meant putting limits on the ruler's power so that he would not be able to use his power on his own wishes and make decisions which could harm society; in other words, people should have the right to have a say in the government's decisions. He said that social liberty was "the nature and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society over the individual". It was attempted in two ways: first, by obtaining recognition of certain immunities, called political liberties or rights; second, by establishment of a system of "constitutional checks". However, in Mill's view, limiting the power of government was not enough. He stated, "Society can and does execute its own mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practices a social tyranny more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape, penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul itself."   ==== LibertyEdit ==== John Stuart Mill's view on liberty, which was influenced by Joseph Priestley and Josiah Warren, is that the individual ought to be free to do as he wishes unless he harms others. Individuals are rational enough to make decisions about their well being. Government should interfere when it is for the protection of society. Mill explained:  The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right...The only part of the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely concerns him, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.  Mill added: "Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has no application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion."   ==== Freedom of speechEdit ==== An influential advocate of freedom of speech, Mill objected to censorship. He says:  I choose, by preference the cases which are least favourable to me – In which the argument opposing freedom of opinion, both on truth and that of utility, is considered the strongest. Let the opinions impugned be the belief of God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of morality... But I must be permitted to observe that it is not the feeling sure of a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility. It is the undertaking to decide that question for others, without allowing them to hear what can be said on the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this pretension not the less if it is put forth on the side of my most solemn convictions. However, positive anyone's persuasion may be, not only of the faculty but of the pernicious consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the immorality and impiety of opinion. – yet if, in pursuance of that private judgement, though backed by the public judgement of his country or contemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less objectionable or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is the case of all others in which it is most fatal.  Mill outlines the benefits of 'searching for and discovering the truth' as a way to further knowledge. He argued that even if an opinion is false, the truth can be better understood by refuting the error. And as most opinions are neither completely true nor completely false, he points out that allowing free expression allows the airing of competing views as a way to preserve partial truth in various opinions. Worried about minority views being suppressed, Mill also argued in support of freedom of speech on political grounds, stating that it is a critical component for a representative government to have in order to empower debate over public policy. Mill also eloquently argued that freedom of expression allows for personal growth and self-realization. He said that freedom of speech was a vital way to develop talents and realise a person's potential and creativity. He repeatedly said that eccentricity was preferable to uniformity and stagnation.   === ColonialismEdit === Mill, an employee for the British East India Company from 1823 to 1858, argued in support of what he called a 'benevolent despotism' with regard to the colonies. Mill argued that "To suppose that the same international customs, and the same rules of international morality, can obtain between one civilized nation and another, and between civilized nations and barbarians, is a grave error....To characterize any conduct whatever towards a barbarous people as a violation of the law of nations, only shows that he who so speaks has never considered the subject."   === SlaveryEdit === Domenico Losurdo argues that "In Mill's view, 'any means were licit for those who took on the task of educating 'savage tribes'; 'slavery' was sometimes a mandatory stage for inducing them to work and making them useful to civilization and progress." In 1850, Mill sent an anonymous letter (which came to be known under the title "The Negro Question"), in rebuttal to Thomas Carlyle's anonymous letter to Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country which argued for slavery. Mill supported abolition in the United States.   === Women's rightsEdit ===  Mill's view of history was that right up until his time "the whole of the female" and "the great majority of the male sex" were simply "slaves". He countered arguments to the contrary, arguing that relations between sexes simply amounted to "the legal subordination of one sex to the other — [which] is wrong itself, and now one of the chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a principle of perfect equality." With this, Mill can be considered among the earliest women's rights advocates. His book The Subjection of Women (1861, published 1869) is one of the earliest written on this subject by a male author. In The Subjection of Women Mill attempts to make a case for perfect equality. He talks about the role of women in marriage and how it needed to be changed. There, Mill comments on three major facets of women's lives that he felt are hindering them: society and gender construction, education, and marriage. He argued that the oppression of women was one of the few remaining relics from ancient times, a set of prejudices that severely impeded the progress of humanity. Mill's ideas were opposed by Ernest Belfort Bax in his treatise, The Legal Subjection of Men.   === UtilitarianismEdit ===  The canonical statement of Mill's utilitarianism can be found in Utilitarianism. This philosophy has a long tradition, although Mill's account is primarily influenced by Jeremy Bentham and Mill's father James Mill. Jeremy Bentham's famous formulation of utilitarianism is known as the "greatest-happiness principle". It holds that one must always act so as to produce the greatest aggregate happiness among all sentient beings, within reason. Mill's major contribution to utilitarianism is his argument for the qualitative separation of pleasures. Bentham treats all forms of happiness as equal, whereas Mill argues that intellectual and moral pleasures (higher pleasures) are superior to more physical forms of pleasure (lower pleasures). Mill distinguishes between happiness and contentment, claiming that the former is of higher value than the latter, a belief wittily encapsulated in the statement that "it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, are of a different opinion, it is because they only know their own side of the question." Mill defines the difference between higher and lower forms of pleasure with the principle that those who have experienced both tend to prefer one over the other. This is, perhaps, in direct contrast with Bentham's statement that "Quantity of pleasure being equal, push-pin is as good as poetry", that, if a simple child's game like hopscotch causes more pleasure to more people than a night at the opera house, it is more imperative upon a society to devote more resources to propagating hopscotch than running opera houses. Mill's argument is that the "simple pleasures" tend to be preferred by people who have no experience with high art, and are therefore not in a proper position to judge. Mill also argues that people who, for example, are noble or practice philosophy, benefit society more than those who engage in individualist practices for pleasure, which are lower forms of happiness. It is not the agent's own greatest happiness that matters "but the greatest amount of happiness altogether". The qualitative account of happiness that Mill advocates thus sheds light on his account presented in On Liberty. As Mill suggests in that text, utility is to be conceived in relation to humanity "as a progressive being", which includes the development and exercise of rational capacities as we strive to achieve a "higher mode of existence". The rejection of censorship and paternalism is intended to provide the necessary social conditions for the achievement of knowledge and the greatest ability for the greatest number to develop and exercise their deliberative and rational capacities.   === Economic philosophyEdit ===  Mill's early economic philosophy was one of free markets. However, he accepted interventions in the economy, such as a tax on alcohol, if there were sufficient utilitarian grounds. He also accepted the principle of legislative intervention for the purpose of animal welfare. Mill originally believed that "equality of taxation" meant "equality of sacrifice" and that progressive taxation penalised those who worked harder and saved more and was therefore "a mild form of robbery". Given an equal tax rate regardless of income, Mill agreed that inheritance should be taxed. A utilitarian society would agree that everyone should be equal one way or another. Therefore, receiving inheritance would put one ahead of society unless taxed on the inheritance. Those who donate should consider and choose carefully where their money goes—some charities are more deserving than others. Considering public charities boards such as a government will disburse the money equally. However, a private charity board like a church would disburse the monies fairly to those who are in more need than others. Later he altered his views toward a more socialist bent, adding chapters to his Principles of Political Economy in defence of a socialist outlook, and defending some socialist causes. Within this revised work he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system be abolished in favour of a co-operative wage system. Nonetheless, some of his views on the idea of flat taxation remained, albeit altered in the third edition of the Principles of Political Economy to reflect a concern for differentiating restrictions on "unearned" incomes, which he favoured, and those on "earned" incomes, which he did not favour. Mill's Principles, first published in 1848, was one of the most widely read of all books on economics in the period. As Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations had during an earlier period, Mill's Principles dominated economics teaching. In the case of Oxford University it was the standard text until 1919, when it was replaced by Marshall's Principles of Economics.   ==== Economic democracyEdit ==== Mill promoted economic democracy instead of capitalism, in the manner of substituting capitalist businesses with worker cooperatives. He says:  The form of association, however, which if mankind continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predominate, is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and work-people without a voice in the management, but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their operations, and working under managers elected and removable by themselves.   ==== Political democracyEdit ==== Mill's major work on political democracy, Considerations on Representative Government, defends two fundamental principles, extensive participation by citizens and enlightened competence of rulers. The two values are obviously in tension, and some readers have concluded that he is an elitist democrat, while others count him as an earlier participatory democrat. In one section he appears to defend plural voting, in which more competent citizens are given extra votes (a view he later repudiated). But in chapter 3 he presents what is still one of the most eloquent cases for the value of participation by all citizens. He believed that the incompetence of the masses could eventually be overcome if they were given a chance to take part in politics, especially at the local level. Mill is one of the few political philosophers ever to serve in government as an elected official. In his three years in Parliament, he was more willing to compromise than the "radical" principles expressed in his writing would lead one to expect.   ==== The environmentEdit ==== Mill demonstrated an early insight into the value of the natural world – in particular in Book IV, chapter VI of "Principles of Political Economy": "Of the Stationary State" in which Mill recognised wealth beyond the material, and argued that the logical conclusion of unlimited growth was destruction of the environment and a reduced quality of life. He concluded that a stationary state could be preferable to unending economic growth:  I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary states of capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested towards it by political economists of the old school.  If the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity compel them to it.   ==== Economic developmentEdit ==== Mill regarded economic development as a function of land, labour and capital. While land and labour are the two original factors of production, capital is "a stock, previously accumulated of the products of former labour." Increase in wealth is possible only if land and capital help to increase production faster than the labour force. It is productive labour that is productive of wealth and capital accumulation. "The rate of capital accumulation is the function of the proportion of the labour force employed ' productively. Profits earned by employing unproductive labours are merely transfers of income; unproductive labour does not generate wealth or income" . It is productive labourers who do productive consumption. Productive consumption is that "which maintains and increase the productive capacity of the community." It implies that productive consumption is an input necessary to maintain productive labourers.   ==== Control of population growthEdit ==== Mill supported the Malthusian theory of population. By population he meant the number of the working class only. He was therefore concerned about the growth in number of labourers who worked for hire. He believed that population control was essential for improving the condition of the working class so that they might enjoy the fruits of the technological progress and capital accumulation. Mill advocated birth control. In 1823 Mill and a friend were arrested while distributing pamphlets on birth control by Francis Place to women in working class areas.   ==== Wage fundEdit ==== According to Mill, supply is very elastic in response to wages. Wages generally exceed the minimum subsistence level, and are paid out of capital. Hence, wages are limited by existing capital for paying wages. Thus, wage per worker can be derived by dividing the total circulating capital by the size of the working population. Wages can increase by an increase in the capital used in paying wages, or by decrease in the number of workers. If wages rise, supply of labour will rise. Competition among workers not only brings down wages, but also keeps some workers out of employment. This is based on Mill's notion that "demand for commodities is not demand for labourers". It means that income invested as advances of wages to labour creates employment, and not income spent on consumer goods. An increase in consumption causes a decline in investment. So increased investment leads to increases in the wage fund and to economic progress. In 1869, Mill recanted his support of the Wage-Fund Doctrine due to recognition that capital is not necessarily fixed in that it can be supplemented through “income of the employer which might otherwise go into savings or be spent on consumption.” (Spiegel, p. 390) Walker also states in “The Wages Question” that the limits on capital and the growth in population “were accidental, not essential” to the formation of the doctrine. The limitation on the growth of industrial capacity placed a limit on the number of workers who could be accommodated more than the limit on capital. Furthermore, English agriculture “had reached the condition of diminishing returns." (Walker); therefore, each additional worker was not providing more output than he needed for himself for survival. Given the improvements in technology and productivity that followed 1848, the original reasons that gave rise to the doctrine were seen to be unusual and not the basis for a universal law.   ==== Rate of capital accumulationEdit ==== According to Mill, the rate of capital accumulation depends on: (1) "the amount of fund from which saving can be made" or "the size of the net produce of the industry", and (2) the "disposition to save". Capital is the result of savings, and the savings come from the "abstinence from present consumption for the sake of future goods". Although capital is the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed. This means saving is spending. Since saving depends on the net produce of the industry, it grows with profits and rent which go into making the net produce. On the other hand, the disposition to save depends on (1) the rate of profit and (2) the desire to save, or what Mill called "effective desire of accumulation". However, profit also depends on the cost of labour, and the rate of profit is the ratio of profits to wages. When profits rise or wages fall, the rate of profits increases, which in turn increases the rate of capital accumulation. Similarly, it is the desire to save which tends to increase the rate of capital accumulation.   ==== Rate of profitEdit ==== According to Mill, the ultimate tendency in an economy is for the rate of profit to decline due to diminishing returns in agriculture and increase in population at a Malthusian rate.   == Major publicationsEdit ==   == Popular cultureEdit == Mill is the subject of a 1905 clerihew by E. C. Bentley:  Mill is namechecked in Monty Python's "Philosophers Song".   == See alsoEdit ==  List of liberal theorists Mill's Methods Women's suffrage in the United Kingdom On Social Freedom   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Alican, Necip Fikri (1994). Mill’s Principle of Utility: A Defense of John Stuart Mill’s Notorious Proof. Amsterdam and Atlanta: Editions Rodopi B.V. ISBN 978-90-518-3748-3.  Bayles, M. D. (1968). Contemporary Utilitarianism. Anchor Books, Doubleday.  Bentham, Jeremy (2009). An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (Dover Philosophical Classics). Dover Publications Inc. ISBN 978-0486454528.  Brandt, Richard B. (1979). A Theory of the Good and the Right. Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-824550-5.  Lyons, David (1965). Forms and Limits of Utilitarianism. Oxford University Press(UK). ISBN 978-0198241973.  Mill, John Stuart (2011). A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive (Classic Reprint). Forgotten Books. ISBN 978-1440090820.  Mill, John Stuart (1981). "Autobiography". In Robson, John. Collected Works, volume XXXI. University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-7100-0718-3.  Moore, G.E. (1903). Principia Ethica. Prometheus Books UK. ISBN 0879754982.  Rosen, Frederick (2003). Classical Utilitarianism from Hume to Mill. Routledge.  Scheffler, Samuel (August 1994). The Rejection of Consequentialism: A Philosophical Investigation of the Considerations Underlying Rival Moral Conceptions, Second Edition. Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0198235118.  Smart, J. J. C.; Williams, Bernard (January 1973). Utilitarianism: For and Against. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521098229.    == External linksEdit ==   === Mill's worksEdit ===  John Stuart Mill's diary of a walking tour at Mount Holyoke College   === Secondary worksEdit ===   === Further informationEdit ===

John Venn, FRS, FSA (4 August 1834 – 4 April 1923) was an English logician and philosopher noted for introducing the Venn diagram, used in the fields of set theory, probability, logic, statistics, and computer science.   == Life and career == John Venn was born on 4 August 1834 in Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire to Martha Sykes and Rev. Henry Venn, who was the rector of the parish of Drypool. His mother died when he was three years old. Venn was descended from a long line of church evangelicals, including his grandfather John Venn.Venn was brought up in a very strict atmosphere at home. His father Henry had played a significant part in the Evangelical movement and he was also the secretary of the ‘Society for Missions to Africa and the East’. He began his education in London joining Sir Roger Cholmeley's School, now known as Highgate School, with his brother Henry in September 1846. He moved on to Islington proprietary school and in October 1853 he went to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. In 1857, he obtained his degree in mathematics and became a fellow. In 1903 he was elected President of the College, a post he held until his death. He would follow his family vocation and become an Anglican priest, ordained in 1859, serving first at the church in Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and later in Mortlake, Surrey. In 1862, he returned to Cambridge as a lecturer in moral science, studying and teaching logic and probability theory, and, beginning around 1869, giving intercollegiate lectures. These duties led to his developing the diagram which would eventually bear his name.  I began at once somewhat more steady work on the subjects and books which I should have to lecture on. I now first hit upon the diagrammatical device of representing propositions by inclusive and exclusive circles. Of course the device was not new then, but it was so obviously representative of the way in which any one, who approached the subject from the mathematical side, would attempt to visualise propositions, that it was forced upon me almost at once.  In 1868, he married Susanna Carnegie Edmonstone with whom he had one son, John Archibald Venn. In 1883, he resigned from the clergy, having concluded that Anglicanism was incompatible with his philosophical beliefs. In that same year, Venn was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and was awarded a Sc.D. by Cambridge. He died on 4 April 1923.   == Memorials == Venn is commemorated at the University of Hull by the Venn Building, built in 1928 A stained glass window in the dining hall of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, commemorates Venn's work. In commemoration of the 180th anniversary of Venn's birth, on 4 August 2014, Google replaced its normal logo on global search pages with an interactive and animated Google doodle that incorporated the use of a Venn diagram. In 1866, Venn published The Logic of Chance, a ground-breaking book which espoused the frequency theory of probability, offering that probability should be determined by how often something is forecast to occur as opposed to “educated” assumptions. Venn then further developed George Boole's theories in the 1881 work Symbolic Logic, where he highlighted what would become known as Venn diagrams.   == Publications == Venn compiled Alumni Cantabrigienses, a biographical register of former members of the University of Cambridge. This work is still being updated online, see #External links, below. His other works include:   == Notes ==   == References ==   == External links == A Cambridge Alumni Database The Venn archives clarify the confusing timeline of the various Venns. Obituary of John Venn (New York Times) Portrait of Venn by Charles Brock, and a link to a site about Venn Another (clearer) view of the Venn stained glass window John Venn at Find a Grave

John von Neumann (Hungarian: Neumann János, /vɒn ˈnɔɪmən/; December 28, 1903 – February 8, 1957) was a Hungarian-American pure and applied mathematician, physicist, inventor, and polymath. He made major contributions to a number of fields, including mathematics (foundations of mathematics, functional analysis, ergodic theory, geometry, topology, and numerical analysis), physics (quantum mechanics, hydrodynamics, fluid dynamics and quantum statistical mechanics), economics (game theory), computing (Von Neumann architecture, linear programming, self-replicating machines, stochastic computing), and statistics. He was a pioneer of the application of operator theory to quantum mechanics, in the development of functional analysis, a principal member of the Manhattan Project and the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton (as one of the few originally appointed), and a key figure in the development of game theory and the concepts of cellular automata, the universal constructor, and the digital computer. Von Neumann's mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA. In a short list of facts about his life he submitted to the National Academy of Sciences, he stated "The part of my work I consider most essential is that on quantum mechanics, which developed in Göttingen in 1926, and subsequently in Berlin in 1927–1929. Also, my work on various forms of operator theory, Berlin 1930 and Princeton 1935–1939; on the ergodic theorem, Princeton, 1931–1932." Along with theoretical physicist Edward Teller and mathematician Stanislaw Ulam, von Neumann worked out key steps in the nuclear physics involved in thermonuclear reactions and the hydrogen bomb. Von Neumann wrote 150 published papers in his life; 60 in pure mathematics, 20 in physics, and 60 in applied mathematics. His last work, an unfinished manuscript written while in the hospital and later published in book form as The Computer and the Brain, gives an indication of the direction of his interests at the time of his death.   == Early life and educationEdit == Von Neumann was born Neumann János Lajos (Hungarian pronunciation: [ˈnɒjmɒn ˈjaːnoʃ ˈlɒjoʃ]; in Hungarian the family name comes first) Hebrew name Yonah, in Budapest, Austro-Hungarian Empire, to wealthy Jewish parents of the Haskalah. He was the eldest of three brothers. His father, Neumann Miksa (Max Neumann) was a banker, who held a doctorate in law. He had moved to Budapest from Pécs at the end of the 1880s. Miksa's father (Mihály b. 1839) and grandfather (Márton) were both born in Ond (now part of the town of Szerencs), Zemplén County, northern Hungary. John's mother was Kann Margit (Margaret Kann) (1881–1956); her parents were Jakab Kann II (Pest (now Budapest) 1845–1928) and Katalin Meisels (Munkács, Carpathian Ruthenia c. 1854–1914). In 1913, his father was elevated to the nobility for his service to the Austro-Hungarian Empire by Emperor Francis Joseph. The Neumann family thus acquired the hereditary appellation Margittai, meaning of Marghita. Neumann János became Margittai Neumann János (John Neumann of Marghita), which he later changed to the German Johann von Neumann. He was an extraordinary child prodigy in the areas of language, memorization, and mathematics. As a 6-year-old, he could divide two 8-digit numbers in his head. By the age of 8, he was familiar with differential and integral calculus. Von Neumann was part of a Budapest generation noted for intellectual achievement: he was born in Budapest around the same time as Theodore von Kármán (b. 1881), George de Hevesy (b. 1885), Leó Szilárd (b. 1898), Eugene Wigner (b. 1902), Edward Teller (b. 1908), and Paul Erdős (b. 1913). John entered the Lutheran high school Fasori Evangelikus Gimnázium in Budapest in 1911. Although his father insisted he attend school at the grade level appropriate to his age, he agreed to hire private tutors to give him advanced instruction in those areas in which he had displayed an aptitude. At the age of 15, he began to study advanced calculus under the renowned analyst Gábor Szegő. On their first meeting, Szegő was so astounded with the boy's mathematical talent that he was brought to tears. Szegő subsequently visited the von Neumann house twice a week to tutor the child prodigy. Some of von Neumann's instant solutions to the problems in calculus posed by Szegő, sketched out with his father's stationery, are still on display at the von Neumann archive in Budapest. By the age of 19, von Neumann had published two major mathematical papers, the second of which gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, which superseded Georg Cantor's definition. He received his Ph.D. in mathematics (with minors in experimental physics and chemistry) from Pázmány Péter University in Budapest at the age of 22. He simultaneously earned a diploma in chemical engineering from the ETH Zürich in Switzerland at his father's request, who wanted his son to follow him into industry and therefore invest his time in a more financially useful endeavour than mathematics.   == Career and abilitiesEdit ==   === BeginningsEdit === Between 1928 and 1932, he taught as a Privatdozent at the University of Berlin. By the end of 1927, von Neumann had published twelve major papers in mathematics, and by the end of 1929, thirty-two papers, at a rate of nearly one major paper per month. Von Neumann's reputed powers of speedy, massive memorization and recall allowed him to recite volumes of information, and even entire directories, with ease. In 1930, von Neumann was invited to Princeton University, New Jersey. In 1933, he was offered a position on the faculty of the Institute for Advanced Study when the institute's plan to appoint Hermann Weyl fell through; von Neumann remained a mathematics professor there until his death. His mother and his brothers followed John to the United States; his father, Max Neumann, died in 1929. Von Neumann anglicized his first name to John, keeping the German-aristocratic surname of von Neumann. In 1937, von Neumann became a United States naturalized citizen and immediately tried to enlist in the US Army Reserve but was rejected because of his age. In 1938, he was awarded the Bôcher Memorial Prize for his work in analysis.   === Set theoryEdit ===  The axiomatization of mathematics, on the model of Euclid's Elements, had reached new levels of rigour and breadth at the end of the 19th century, particularly in arithmetic, thanks to the axiom schema of Richard Dedekind and Charles Sanders Peirce, and geometry, thanks to David Hilbert. At the beginning of the 20th century, efforts to base mathematics on naive set theory suffered a setback due to Russell's paradox (on the set of all sets that do not belong to themselves). The problem of an adequate axiomatization of set theory was resolved implicitly about twenty years later by Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel. Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory provided a series of principles that allowed for the construction of the sets used in the everyday practice of mathematics. But they did not explicitly exclude the possibility of the existence of a set that belongs to itself. In his doctoral thesis of 1925, von Neumann demonstrated two techniques to exclude such sets—the axiom of foundation and the notion of class.  The axiom of foundation established that every set can be constructed from the bottom up in an ordered succession of steps by way of the principles of Zermelo and Fraenkel, in such a manner that if one set belongs to another then the first must necessarily come before the second in the succession, hence excluding the possibility of a set belonging to itself. To demonstrate that the addition of this new axiom to the others did not produce contradictions, von Neumann introduced a method of demonstration, called the method of inner models, which later became an essential instrument in set theory. The second approach to the problem took as its base the notion of class, and defines a set as a class which belongs to other classes, while a proper class is defined as a class which does not belong to other classes. Under the Zermelo–Fraenkel approach, the axioms impede the construction of a set of all sets which do not belong to themselves. In contrast, under the von Neumann approach, the class of all sets which do not belong to themselves can be constructed, but it is a proper class and not a set. With this contribution of von Neumann, the axiomatic system of the theory of sets became fully satisfactory, and the next question was whether or not it was also definitive, and not subject to improvement. A strongly negative answer arrived in September 1930 at the historic mathematical Congress of Königsberg, in which Kurt Gödel announced his first theorem of incompleteness: the usual axiomatic systems are incomplete, in the sense that they cannot prove every truth which is expressible in their language. This result was sufficiently innovative as to confound the majority of mathematicians of the time. But von Neumann, who had participated at the Congress, confirmed his fame as an instantaneous thinker, and in less than a month was able to communicate to Gödel himself an interesting consequence of his theorem: namely that the usual axiomatic systems are unable to demonstrate their own consistency. However, Gödel had already discovered this consequence, now known as his second incompleteness theorem, and sent von Neumann a preprint of his article containing both incompleteness theorems. Von Neumann acknowledged Gödel's priority in his next letter.   === GeometryEdit === Von Neumann founded the field of continuous geometry. It followed his path-breaking work on rings of operators. In mathematics, continuous geometry is an analogue of complex projective geometry, where instead of the dimension of a subspace being in a discrete set 0, 1, ..., n, it can be an element of the unit interval [0,1]. Von Neumann was motivated by his discovery of von Neumann algebras with a dimension function taking a continuous range of dimensions, and the first example of a continuous geometry other than projective space was the projections of the hyperfinite type II factor.   === Measure theoryEdit ===  In a series of famous papers, von Neumann made spectacular contributions to measure theory. The work of Banach had implied that the problem of measure has a positive solution if n = 1 or n = 2 and a negative solution in all other cases. Von Neumann's work argued that the "problem is essentially group-theoretic in character, and that, in particular, for the solvability of the problem of measure the ordinary algebraic concept of solvability of a group is relevant. Thus, according to von Neumann, it is the change of group that makes a difference, not the change of space." In a number of von Neumann's papers, the methods of argument he employed are considered even more significant than the results. In anticipation of his later study of dimension theory in algebras of operators, von Neumann used results on equivalence by finite decomposition, and reformulated the problem of measure in terms of functions (anticipating his later work, Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, on almost periodic functions). In the 1936 paper on analytic measure theory, von Neumann used the Haar theorem in the solution of Hilbert's fifth problem in the case of compact groups.   === Ergodic theoryEdit === Von Neumann made foundational contributions to ergodic theory, in a series of articles published in 1932. Of the 1932 papers on ergodic theory, Paul Halmos writes that even "if von Neumann had never done anything else, they would have been sufficient to guarantee him mathematical immortality". By then von Neumann had already written his famous articles on operator theory, and the application of this work was instrumental in the von Neumann mean ergodic theorem.   === Operator theoryEdit ===  Von Neumann introduced the study of rings of operators, through the von Neumann algebras. A von Neumann algebra is a *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator. The von Neumann bicommutant theorem shows that the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely algebraic definition as an algebra of symmetries. The direct integral was introduced in 1949 by John von Neumann. One of von Neumann's analyses was to reduce the classification of von Neumann algebras on separable Hilbert spaces to the classification of factors.   === Lattice theoryEdit === Von Neumann worked on lattice theory between 1937 and 1939. Von Neumann provided an abstract exploration of dimension in completed complemented modular topological lattices: "Dimension is determined, up to a positive linear transformation, by the following two properties. It is conserved by perspective mappings ("perspectivities") and ordered by inclusion. The deepest part of the proof concerns the equivalence of perspectivity with "projectivity by decomposition"—of which a corollary is the transitivity of perspectivity." Garrett Birkhoff writes: "John von Neumann's brilliant mind blazed over lattice theory like a meteor". Additionally, "[I]n the general case, von Neumann proved the following basic representation theorem. Any complemented modular lattice L having a "basis" of n≥4 pairwise perspective elements, is isomorphic with the lattice ℛ(R) of all principal right-ideals of a suitable regular ring R. This conclusion is the culmination of 140 pages of brilliant and incisive algebra involving entirely novel axioms. Anyone wishing to get an unforgettable impression of the razor edge of von Neumann's mind, need merely try to pursue this chain of exact reasoning for himself—realizing that often five pages of it were written down before breakfast, seated at a living room writing-table in a bathrobe."   === Mathematical formulation of quantum mechanicsEdit ===  Von Neumann was the first to rigorously establish a mathematical framework for quantum mechanics, known as the Dirac–von Neumann axioms, with his 1932 work Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. After having completed the axiomatization of set theory, von Neumann began to confront the axiomatization of quantum mechanics. He realized, in 1926, that a state of a quantum system could be represented by a point in a (complex) Hilbert space that, in general, could be infinite-dimensional even for a single particle. This is in contrast to a classical system where a state is represented by a point in a (real) phase space with 6N dimensions where N is the number of particles (3 generalized coordinates and 3 conjugate generalized momenta for each particle). In this formalism of quantum mechanics, observable quantities such as position or momentum are represented as linear operators acting on the Hilbert space associated with the quantum system. The physics of quantum mechanics was thereby reduced to the mathematics of Hilbert spaces and linear operators acting on them. For example, the uncertainty principle, according to which the determination of the position of a particle prevents the determination of its momentum and vice versa, is translated into the non-commutativity of the two corresponding operators. This new mathematical formulation included as special cases the formulations of both Heisenberg and Schrödinger. Von Neumann's abstract treatment permitted him also to confront the foundational issue of determinism vs. non-determinism, and in the book he presented a proof that the statistical results of quantum mechanics could not possibly be averages of an underlying set of determined "hidden variables," as in classical statistical mechanics. In 1966, John S. Bell published a paper arguing that the proof contained a conceptual error and was therefore invalid (see the article on John Stewart Bell for more information). However, in 2010, Jeffrey Bub argued that Bell had misconstrued von Neumann's proof, and pointed out that the proof, though not valid for all hidden variable theories, does rule out a well-defined and important subset. Bub also suggests that von Neumann was aware of this limitation, and that von Neumann did not claim that his proof completely ruled out hidden variable theories. In any case, the proof inaugurated a line of research that ultimately led, through the work of Bell in 1964 on Bell's theorem, and the experiments of Alain Aspect in 1982, to the demonstration that quantum physics either requires a notion of reality substantially different from that of classical physics, or must include nonlocality in apparent violation of special relativity. In a chapter of The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, von Neumann deeply analyzed the so-called measurement problem. He concluded that the entire physical universe could be made subject to the universal wave function. Since something "outside the calculation" was needed to collapse the wave function, von Neumann concluded that the collapse was caused by the consciousness of the experimenter (although this view was accepted by Eugene Wigner, it never gained acceptance amongst the majority of physicists). Though theories of quantum mechanics continue to evolve to this day, there is a basic framework for the mathematical formalism of problems in quantum mechanics which underlies the majority of approaches and can be traced back to the mathematical formalisms and techniques first used by von Neumann. In other words, discussions about interpretation of the theory, and extensions to it, are now mostly conducted on the basis of shared assumptions about the mathematical foundations.   === Quantum logicEdit ===  In a famous paper of 1936 with Garrett Birkhoff, the first work ever to introduce quantum logics, von Neumann and Birkhoff first proved that quantum mechanics requires a propositional calculus substantially different from all classical logics and rigorously isolated a new algebraic structure for quantum logics. The concept of creating a propositional calculus for quantum logic was first outlined in a short section in von Neumann's 1932 work, but in 1936, the need for the new propositional calculus was demonstrated through several proofs. For example, photons cannot pass through two successive filters that are polarized perpendicularly (e.g., one horizontally and the other vertically), and therefore, a fortiori, it cannot pass if a third filter polarized diagonally is added to the other two, either before or after them in the succession, but if the third filter is added in between the other two, the photons will, indeed, pass through. This experimental fact is translatable into logic as the non-commutativity of conjunction . It was also demonstrated that the laws of distribution of classical logic,  and , are not valid for quantum theory. The reason for this is that a quantum disjunction, unlike the case for classical disjunction, can be true even when both of the disjuncts are false and this is, in turn, attributable to the fact that it is frequently the case, in quantum mechanics, that a pair of alternatives are semantically determinate, while each of its members are necessarily indeterminate. This latter property can be illustrated by a simple example. Suppose we are dealing with particles (such as electrons) of semi-integral spin (angular momentum) for which there are only two possible values: positive or negative. Then, a principle of indetermination establishes that the spin, relative to two different directions (e.g., x and y) results in a pair of incompatible quantities. Suppose that the state ɸ of a certain electron verifies the proposition "the spin of the electron in the x direction is positive." By the principle of indeterminacy, the value of the spin in the direction y will be completely indeterminate for ɸ. Hence, ɸ can verify neither the proposition "the spin in the direction of y is positive" nor the proposition "the spin in the direction of y is negative." Nevertheless, the disjunction of the propositions "the spin in the direction of y is positive or the spin in the direction of y is negative" must be true for ɸ. In the case of distribution, it is therefore possible to have a situation in which , while . Von Neumann proposes to replace classical logics with a logic constructed in orthomodular lattices (isomorphic to the lattice of subspaces of the Hilbert space of a given physical system).   === Game theoryEdit === Von Neumann founded the field of game theory as a mathematical discipline. Von Neumann proved his minimax theorem in 1928. This theorem establishes that in zero-sum games with perfect information (i.e. in which players know at each time all moves that have taken place so far), there exists a pair of strategies for both players that allows each to minimize his maximum losses, hence the name minimax. When examining every possible strategy, a player must consider all the possible responses of his adversary. The player then plays out the strategy that will result in the minimization of his maximum loss. Such strategies, which minimize the maximum loss for each player, are called optimal. Von Neumann showed that their minimaxes are equal (in absolute value) and contrary (in sign). Von Neumann improved and extended the minimax theorem to include games involving imperfect information and games with more than two players, publishing this result in his 1944 Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (written with Oskar Morgenstern). The public interest in this work was such that The New York Times ran a front-page story. In this book, von Neumann declared that economic theory needed to use functional analytic methods, especially convex sets and topological fixed-point theorem, rather than the traditional differential calculus, because the maximum-operator did not preserve differentiable functions. Independently, Leonid Kantorovich's functional analytic work on mathematical economics also focused attention on optimization theory, non-differentiability, and vector lattices. Von Neumann's functional-analytic techniques—the use of duality pairings of real vector spaces to represent prices and quantities, the use of supporting and separating hyperplanes and convex set, and fixed-point theory—have been the primary tools of mathematical economics ever since. Von Neumann was also the inventor of the method of proof, used in game theory, known as backward induction (which he first published in 1944 in the book co-authored with Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour). Morgenstern wrote a paper on game theory and thought he would show it to von Neumann because of his interest in the subject. He read it and said to Morgenstern that he should put more in it. This was repeated a couple of times, and then von Neumann became a coauthor and the paper became 100 pages long. Then it became a book.   === Mathematical economicsEdit === Von Neumann raised the intellectual and mathematical level of economics in several stunning publications. For his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann proved the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium using his generalization of the Brouwer fixed-point theorem. Von Neumann's model of an expanding economy considered the matrix pencil  A − λB with nonnegative matrices A and B; von Neumann sought probability vectors p and q and a positive number λ that would solve the complementarity equation pT (A − λ B) q = 0, along with two inequality systems expressing economic efficiency. In this model, the (transposed) probability vector p represents the prices of the goods while the probability vector q represents the "intensity" at which the production process would run. The unique solution λ represents the growth factor which is 1 plus the rate of growth of the economy; the rate of growth equals the interest rate. Proving the existence of a positive growth rate and proving that the growth rate equals the interest rate were remarkable achievements, even for von Neumann. Von Neumann's results have been viewed as a special case of linear programming, where von Neumann's model uses only nonnegative matrices. The study of von Neumann's model of an expanding economy continues to interest mathematical economists with interests in computational economics. This paper has been called the greatest paper in mathematical economics by several authors, who recognized its introduction of fixed-point theorems, linear inequalities, complementary slackness, and saddlepoint duality. In the proceedings of a conference on von Neumann's growth model, Paul Samuelson said that many mathematicians had developed methods useful to economists, but that von Neumann was unique in having made significant contributions to economic theory itself. The lasting importance of the work on general equilibria and the methodology of fixed point theorems is underscored by the awarding of Nobel prizes in 1972 to Kenneth Arrow, in 1983 to Gérard Debreu, and in 1994 to John Nash who used fixed point theorems to establish equilibria for non-cooperative games and for bargaining problems in his Ph.D. thesis. Arrow and Debreu also used linear programming, as did Nobel laureates Tjalling Koopmans, Leonid Kantorovich, Wassily Leontief, Paul Samuelson, Robert Dorfman, Robert Solow, and Leonid Hurwicz. Norman Macrae has traced the origins of von Neumann's famous 9-page paper. It started life as a talk at Princeton and then became a paper in Germany, which was eventually translated into English. His interest in economics that led to that paper began as follows: When lecturing at Berlin in 1928 and 1929 he spent his summers back home in Budapest, and so did the economist Nicholas Kaldor, and they hit it off. Kaldor recommended that von Neumann read a book by the mathematical economist Léon Walras. Von Neumann found some faults in that book and corrected them, for example, replacing equations by inequalities. He noticed that Walras's General Equilibrium Theory and Walras' Law, which led to systems of simultaneous linear equations, could produce the absurd result that the profit could be maximized by producing and selling a negative quantity of a product. He replaced the equations by inequalities, introduced dynamic equilibria, among other things, and eventually produced his 9-page paper.   === Linear programmingEdit === Building on his results on matrix games and on his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann invented the theory of duality in linear programming, after George Dantzig described his work in a few minutes, when an impatient von Neumann asked him to get to the point. Then, Dantzig listened dumbfounded while von Neumann provided an hour lecture on convex sets, fixed-point theory, and duality, conjecturing the equivalence between matrix games and linear programming. Later, von Neumann suggested a new method of linear programming, using the homogeneous linear system of Gordan (1873), which was later popularized by Karmarkar's algorithm. Von Neumann's method used a pivoting algorithm between simplices, with the pivoting decision determined by a nonnegative least squares subproblem with a convexity constraint (projecting the zero-vector onto the convex hull of the active simplex). Von Neumann's algorithm was the first interior point method of linear programming.   === Mathematical statisticsEdit === Von Neumann made fundamental contributions to mathematical statistics. In 1941, he derived the exact distribution of the ratio of the mean square of successive differences to the sample variance for independent and identically normally distributed variables. This ratio was applied to the residuals from regression models and is commonly known as the Durbin–Watson statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the errors are serially independent against the alternative that they follow a stationary first order autoregression. Subsequently, Denis Sargan and Alok Bhargava extended the results for testing if the errors on a regression model follow a Gaussian random walk (i.e., possess a unit root) against the alternative that they are a stationary first order autoregression.   === Nuclear weaponsEdit ===  Beginning in the late 1930s, von Neumann developed an expertise in explosions—phenomena that are difficult to model mathematically. During this period von Neumann was the leading authority of the mathematics of shaped charges. This led him to a large number of military consultancies, primarily for the Navy, which in turn led to his involvement in the Manhattan Project. The involvement included frequent trips by train to the project's secret research facilities in Los Alamos, New Mexico. Von Neumann's principal contribution to the atomic bomb was in the concept and design of the explosive lenses needed to compress the plutonium core of the Trinity test device and the "Fat Man" weapon that was later dropped on Nagasaki. While von Neumann did not originate the "implosion" concept, he was one of its most persistent proponents, encouraging its continued development against the instincts of many of his colleagues, who felt such a design to be unworkable. He also eventually came up with the idea of using more powerful shaped charges and less fissionable material to greatly increase the speed of "assembly" (compression). When it turned out that there would not be enough uranium-235 to make more than one bomb, the implosive lens project was greatly expanded and von Neumann's idea was implemented. Implosion was the only method that could be used with the plutonium-239 that was available from the Hanford Site. His calculations showed that implosion would work if it did not depart by more than 5% from spherical symmetry. After a series of failed attempts with models, 5% was achieved by George Kistiakowsky, and the construction of the Trinity bomb was completed in July 1945. In a visit to Los Alamos in September 1944, von Neumann showed that the pressure increase from explosion shock wave reflection from solid objects was greater than previously believed if the angle of incidence of the shock wave was between 90° and some limiting angle. As a result, it was determined that the effectiveness of an atomic bomb would be enhanced with detonation some kilometers above the target, rather than at ground level. Beginning in the spring of 1945, along with four other scientists and various military personnel, von Neumann was included in the target selection committee responsible for choosing the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as the first targets of the atomic bomb. Von Neumann oversaw computations related to the expected size of the bomb blasts, estimated death tolls, and the distance above the ground at which the bombs should be detonated for optimum shock wave propagation and thus maximum effect. The cultural capital Kyoto, which had been spared the firebombing inflicted upon militarily significant target cities like Tokyo in World War II, was von Neumann's first choice, a selection seconded by Manhattan Project leader General Leslie Groves. However, this target was dismissed by Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson. On July 16, 1945, with numerous other Los Alamos personnel, von Neumann was an eyewitness to the first atomic bomb blast, code named Trinity, conducted as a test of the implosion method device, on the White Sands Proving Ground, 35 miles (56 km) southeast of Socorro, New Mexico. Based on his observation alone, von Neumann estimated the test had resulted in a blast equivalent to 5 kilotons of TNT, but Enrico Fermi produced a more accurate estimate of 10 kilotons by dropping scraps of torn-up paper as the shock wave passed his location and watching how far they scattered. The actual power of the explosion had been between 20 and 22 kilotons. After the war, J. Robert Oppenheimer remarked that the physicists involved in the Manhattan project had "known sin". Von Neumann's response was that "sometimes someone confesses a sin in order to take credit for it." Von Neumann continued unperturbed in his work and became, along with Edward Teller, one of those who sustained the hydrogen bomb project. He then collaborated with Klaus Fuchs on further development of the bomb, and in 1946 the two filed a secret patent on "Improvement in Methods and Means for Utilizing Nuclear Energy", which outlined a scheme for using a fission bomb to compress fusion fuel to initiate nuclear fusion. The Fuchs–von Neumann patent used radiation implosion, but not in the same way as is used in what became the final hydrogen bomb design, the Teller–Ulam design. Their work was, however, incorporated into the "George" shot of Operation Greenhouse, which was instructive in testing out concepts that went into the final design. The Fuchs–von Neumann work was passed on, by Fuchs, to the Soviet Union as part of his nuclear espionage, but it was not used in the Soviets' own, independent development of the Teller–Ulam design. The historian Jeremy Bernstein has pointed out that ironically, "John von Neumann and Klaus Fuchs, produced a brilliant invention in 1946 that could have changed the whole course of the development of the hydrogen bomb, but was not fully understood until after the bomb had been successfully made."   === The Atomic Energy CommitteeEdit === In 1954 von Neumann was invited to become a member of the Atomic Energy Committee. He accepted this position and used it to further the production of compact H-bombs suitable for Intercontinental ballistic missile delivery. He involved himself in correcting the severe shortage of tritium and lithium 6 needed for these compact weapons, and he argued against settling for the intermediate range missiles that the Army wanted. He was adamant that H-bombs delivered into the heart of enemy territory by an ICBM would be the most effective weapon possible, and that the relative inaccuracy of the missile wouldn't be a problem with an H-bomb. He said the Russians would probably be building a similar weapon system, which turned out to be the case.   === The ICBM CommitteeEdit === In 1955, von Neumann became a commissioner of the United States Atomic Energy Program. Shortly before his death, when he was already quite ill, von Neumann headed the United States government's top secret intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) committee, and it would sometimes meet in his home. Its purpose was to decide on the feasibility of building an ICBM large enough to carry a thermonuclear weapon. Von Neumann had long argued that while the technical obstacles were sizable, they could be overcome in time. The SM-65 Atlas passed its first fully functional test in 1959, two years after his death. The feasibility of an ICBM owed as much to improved, smaller warheads as it did to developments in rocketry, and his understanding of the former made his advice invaluable.   === Mutual assured destructionEdit === John von Neumann is credited with the equilibrium strategy of mutual assured destruction, providing the deliberately humorous acronym, MAD. (Other humorous acronyms coined by von Neumann include his computer, the Mathematical Analyzer, Numerical Integrator, and Computer—or MANIAC). He also "moved heaven and earth" to bring MAD about. His goal was to quickly develop ICBMs and the compact hydrogen bombs that they could deliver to the USSR, and he knew the Soviets were doing similar work because the CIA interviewed German rocket scientists who were allowed to return to Germany, and von Neumann had planted a dozen technical people in the CIA. The Russians believed that bombers would soon be vulnerable, and they shared von Neumann's view that an H-bomb in an ICBM was the ne plus ultra of weapons, and they believed that whoever had superiority in these weapons would take over the world, without necessarily using them. von Neumann was afraid of a "missile gap" and took several more steps to achieve his goal of keeping up with the Soviets: He modified the ENIAC by making it programmable and then wrote programs for it to do the H-bomb calculations verifying that the Teller-Ulam design was feasible and to develop it further. He became a member of the Atomic Energy Committee to speed up the development of a compact H-bomb that would fit in an ICBM. He personally interceded to speed up the production of lithium-6 and tritium needed for the compact bombs. He caused several separate missile projects to be started, because he felt that competition combined with collaboration got the best results.   === ComputingEdit ===  Von Neumann was a founding figure in computing. Von Neumann's hydrogen bomb work was played out in the realm of computing, where he and Stanislaw Ulam developed simulations on von Neumann's digital computers for the hydrodynamic computations. During this time he contributed to the development of the Monte Carlo method, which allowed solutions to complicated problems to be approximated using random numbers. He was also involved in the design of the later IAS machine. Because using lists of "truly" random numbers was extremely slow, von Neumann developed a form of making pseudorandom numbers, using the middle-square method. Though this method has been criticized as crude, von Neumann was aware of this: he justified it as being faster than any other method at his disposal, and also noted that when it went awry it did so obviously, unlike methods which could be subtly incorrect. While consulting for the Moore School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania on the EDVAC project, von Neumann wrote an incomplete First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC. The paper, whose premature distribution nullified the patent claims of EDVAC designers J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, described a computer architecture in which the data and the program are both stored in the computer's memory in the same address space. This architecture is to this day the basis of modern computer design, unlike the earliest computers that were "programmed" using a separate memory device such as a paper tape or plugboard. Although the single-memory, stored program architecture is commonly called von Neumann architecture as a result of von Neumann's paper, the architecture's description was based on the work of J. Presper Eckert and John William Mauchly, inventors of the ENIAC computer at the University of Pennsylvania. John von Neumann also consulted for the ENIAC project. The electronics of the new ENIAC ran at one-sixth the speed, but this in no way degraded the ENIAC's performance, since it was still entirely I/O bound. Complicated programs could be developed and debugged in days rather than the weeks required for plugboarding the old ENIAC. Some of von Neumann's early computer programs have been preserved. The next computer that von Neumann designed was the IAS machine at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. He arranged its financing, and the components were designed and built at the RCA Research Laboratory nearby. John von Neumann recommended that the IBM 701, nicknamed the defense computer include a magnetic drum. It was a faster version of the IAS machine and formed the basis for the commercially successful IBM 704. Stochastic computing was first introduced in a pioneering paper by von Neumann in 1953. However, the theory could not be implemented until advances in computing of the 1960s. Von Neumann also created the field of cellular automata without the aid of computers, constructing the first self-replicating automata with pencil and graph paper. The concept of a universal constructor was fleshed out in his posthumous work Theory of Self Reproducing Automata. Von Neumann proved that the most effective way of performing large-scale mining operations such as mining an entire moon or asteroid belt would be by using self-replicating machines, taking advantage of their exponential growth. Von Neumann's rigorous mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication (of the semiotic relationship between constructor, description and that which is constructed), preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA. Beginning in 1949, von Neumann's design for a self-reproducing computer program is considered the world's first computer virus, and he is considered to be the theoretical father of computer virology. Donald Knuth cites von Neumann as the inventor, in 1945, of the merge sort algorithm, in which the first and second halves of an array are each sorted recursively and then merged. His algorithm for simulating a fair coin with a biased coin is used in the "software whitening" stage of some hardware random number generators.   === Fluid dynamicsEdit === Von Neumann made fundamental contributions in exploration of problems in numerical hydrodynamics. For example, with Robert D. Richtmyer he developed an algorithm defining artificial viscosity that improved the understanding of shock waves. It is possible that we would not understand much of astrophysics, and might not have highly developed jet and rocket engines without the work of von Neumann. A problem was that when computers solved hydrodynamic or aerodynamic problems, they tried to put too many computational grid points at regions of sharp discontinuity (shock waves). The mathematics of artificial viscosity smoothed the shock transition without sacrificing basic physics. Other well known contributions to fluid dynamics included the classic flow solution to blast waves, and the co-discovery of the ZND detonation model of explosives.   === Politics and social affairsEdit ===  Von Neumann obtained, at the age of 29, one of the first five professorships at the new Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey (another had gone to Albert Einstein). He was a frequent consultant for the Central Intelligence Agency, the United States Army, the RAND Corporation, Standard Oil, General Electric, IBM, and others. Throughout his life, von Neumann had a respect and admiration for business and government leaders, something that was often at variance with the inclinations of his scientific colleagues. Von Neumann entered government service (Manhattan Project) primarily because he felt that, if freedom and civilization were to survive, it would have to be because the US would triumph over totalitarianism from Nazism, Fascism and Soviet Communism. As president of the von Neumann Committee for Missiles, and later as a member of the United States Atomic Energy Commission, from 1953 until his death in 1957, he was influential in setting US scientific and military policy. Through his committee, he developed various scenarios of nuclear proliferation, the development of intercontinental and submarine missiles with atomic warheads, and the controversial strategic equilibrium called mutual assured destruction. During a Senate committee hearing he described his political ideology as "violently anti-communist, and much more militaristic than the norm". He was quoted in 1950 remarking, "If you say why not bomb [the Soviets] tomorrow, I say, why not today. If you say today at five o'clock, I say why not one o'clock?"   === On the eve of World War IIEdit === Von Neumann's shrewd prewar analysis is often quoted. Asked about how France would stand up to Germany he said "Oh, France won't matter." Asked whether the US would enter the war and what their motives would be, he said they would enter the war as a purely defensive measure to protect their interests overseas and would not be motivated by imperialistic ambitions, but that such ambitions could arise after the war. He said the Roman Empire was purely defensive in the early days and only became imperialistic towards the end. He also said that it would not be profitable for the US to sell arms to combatants, because such sales are usually on credit, and such debts are never paid. He said this before 1935 when Roosevelt outlawed such sales.   === Weather systemsEdit === Von Neumann's team performed the world's first numerical weather forecasts on the ENIAC computer; von Neumann published the paper Numerical Integration of the Barotropic Vorticity Equation in 1950. Von Neumann's interest in weather systems and meteorological prediction led him to propose manipulating the environment by spreading colorants on the polar ice caps to enhance absorption of solar radiation (by reducing the albedo), thereby inducing global warming.   === Cognitive abilitiesEdit === Von Neumann's ability to instantaneously perform complex operations in his head stunned other mathematicians. Eugene Wigner wrote that, seeing von Neumann's mind at work, "one had the impression of a perfect instrument whose gears were machined to mesh accurately to a thousandth of an inch." Paul Halmos states that "von Neumann's speed was awe-inspiring." Israel Halperin said: "Keeping up with him was ... impossible. The feeling was you were on a tricycle chasing a racing car." Edward Teller wrote that von Neumann effortlessly outdid anybody he ever met, and said "I never could keep up with him". Teller also said "von Neumann would carry on a conversation with my 3-year-old son, and the two of them would talk as equals, and I sometimes wondered if he used the same principle when he talked to the rest of us. Most people avoid thinking if they can, some of us are addicted to thinking, but von Neumann actually enjoyed thinking, maybe even to the exclusion of everything else." Lothar Wolfgang Nordheim described von Neumann as the "fastest mind I ever met", and Jacob Bronowski wrote "He was the cleverest man I ever knew, without exception. He was a genius." George Pólya, whose lectures at ETH Zürich von Neumann attended as a student, said "Johnny was the only student I was ever afraid of. If in the course of a lecture I stated an unsolved problem, the chances were he'd come to me at the end of the lecture with the complete solution scribbled on a slip of paper." Halmos recounts a story told by Nicholas Metropolis, concerning the speed of von Neumann's calculations, when somebody asked von Neumann to solve the famous fly puzzle:  Two bicyclists start twenty miles apart and head toward each other, each going at a steady rate of 10 mph. At the same time a fly that travels at a steady 15 mph starts from the front wheel of the southbound bicycle and flies to the front wheel of the northbound one, then turns around and flies to the front wheel of the southbound one again, and continues in this manner till he is crushed between the two front wheels. Question: what total distance did the fly cover? The slow way to find the answer is to calculate what distance the fly covers on the first, northbound, leg of the trip, then on the second, southbound, leg, then on the third, etc., etc., and, finally, to sum the infinite series so obtained. The quick way is to observe that the bicycles meet exactly one hour after their start, so that the fly had just an hour for his travels; the answer must therefore be 15 miles. When the question was put to von Neumann, he solved it in an instant, and thereby disappointed the questioner: "Oh, you must have heard the trick before!" "What trick?" asked von Neumann, "All I did was sum the geometric series."  It's claimed that Von Neumann had a very strong eidetic memory, commonly called "photographic" memory—though such a phenomenon has never been scientifically documented in a human. Herman Goldstine writes: "One of his remarkable abilities was his power of absolute recall. As far as I could tell, von Neumann was able on once reading a book or article to quote it back verbatim; moreover, he could do it years later without hesitation. He could also translate it at no diminution in speed from its original language into English. On one occasion I tested his ability by asking him to tell me how A Tale of Two Cities started. Whereupon, without any pause, he immediately began to recite the first chapter and continued until asked to stop after about ten or fifteen minutes." "I have sometimes wondered whether a brain like von Neumann's does not indicate a species superior to that of man", said Nobel Laureate Hans Bethe of Cornell University. "It seems fair to say that if the influence of a scientist is interpreted broadly enough to include impact on fields beyond science proper, then John von Neumann was probably the most influential mathematician who ever lived," wrote Miklós Rédei in "Selected Letters." Glimm writes "he is regarded as one of the giants of modern mathematics". The mathematician Jean Dieudonné called von Neumann "the last of the great mathematicians", while Peter Lax described him as possessing the "most scintillating intellect of this century".   === Mastery of mathematicsEdit === Stan Ulam, who knew von Neumann well, described his mastery of mathematics this way: "Most mathematicians know one method. For example, Norbert Wiener had mastered Fourier transforms. Some mathematicians have mastered two methods and might really impress someone who knows only one of them. John von Neumann had mastered three methods." He went on to explain that the three methods were: A facility with the symbolic manipulation of linear operators; An intuitive feeling for the logical structure of any new mathematical theories; An intuitive feeling for the combinatorial superstructure of new theories.   == Personal lifeEdit == Von Neumann married twice. He married Mariette Kövesi in 1930, just prior to emigrating to the United States. Before his marriage he was baptized a Catholic. They had one daughter (von Neumann's only child), Marina, who is now a distinguished professor of international trade and public policy at the University of Michigan. The couple divorced in 1937. In 1938, von Neumann married Klara Dan, whom he had met during his last trips back to Budapest prior to the outbreak of World War II. Von Neumann was initially refused permission to immigrate into the United States, although considered a famous and talented mathematician, but later with the influence of fellow scientists in the US he was able to secure the permit and received US citizenship. Von Neumann predicted the German takeover of Europe, anticipated its consequences for the Jews, and succeeded in ensuring the escape and immigration of his own immediate family along with his second wife Klara's family to the US, in 1938 just before the annexations and battles by Germany and the beginnings of World War II. The von Neumanns, Klara and John were very active socially within the Princeton academic community. Von Neumann had a wide range of cultural interests. Since the age of six, von Neumann had been fluent in Latin and ancient Greek, and he held a lifelong passion for ancient history, being renowned for his prodigious historical knowledge. A professor of Byzantine history once said that von Neumann had greater expertise in Byzantine history than he did. Von Neumann took great care over his clothing, and would always wear formal suits, once riding down the Grand Canyon astride a mule in a three-piece pin-stripe. Mathematician David Hilbert is reported to have asked at von Neumann's 1926 doctoral exam: "Pray, who is the candidate's tailor?" as he had never seen such beautiful evening clothes. He was sociable and enjoyed throwing large parties at his home in Princeton, occasionally twice a week. His white clapboard house at 26 Westcott Road was one of the largest in Princeton. Despite being a notoriously bad driver, he nonetheless enjoyed driving—frequently while reading a book—occasioning numerous arrests, as well as accidents. When Cuthbert Hurd hired him as a consultant to IBM, Hurd often quietly paid the fines for his traffic tickets. He believed that much of his mathematical thought occurred intuitively, and he would often go to sleep with a problem unsolved, and know the answer immediately upon waking up. Von Neumann liked to eat and drink; his wife, Klara, said that he could count everything except calories. He enjoyed Yiddish and "off-color" humor (especially limericks). At Princeton he received complaints for regularly playing extremely loud German march music on his gramophone, which distracted those in neighbouring offices, including Albert Einstein, from their work. Von Neumann did some of his best work blazingly fast in noisy, chaotic environments, and once admonished his wife for preparing a quiet study for him to work in. He never used it, preferring the couple's living room with its television playing loudly. Von Neumann's closest friend in the United States was mathematician Stanislaw Ulam. A later friend of Ulam's, Gian-Carlo Rota writes: "They would spend hours on end gossiping and giggling, swapping Jewish jokes, and drifting in and out of mathematical talk." When von Neumann was dying in hospital, every time Ulam would visit he would come prepared with a new collection of jokes to cheer up his friend.   == Later life and deathEdit ==  In 1955, von Neumann was diagnosed with what was either bone or pancreatic cancer. A von Neumann biographer, Norman Macrae, has speculated that the cancer was caused by von Neumann's presence at the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests held in 1946 at Bikini Atoll. His mother, Margaret von Neumann, had been diagnosed with cancer in 1956 and died within two weeks. John had eighteen months from diagnosis till death. In this period von Neumann returned to the Roman Catholic faith that had also been significant to his mother after the family's conversion in 1929–1930. John had earlier said to his mother, "There is probably a God. Many things are easier to explain if there is than if there isn't." Von Neumann held on to his exemplary knowledge of Latin and quoted to a deathbed visitor the declamation "Judex ergo cum sedebit," and ends "Quid sum miser tunc dicturus? Quem patronum rogaturus, Cum vix iustus sit securus?" (When the judge His seat hath taken ... What shall wretched I then plead? Who for me shall intercede when the righteous scarce is freed?) On his deathbed, Von Neumann entertained his brother by using his photographic memory to recite from heart, word-for-word the first few lines of each page of Goethe's Faust. Von Neumann died a year and a half after the diagnosis of cancer, at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C. under military security lest he reveal military secrets while heavily medicated. He was buried at Princeton Cemetery in Princeton, Mercer County, New Jersey. While at Walter Reed, he invited a Roman Catholic priest, Father Anselm Strittmatter, O.S.B., to visit him for consultation. Von Neumann reportedly said in explanation that Pascal had a point, referring to Pascal's Wager. Father Strittmatter administered the last sacraments to him. Some of von Neumann's friends (such as Abraham Pais and Oskar Morgenstern) said they had always believed him to be "completely agnostic." Poundstone: "Of this deathbed conversion, Morgenstern told Heims, "He was of course completely agnostic all his life, and then he suddenly turned Catholic—it doesn't agree with anything whatsoever in his attitude, outlook and thinking when he was healthy." After the religious conversion, Father Strittmatter recalled that von Neumann did not receive much peace or comfort from it, as he still remained terrified of death.   == HonorsEdit == The John von Neumann Theory Prize of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS, previously TIMS-ORSA) is awarded annually to an individual (or group) who have made fundamental and sustained contributions to theory in operations research and the management sciences. The IEEE John von Neumann Medal is awarded annually by the IEEE "for outstanding achievements in computer-related science and technology." The John von Neumann Lecture is given annually at the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) by a researcher who has contributed to applied mathematics, and the chosen lecturer is also awarded a monetary prize. The crater von Neumann on the Moon is named after him. The John von Neumann Center in Plainsboro Township, New Jersey (40.348695°N 74.592251°W﻿ / 40.348695; -74.592251﻿ (John von Neumann Center)) was named in his honour. The professional society of Hungarian computer scientists, John von Neumann Computer Society, is named after John von Neumann. On February 15, 1956, von Neumann was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. On May 4, 2005 the United States Postal Service issued the American Scientists commemorative postage stamp series, a set of four 37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several configurations designed by artist Victor Stabin. The scientists depicted were John von Neumann, Barbara McClintock, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman. The John von Neumann Award of the Rajk László College for Advanced Studies was named in his honour, and has been given every year since 1995 to professors who have made an outstanding contribution to the exact social sciences and through their work have strongly influenced the professional development and thinking of the members of the college.   === Infopark and Neumann János StreetEdit === Infopark is situated in the 11th district of Budapest, near the Buda side of Rákóczi bridge, in the university neighborhood, across the river from the National Theatre and the Palace of Arts. The streets bordering Infopark are Hevesy György Street, Boulevard of Hungarian Scientists, Street of Hungarian Nobel Prize Winners and Neumann János street.   == Selected worksEdit == 1923. On the introduction of transfinite numbers, 346–54. 1925. An axiomatization of set theory, 393–413. 1932. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Beyer, R. T., trans., Princeton Univ. Press. 1996 edition: ISBN 0-691-02893-1. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, with Morgenstern, O., Princeton Univ. Press, online at archive.org. 2007 edition: ISBN 978-0-691-13061-3. 1945. First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC TheFirstDraft.pdf 1963. Collected Works of John von Neumann, Taub, A. H., ed., Pergamon Press. ISBN 0-08-009566-6 1966. Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, Burks, A. W., ed., University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-598-37798-0 von Neumann, John (1998) [1960]. Continuous geometry. Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-05893-1. MR 0120174.  von Neumann, John (1981) [1937]. Halperin, Israel, ed. Continuous geometries with a transition probability. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society 34 (252). ISBN 9780821822524. MR 634656.    == See alsoEdit ==  PhD Students Donald B. Gillies, Ph.D. student Israel Halperin, Ph.D. student   == NotesEdit ==   === FootnotesEdit ===   === CitationsEdit ===   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.   == Further readingEdit == Aspray, William (1990), John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing. Bochner, S. (1958), John von Neumann 1903–1957, biographical memoir of the National Academy of Sciences. Dyson, George (2012), Turing's Cathedral, Pantheon Books, ISBN 978-0-375-42277-5 Halmos, Paul R. (1985), I Want To Be A Mathematician, Springer-Verlag. Israel, Giorgio; Ana Millan Gasca (1995). The World as a Mathematical Game: John von Neumann, Twentieth Century Scientist.  Macrae, Norman (1992), John von Neumann, The Scientific Genius who Pioneered the Modern Computer, Game Theory, Nuclear Deterrence, and Much More, Random House, reprinted by the AMS in 2008. von Neumann Whitman, Marina (2012), The Martian's Daughter—A Memoir, University of Michigan Press. Redei, Miklos (ed.) (2005), John von Neumann: Selected Letters, American Mathematical Society. Slater, Robert (1989). Portraits in Silicon. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. pp. 23–33. ISBN 0-262-69131-0.  Vonneuman, Nicholas A. (1987), John von Neumann as Seen by His Brother ISBN 0-9619681-0-9 1958, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 64(3). 1990, "The Legacy of John von Neumann", Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society Symposia in Pure Mathematics, 50. Popular periodicals Good Housekeeping Magazine, September 1956, "Married to a Man Who Believes the Mind Can Move the World" Video John von Neumann, A Documentary (60 min.), Mathematical Association of America   == External linksEdit == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "John von Neumann", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . von Neumann's contribution to economics — International Social Science Review von Neumann's profile at Google Scholar Oral history interview with Alice R. Burks and Arthur W. Burks, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Alice Burks and Arthur Burks describe ENIAC, EDVAC, and IAS computers, and John von Neumann's contribution to the development of computers. Oral history interview with Eugene P. Wigner, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Oral history interview with Nicholas C. Metropolis, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Von Neumann vs. Dirac — from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Von Neumann's Universe, audio talk by George Dyson John von Neumann's 100th Birthday, article by Stephen Wolfram on von Neumann's 100th birthday. Annotated bibliography for John von Neumann from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues Budapest Tech Polytechnical Institution — John von Neumann Faculty of Informatics John von Neumann speaking at the dedication of the NORD, December 2, 1954 (audio recording) Citation Accompanying Medal of Freedom, The American Presidency Project John von Neumann (1903–1957). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.


Kenneth Jon Barwise (/ˈbɑrwaɪz/; June 29, 1942 – March 5, 2000) was an American mathematician, philosopher and logician who proposed some fundamental revisions to the way that logic is understood and used. Born in Independence, Missouri to Kenneth T. and Evelyn Barwise, he was a precocious child. A pupil of Solomon Feferman at Stanford University, Barwise started his research in infinitary logic. After positions as assistant professor at the Universities of Yale and Wisconsin, during which time his interests turned to natural language, he returned to Stanford in 1983 to direct the Center for the Study of Language and Information. He began teaching at Indiana University in 1990. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1999. Barwise contended that, by being explicit about the context in which a proposition is made, the situation, many problems in the application of logic can be eliminated. He sought ... to understand meaning and inference within a general theory of information, one that takes us outside the realm of sentences and relations between sentences of any language, natural or formal. In particular, he claimed that such an approach resolved the liar paradox. He made use of Peter Aczel's non-well-founded set theory in understanding "vicious circles" of reasoning. Barwise, along with his former colleague at Stanford John Etchemendy, was the author of the popular logic textbook Language, Proof and Logic. Unlike the Handbook of Mathematical Logic which was a survey of the state of the art of Mathematical Logic c. 1975, and of which he was the editor, this work targeted elementary logic. The text is notable for including computer-aided homework problems, some of which provide visual representations of logical problems. During his time at Stanford, he was also the first Director of the Symbolic Systems Program, an interdepartmental degree program focusing on the relationships between cognition, language, logic, and computation. The K. Jon Barwise Award for Distinguished Contributions to the Symbolic Systems Program has been given periodically since 2001.   == Works == Barwise, K. J. (1975) Admissible Sets and Structures. An Approach to Definability Theory ISBN 0-387-07451-1 Barwise, K. J. & Perry, John (1983) Situations and Attitudes. Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 1-57586-193-3 Barwise, K. J. & Etchemendy, J. (1987) The Liar: An Essay in Truth and Circularity ISBN 0-19-505944-1 Barwise, K. J. (1988) The Situation in Logic ISBN 0-937073-32-6 Barwise, K. J. & Moss, L. (1996) Vicious Circles. On the Mathematics of Non-Wellfounded Phenomena ISBN 1-57586-008-2 Barwise, K, J. & Seligman, J. (1997) Information Flow: the Logic of Distributed Systems ISBN 0-521-58386-1 Barwise, K. J. & Etchemendy, J. (2002) Language, Proof and Logic ISBN 1-57586-374-X Barwise, K. J. Editor (1977) Handbook of Mathematical Logic. xi+1165 pages ISBN 0-7204-2285-X   == See also == Barwise prize Barwise compactness theorem   == References ==   == External links == In Memoriam: Kenneth Jon Barwise by Solomon Feferman The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic vol. 6(4) Dec. 2000, pp505–8 (PostScript) K. Jon (Kenneth) Barwise at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Joseph Diaz Gergonne (19 June 1771 at Nancy, France – 4 May 1859 at Montpellier, France) was a French mathematician and logician.   == Life == In 1791, Gergonne enlisted in the French army as a captain. That army was undergoing rapid expansion because the French government feared a foreign invasion intended to undo the French Revolution and restore Louis XVI to the throne of France. He saw action in the major battle of Valmy on 20 September 1792. He then returned to civilian life but soon was called up again and took part in the French invasion of Spain in 1794. In 1795, Gergonne and his regiment were sent to Nîmes. At this point, he made a definitive transition to civilian life by taking up the chair of "transcendental mathematics" at the new École centrale. He came under the influence of Gaspard Monge, the Director of the new École polytechnique in Paris. In 1810, in response to difficulties he encountered in trying to publish his work, Gergonne founded his own mathematics journal, officially named the Annales de mathématiques pures et appliquées but generally referred to as the Annales de Gergonne. The most common subject of articles in his journal was geometry, Gergonne's specialty. Over a period of 22 years, the Annales de Gergonne published about 200 articles by Gergonne himself, and other articles by many distinguished mathematicians, including Poncelet, Servois, Bobillier, Steiner, Plücker, Chasles, Brianchon, Dupin, Lamé, even Galois. Gergonne was appointed to the chair of astronomy at the University of Montpellier in 1816. In 1830, he was appointed Rector of the University of Montpellier, at which time he ceased publishing his journal. He retired in 1844.   == Work == Gergonne was among the first mathematicians to employ the word polar. In a series of papers beginning in 1810, he contributed to elaborating the principle of duality in projective geometry, by noticing that every theorem in the plane connecting points and lines corresponds to another theorem in which points and lines are interchanged, provided that the theorem embodied no metrical notions. Gergonne was an early proponent of the techniques of analytical geometry and in 1816, he devised an elegant coordinate solution to the classical problem of Apollonius: to find a circle which touches three given circles, thus demonstrating the power of the new methods. In 1813, Gergonne wrote the prize-winning essay for the Bordeaux Academy, Methods of synthesis and analysis in mathematics, unpublished to this day and known only via a summary. The essay is very revealing of Gergonne's philosophical ideas. He called for the abandonment of the words analysis and synthesis, claiming they lacked clear meanings. Surprisingly for a geometer, he suggested that algebra is more important than geometry at a time when algebra consisted almost entirely of the elementary algebra of the real field. He predicted that one day quasi-mechanical methods would be used to discover new results. In 1815, Gergonne wrote the first paper on the optimal design of experiments for polynomial regression. According to S. M. Stigler, Gergonne is the pioneer of optimal design as well as response surface methodology. He published his "Essai sur la théorie des définitions" (An essay on the theory of definition) in his Annales in 1818. This essay is generally credited for first recognizing and naming the construct of implicit definition.   == Quote == "It is not possible to feel satisfied at having said the last word about some theory as long as it cannot be explained in a few words to any passer-by encountered in the street."   == Notes ==   == References == Gergonne, J. D. (November 1974) [1815]. "The application of the method of least squares to the interpolation of sequences". Historia Mathematica (Translated by Ralph St. John and S. M. Stigler from the 1815 French ed.) 1 (4): 439–447. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(74)90034-2.  Stigler, Stephen M. (November 1974). "Gergonne's 1815 paper on the design and analysis of polynomial regression experiments". Historia Mathematica 1 (4): 431–439. doi:10.1016/0315-0860(74)90033-0.    == External links == Biography in the MacTutor History of Mathematics archive: Joseph Gergonne.

Józef Maria Bocheński (Czuszów, Congress Poland, Russian Empire, 30 August 1902 – February 8, 1995, Fribourg, Switzerland) was a Polish Dominican, logician and philosopher.   == Life == After taking part in the 1920 campaign against aggression of the Soviet Russia, he took up legal studies in Lwów, then studied economics in Poznań. Bocheński earned a doctorate in philosophy (he studied in Freiburg, 1928–31). He was also an alumnus of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum in Rome where he studied Sacred Theology from 1931 to 1934 earning a doctorate in Sacred Theology. Bocheński was a professor of logic at the Angelicum until 1940. During World War II he served as chaplain to Polish forces during the 1939 invasion of Poland, was taken prisoner of war, escaped the Germans and reached Rome. He joined the Polish Army and served as chaplain first in France, then in England. He fought as a soldier in 1944 in the Italian campaign of the Polish II Corps at Monte Cassino. In 1945 he received the chair in the history of twentieth-century philosophy at the University of Fribourg (of which he was rector in 1964-66); he founded and ran the Institute of Eastern Europe there, and published the journal Studies in Soviet Thought and a book series concerned with the foundations of Marxist philosophy (Sovietica). Bocheński served as consultant to several governments: West Germany (under Konrad Adenauer), South Africa, the United States, Argentina, and Switzerland. Before 1989 none of his works were published officially in Poland.   == The Cracow Circle == Bocheński is perhaps the most famous exponent of the Cracow Circle, which has been called "the most significant expression of Catholic thought between the two World Wars." The Circle was founded by a group of philosophers and theologians that, in distinction from traditional neo-Thomism, embraced modern formal logic and it applied to traditional Thomist philosophy and theology. Inspired by the logical clarity of Aquinas, members of the Circle held both philosophy and theology to contain "propositions with truth-values…a structured body of propositions connected in meaning and subject matter, and linked by logical relations of compatibility and incompatibility, entailment etc." "The Cracow Circle set about investigating and where possible improving this logical structure with the most advanced logical tools available at the time, namely those of modern mathematical logic, then called ‘logistic’."  Other members of the Circle included Jan Salamucha and Jan F. Drewnowski.   == Précis de logique mathématique == In Bocheński's Précis de logique mathématique, he uses this notation, in the style of Łukasiewicz:   == The logical hexagon for the square of opposition == Robert Blanché quoted a passage of Bochenski’s Formale Logik in Structure intellectuelles (1966, 39): “Hindu logic knows of three logical propositions and not the four of western logic. For it Some S are P does not signify Some S at least are P but Some S are P but not all.” This passage shows that Indian tradition explicitly speaks of the existence of partial quantity, the third quantity to be considered along with totality apprehended by A the universal affirmative of the square, and zero quantity apprehended by E the universal negative of the square. To the two universals A and E entertaining a relationship of contrariety, one should add the third contrary constituted by the double negation of the first two. As the subcontrary I contradicts E and the subcontrary O contradicts A, the logical proposition apprehending partial quantity can be represented by the conjunction of I and O : I & O. In Blanché’s logical hexagon this conjunction is symbolized by the letter Y. Many scholars think that the logical square of opposition, representing four values, should be replaced by the logical hexagon, which has the power to express more relations of opposition.   == Works == Elementa logicae graecae (1937), Rome: Anonima Libraria Catolica Italiana. Manuale di filosofia bolscevica (1946) La logique de Théophraste (1947), 1987 reprint, New York, Garland Publishing. Europäische Philosophie der Gegenwart (1947), Bern: A. Francke. Précis de logique mathématique (1948), Bussum, North Holland: F. G. Kroonder. ABC tomizmu (1950), London: Veritas. Der sowjetrussische Dialektische Materialismus (1950) Ancient formal logic (1951) Szkice etyczne: Zebrał i ułożył Adam Bocheński (1953), London: Veritas. Die zeitgenössischen Denkmethoden (1954) Die kommunistische Ideologie und die Würde, Freiheit und Gleichheit der Menschen im Sinne des Grundgesetzes für die Bundesrepublik Deutschland vom 23.5.1949 (1956), [Bonn]: Bundeszentrale für Heimatdienst. Bibliographie der Sowietischen Philosophie (1959), Fribourg: Ost-Europa Institut. Formale Logik (1956) translated into English as A history of formal logic (1961) Der sowjetrussische dialektische Materialismus (Diamat) (1962) (co-edited with Gerhart Niemayer) Handbook on Communism(1962), New York: Praeger. The Logic of Religion (1965) Wege zum philosophischen Denken (1967) Guide to Marxist philosophy: an introductory bibliography (1972), Chicago: Swallow Press. Philosophy, an introduction (1972), New York: Harper & Row. Marxismus-Leninismus. Wissenschaft oder Glaube? (1973), München: Olzog. Was ist Autorität?: Einf. in d. Logik d. Autorität (1974), Fribourg: Herder. Logic and Ontology (1974) Sto zabobonów. Krótki filozoficzny słownik zabobonów ("One Hundred Superstitions. A Short Philosophical Dictionary of Superstitions", 1987). Logika i filosofia (1993) Miedzy logika a wiara (1994) Szkice o nacionalizmie i katolicyzmie polskim (1994), Komorów: Wydawn. Antyk, Marcin Dybowski. Wspomnienia (1994), Kraków: Philed. Lewica, religia, sowietologica (1996), Warsaw: Zakon Ojców Dominikanów. The Road to Understanding. More than Dreamt of in Your Philosophy (1996), ISBN 1-886670-06-4   == See also == Analytical Thomism History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles   == Notes ==   == References ==

Juan Luis Vives (Latin: Ioannes Lodovicus Vives; Catalan: Joan Lluís Vives i March; Dutch: Jan Ludovicus Vives; 6 March 1493 – 6 May 1540) was a Valencian scholar and humanist who spent most of his adult life in the Southern Netherlands. His beliefs on the soul, insight into early medical practice, and perspective on emotions, memory and learning earned him the title of the "father" of modern psychology.  Vives was the first to shed light on some key ideas that established how we perceive psychology today.   == Early life == Vives was born in Valencia to a family which had converted to Christianity. As a child, he saw his father, grandmother and great-grandfather, as well as members of their wider family, executed as Judaizers at the behest of the Spanish Inquisition; his mother was acquitted but died of the plague when he was 15 years old. Shortly thereafter, he left Spain never to return. While still in Spain, he attended the Valencia Academy, where he was taught by Jerome Amiguetus and Daniel Siso. The school was dominated by scholasticism, with the dialectic and disputation playing a central role in the delivery of education.  Even the youngest scholars are accustomed never to keep silence; they are always asserting vigorously whatever comes uppermost to their minds, lest they should seem to be giving up the dispute. Nor does one disputation, or even two a day prove sufficient, as for instance at dinner. They wrangle at breakfast; they wrangle after breakfast; they wrangle before supper and they wrangle after supper. At home they dispute, out of doors they dispute. They wrangle over their food, in the bath, in the sweating room, in the church, in the town, in the country, in public, in private. At all times they are wrangling.   == Academic career == He studied at the University of Paris from 1509 to 1512, and in 1519 was appointed professor of humanities at the University of Leuven. At the insistence of his friend Erasmus, he prepared an elaborate commentary on Augustine's De Civitate Dei, which was published in 1522 with a dedication to Henry VIII of England. Soon afterwards, he was invited to England, and acted as tutor to the Princess Mary, for whose use he wrote De ratione studii puerilis epistolae duae (1523) and, ostensibly, De Institutione Feminae Christianae, on the education of girls (a book he dedicated to the English queen Catherine of Aragon). While in England, he resided at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, where he was made doctor of laws and lectured on philosophy. Having declared himself against the annulment of the marriage of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon, he lost royal favour and was confined to his house for six weeks. On his release, he withdrew to Bruges, where he devoted the rest of his life to the composition of numerous works, chiefly directed against the scholastic philosophy and the preponderant unquestioning authority of Aristotle. The most important of his treatises is the De Causis Corruptarum Artium, which has been ranked with Bacon's Organon. His most important pedagogic work are Introductio ad sapientiam (1524); De disciplinis, which stressed the urgent importance of more rational programs of studying; De prima philosophia; and the Exercitatio linguae latinae, which is a Latin textbook consisting of a series of brilliant dialogues. His philosophical works include De anima et vita (1538), De veritate fidei Christianae; and "De Subventione Pauperum Sive de Humanis Necessitatibus" (On Assistance To The Poor) (1526), the first tract of its kind in the Western world to treat the problem of urban poverty and propose concrete suggestions for a policy of social legislation. Vives detected through philological analysis that the supposed author of the so-called Letter of Aristeas, purporting to describe the Biblical translation of the Septuagint, could not have been a Greek but must have been a Jew who lived after the events he described had transpired. He died in Bruges in 1540, at the age of 47, and was buried in the St. Donatian's Cathedral.   == State assistance for those in poverty == During the Middle Ages, poor relief was usually the responsibility of the Church and individuals through almsgiving. As society became more advanced, these efforts became inadequate. In 1525, the Dutch city of Bruges requested Vives to suggest means to address the issue of relief for the poor. He set out his views in his essay De Subventione Pauperum Sive de Humanis Necessitatibus (On Assistance To The Poor). Vives argued that the state had a responsibility to provide some level of financial relief for the poor, as well as craft training for the unskilled poor. The city of Bruges did not implement Vives's suggestions until 1557, but his proposals influenced social relief legislation enacted in England and the German Empire during the 1530s.   == Contemporary relevance == Vives imagined and described a comprehensive theory of education. He may have directly influenced the essays of Michel Eyquem de Montaigne. He was admired by Thomas More and Erasmus, who wrote that Vives "will overshadow the name of Erasmus." Vives is considered the first scholar to analyze the psyche directly. He did extensive interviews with people, and noted the relation between their exhibition of affect and the particular words they used and the issues they were discussing. While it is unknown if Freud was familiar with Vives's work, historian of psychiatry Gregory Zilboorg considered Vives a godfather of psychoanalysis. (A History of Medical Psychology, 1941) and the father of modern psychology by Foster Watson (1915.) Vives taught monarchs. His idea of a diverse and concrete children's education long preceded Jean Jacques Rousseau, and may have indirectly influenced Rousseau through Montaigne. However influential he may have been in the 16th century, Vives now attracts minimal interest beyond specialized academic fields. The values of Vives inspired two Belgian Schools for higher education (KATHO and Katholieke Hogeschool Brugge-Oostende) to choose the name ‘Vives’ as the name for their cooperation/merger starting from September 2013. Also, the regional link of Vives with the province of West Flanders (Bruges is the capital of this province) played a role.   === Gender Roles and Responsibilities === Some see Vives altering classical rhetoric to express his own sort of pro-virginity half-feminism - which remains of interest to historians of gender. Among 16th century Spain's numerous "treatises for and against women," some see Vives "steer[ing] a middle path" (p. xxiv-xxv), neither misogynist nor sanctifying. Others see him as prescribing quite patriarchal and misogynistic views. He stated that women should not be educators: "For Adam was created first, then Eve, and Adam was not seduced but the woman was seduced and led astray. Therefore, since woman is a weak creature and of uncertain judgment and is easily deceived (as Eve, the first parent of mankind, demonstrated, whom the devil deluded with such a slight pretext), she should not teach, lest when she has convinced herself of some false opinion, she transmit it to her listeners in her role as a teacher and easily drag others into her error, since pupils willingly follow their teacher." His De institutione feminae christianae, published in 1523, was commissioned by Catherine of Aragon, Catholic Queen consort of Henry VIII of England, for her daughter, Mary to instruct her on the proper roles for her sex. Interestingly, it forbids the very role Queen regnant Elizabeth I would later fulfill with the support of England and its navy in defeating the Armada of Catholic Spain, originating from the country of the Catholic Monarchs, Catherine of Aragon's parents and leaders of the Spanish Inquisition that executed Vives' relatives: “An unmarried young woman should rarely appear in public . . . who can have respect for a man who he sees is ruled by a woman?”" The book describes a longer list of attributes for a married woman. She must be loyal, dedicated, and obedient to her spouse; she must dress appropriately, covering her face in public; she must not allow any man into her house without her husband’s permission. While a wife’s obedience and dedication to her spouse determined her honor, a husband’s honor stemmed from his ability to control his wife and ensure she remained virtuous. Vives’s text for husbands, De los deberes del marido, fills less than half the pages of his advice book for women and focuses substantially on selecting and governing a good wife rather than detailing how a husband should behave in his own right.   === Thoughts on the soul === Vives expressed an interest in the soul. He believed that understanding how the soul functions is more valuable than understanding the soul itself. “He was not concerned with what the soul is, but rather what the soul was like”. Norena explains that Vives thought that the soul had certain characteristics. He believed that the best part of the soul is its ability to "…understand, remember, reason, and judge."  Vives touched on the mind in terms of his explanations of the soul—he claims that one cannot simply define what the soul is, but by piecing together parts of it, a better concept of how the soul works can be achieved. He compared the soul to art with an analogy by stating: “How we perceive a painted picture is more telling than declaring what the picture is itself”. Vives rejected the deterministic view of human behavior, and said instead that our soul can "modify our behavior in ethically and socially." He also suggested that the way we feel day to day affects whether our soul is attaining good or evil.   === Insight on medicine === Vives is acknowledged for integrating psychology and medicine. “His ideas were new and they paved the way for other contributions that have greatly impacted our society today in terms of how we view the impact of medicine on humans”. He expressed the importance of animal testing before doing so on to people -–“Although Vives did not perform actual medical procedures, his suggestions were among the first of his time."  Vives had hopes that his ideas would influence the public. “With time, some may argue that a sort of social reform was created largely due to Vives’ ideas on medicine”. Clements described Vives’ contributions as being “original," yet many would classify him as being very underrated in terms of his accomplishments and ideas. Vives also made important early observations on the health of the human body-—he urged that “Personal habits of cleanliness and temperance greatly impacted health”. He claimed that the cleanliness of the body impacts the welfare of the body and the mind. He touched on how to medicate the mentally unstable by saying that mocking, exciting, and irritating those individuals who are mentally ill does not contribute to their treatment. Vives said that “Using the mentally ill as a form of entertainment is one of the most inhumane practices he had ever encountered”. His belief was that the some individuals who are mentally ill should be provided medication, but others just need friendly treatment.   === Emotions and the body === Another psychological contribution from Vives involves his thoughts on emotion. His ideas were largely influenced by the ideologies that came from Galen and Hippocrates in terms of how emotion is related to biles in the body. He agreed with the two with the belief that “different colored biles that humans have reflected different types of emotions”. Further, Vives believed that “Certain emotions color bile inside of human bodies and colored bodies likewise influences emotions”. According to Norena, Vives followed Galen’s recommendations of eating certain types of food for certain types of temperaments. Vives also suggested that almost all of our emotions, even those considered to be negative, are actually beneficial in a lot of ways. He expressed how there is potential to learn and grow from negative emotions as well as positive emotions. His emphasis on animism, or animal spirits, influenced Decartes according to Clements. Vives suggested in his work that the degree in which how strongly a person believes in his or her morals have a great impact on the way they feel about themselves-—“mental strength can influence physical strength”. Emotions, according to Vives, can be divided up into “Hot, cold, moist, dry, and varying combinations of the four”. Personality disturbances with emotions could be fixed when applying the correct temperature on to the body.   === Memory === Vives placed emphasis on memory. He defined memory as “…relating to the past, while perception relates to the present”. “Memory is something that is retained by either externally or internally perceiving it”.  He especially emphasized how humans imagine something internally and connect it with an event in order to create a memory. This, according to Vives, makes information retrieval of memory easier. He touched on memories in which we are unaware of, otherwise known as the unconscious. He said information is the “Most accessible from memory when a certain amount of attention is given." According to Murray, Vives showed understanding of the modern-day conception of how humans process retrieval. Vives observed that the more a memory is connected to a strong emotional experience, the easier it can be remembered. In terms of retaining memory, imagination was thought to play a key role, especially in children.  He also believed in a theory that pointed towards the fact that memory can be improved with practice. He advised that "One should memorize something every day, even a useless quotation." Vives even touched on childhood memory-—he believed that children learn quickly because their mind is less cluttered with worries that adult minds have. Vives also believed that recall of memory is brought about by a concept in which the soul processes the memory. Vives himself had a recall experience as a child where he ate cherries when he had a fever. When he was adult and had cherries again and he "felt as though he was sick just as he was when he was a child." He found this remarkable and determined that memory can exist unconsciously for a very long time. He also believed that “memory declines every day that the mind is not exercised."   === Learning === Vives used the word “intelligence” in a way that can be translated to the word “supervisor” as we know its meaning today: intelligence, according to Vives, involves functions directing attention from different kinds of stimulus. Intelligence is very much a cognitive structure according to Vives. When we learn, the memory of the experience is locked in an order of the actual intelligence. Vives’ perception on intelligence is that it is only important when it is put to use. Having an intelligent gift is only meaningful when the person is actively exercising it. The exercising of intelligence is important in retaining memory, which creates a better learning experience in general. Vives was among the first to suggest that the health of a student, the personality of the teacher, the classroom environment and the types of authors that the students are required to read from are all very important in how the student learns. “Vives placed special stress upon the proper environment of the school as the first ecological ingredient of the child’s sense experience." He compared learning and gaining knowledge to how humans digest food. Feeding the mind with knowledge is the same as feeding the body with food; it is essential to the human being.   == Major works ==  Opuscula varia (1519), collection of small works include Vives' first philosophical works, De initiis, sectis et laudibus philosophiae. Adversus pseudodialecticos (1520) De subventione pauperum. Sive de humanis necessitatibus libri II (1525), dealing with the problem of poverty. De Europae dissidis et Republica (1526). De concordia et discordia in humano genere (1529). De pacificatione (1529). Quam misera esset vita chistianorum sub Turca (1529). De disciplinis libri XX (1531). An encyclopedical work, divided into three parts: De causis corruptarum artium, De tradendis disciplinis and De artibus De conscribendis epistolis (1534), a treatise on letter writing. De anima et vita (1538) De Europeae statu ac tumultibus, a mediation addressing to the Pope to ask peace between the Christian princes. Introductio ad sapientiam (1524), the most important of his pedagogical works. De institutione feminae christianae, was dedicated to Catherine of Aragon.   == See also == Vives Network   == Notes ==   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Vives, Juan Luis". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   Lejay, Paul (1913). "Juan Luis Vives". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.  Clements, R. D. (1967). "Physiological-Psychological Thought in Juan Luis Vives". Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 3: 219–235. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(196707)3:3<219::aid-jhbs2300030302>3.0.co;2-r.  "JUAN LUIS VIVES (1492?-1540), by Ricardo Marín Ibáñez, Prospects: the quarterly review of comparative education (Paris, UNESCO: International Bureau of Education), vol. XXIV, no. 3/4, 1994, p. 743-759. UNESCO: International Bureau of Education, 2000 Murray, D. J., & Ross, H. E. (1982). "Memory and Recall." Canadian Psychology, 23, 22-30. Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org.ezproxy.umw.edu/journals/cap/23/1/22.pdf Norena, C. G. (1970). Juan Luis Vives. The Hague: Nijhoff. Watson, F. (September 1915). The Psychological Review: "The Father of Modern Psychology." Archive.org, Vol. XXII. No. 5. Retrieved from http://archive.org/stream/psychologicalrev22ameruoft#page/332/mode/2up   == Further reading == Carlos G. Noreňa, Jean Louis Vives, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1970. Charles Fantazzi (ed.), A Companion to Juan Luis Vives, Leiden: Brill, 2008 (Brill's Companions to the Christian Tradition, 12).   == External links ==  Media related to Juan Luis Vives at Wikimedia Commons Juan Luis Vives (Joannes Ludovicus Vives) at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Karel Lambert (born 1928) is a philosopher and logician at the University of California, Irvine and the University of Salzburg. He has written extensively on the subject of free logic, a term which he coined.   == Lambert's Law == Lambert's Law is the major principle in any free definite description theory that says: For all x, x = the y (A) if and only if (A(x/y) & for all y (if A then y = x)). Free logic itself is an adjustment of a given standard predicate logic such as to relieve it of existential assumptions, and so make it a free logic. Taking Bertrand Russell's predicate logic in his Principia Mathematica as standard, one replaces universal instantiation, , with universal specification . Thus universal statements, like "All men are mortal," or "Everything is a unicorn," do not presuppose that there are men or that there is anything. These would be symbolized, with the appropriate predicates, as  and , which in Principia Mathematica entail  and , but not in free logic. The truth of these last statements, when used in a free logic, depend on the domain of quantification, which may be the null set.   == Published works == Philosophical Applications of Free Logic, New York: Oxford University Press, 1991, "A Theory of Definite Descriptions", pp. 17-27, details an account of Russell's Theory of Descriptions in free logic. In the process, he demonstrates how a formulation from Hintikka allows for a contradiction by a correlate in logic to Russell's Paradox. He introduces the predicate  Free Logic. Selected Essays, Cambridge University Press, 2003.   == External links == Official Personal Page at Internet Archive   == References == ^ Lambert, Karel (1960). "The Definition of E! in Free Logic". Abstracts: The International Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press).

Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz (12 December 1890 – 12 April 1963) was a Polish philosopher and logician, a prominent figure in the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic. He originated many novel ideas in semantics. Among these was categorial grammar, a highly flexible framework for the analysis of natural language syntax and (indirectly) semantics that remains a major influence on work in formal linguistics. Ajdukiewicz's fields of research were model theory and the philosophy of science. Ajdukiewicz studied at the University of Lwów, and lectured there, as well as in Warsaw and in Poznań. He was Rector of the University of Poznań from 1948 to 1952. He was one of the founders of the journal Studia Logica in its current incarnation, editing it from 1953 to his death. In his early epistemological system, which he called Radical Conventionalism, Ajdukiewicz analyzed any language as a set of expressions or sentences, with inferential rules of meaning that specify the relation of one expression to another, or to external data. There are three kinds of rules: Axiomatic, Deductive, and Empirical. Following the rules, one can map all knowable sentences of a language. However, some languages' vocabularies can produce disconnected sentences, which are only partly mapped by the meaning rules. Therefore, when one uses a language, even scientific one, a conceptual apparatus, an untranslatable set of meanings, is needed too, and with it a choice of the problems to be settled. For this reason the theory is a form of Conventionalism, and it is radical because even simple experiential reports are exposed to these language-wide considerations. Ajdukiewicz discarded this theory as the 1930s progressed.   == Works == 1921 "Z metodologii nauk dedukcyjnych" 1923 "Główne kierunki filozofii" 1928 "Główne zasady metodologii nauk i logiki formalnej" 1931 "O znaczeniu wyrażeń" 1934 "Logiczne podstawy nauczania" 1938 "Propedeutyka filozofii" 1948 "Epistemologia i semantyka" 1949 "Zagadnienia i kierunki filozofii" 1952 "Zarys logiki" 1964 "Zagadnienia empiryzmu a koncepcja znaczenia" 1965 "Logika pragmatyczna" 1960-1965 "Język i poznanie. Wybór pism" 1966- Selected articles in "Logiczna Teoria Nauki" ( Logical Theory of Science) Ed. T.Pawłowski, Printed PWN, Warszawa.   == Bibliography == Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: The Scientific World-Perspective and Other essays 1931-1963, Dordrecht, Reidel, 1977 Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: Problems and Theories of Philosophy, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: Pragmatic Logic, Dordrecht, Reidel, 1974.   == See also == History of philosophy in Poland   == External links == Polish Philosophy Page: Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz Lwów–Warsaw school of logic, at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Sections on Categorial Grammar and Radical Conventionalism.

Kazimierz Jerzy Skrzypna-Twardowski (20 October 1866 – 11 February 1938) was a Polish philosopher and logician.   == Life == Twardowski's family belonged to the Ogończyk coat of arms. Twardowski studied philosophy in Vienna with Franz Brentano and Robert Zimmermann. In 1892 he received his doctorate with his dissertation, Idee und Perzeption (Idea and Perception), and in 1894 he presented his habilitation thesis, Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen (On the Doctrine of the Content and Object of Presentations). He originated many novel ideas related to metaphilosophy. He lectured in Vienna in the years 1894–95, then was appointed professor at Lwów (Lemberg in Austrian Galicia, now Lviv in the Ukraine). An outstanding lecturer, he was also a rector of the Lwów University during World War I. There Twardowski established the Lwów-Warsaw School of logic and also became the "father of Polish logic", beginning the tradition of scientific philosophy in Poland. Among his students were the logicians Stanisław Leśniewski, Jan Łukasiewicz and Tadeusz Czeżowski, the historian of philosophy Władysław Tatarkiewicz, the phenomenologist and aesthetician Roman Ingarden, as well as philosophers close to the Vienna Circle such as Tadeusz Kotarbiński and Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz.   == Content and object == In his On the Content and Object of Presentations, Twardowski argues for a distinction between content and object in the frame of the theory of intentionality of his teacher Franz Brentano. According to him the mind is divided in two main areas: acts or mental phenomena, and a physical phenomenon. For example, an act of presentation is aimed at a presentation. This is what he called ‘intentionality’, aboutness. Every act is about something, but also every presentation goes together with an act of presentation. This theory suffers from the problem that it is not clear what the presentation exactly is. Is the presentation something only in the mind, or is it also in the world as object? Twardowski says that sometimes presentation is used for the object in the world and sometimes for the immanent content of a mental phenomena. Twardowski offers a solution for this problem and proposes to make a distinction between the content of a presentation and the object of a presentation. In his book Twardowski offers an analogy to clarify this distinction. He uses the example of a painting. People say of a landscape that it is painted, but also of a painting that it is painted. In the first case the word ‘painting’ is used in a modifying way (a painted landscape is not a landscape at all), while in the latter case the word painting is used in a qualitative or attributive way. Twardowski argues that presentations are similar. The content is the painted painting and the object is the painted landscape. The content resembles the present ‘picture’ in your mind, and the object the landscape.   == Works in German and Polish == Über den Unterschied zwischen der klaren und deutlichen Perzeption und der klaren und deutlichen Idee bei Descartes (1891) (Dissertation) Idee und perzeption. Eine erkenntnis-theoretische Untersuchung aus Descartes (1892) Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen (1894) Wyobrażenie i pojęcie (1898) O tzw. prawdach względnych (1900) Über sogenannte relative Wahrheiten (1902) Über begriffliche Vorstellungen (1903) Das Wesen der Begriffe allegato a Jahresbericht der Wiener philosophischen Gesellschaft (1903) O psychologii, jej przedmiocie, zadaniach, metodzie, stosunku do innych nauk i jej rozwoju (1913) Rozprawy i artykuły filozoficzne (1927) Wybrane pisma filozoficzne (1965) (Collection of the philosophical essays) Wybór pism psychologicznych i pedagogicznych (1992) (Collection of the psychological and pedagogical essays) Dzienniki (1997)   == Translations == On the Content and Object of Presentations. A Psychological Investigation. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff 1977. Translated and with an introduction by Reinhardt Grossmann. On Actions, Products and Other Topics in Philosophy. Edited by Johannes Brandl and Jan Wolenski. Amsterdam: Rodopi 1999. Translated and annotated by Arthur Szylewicz. Sur les objets intentionnels (1893–1901). Paris: Vrin 1993. French translation of Zur Lehre vom Inhalt und Gegenstand der Vorstellungen and other texts by Edmund Husserl.   == See also == School of Brentano Representationalism Lwów–Warsaw school of logic Polish logic History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles   == Notes ==   == References == Jens Cavallin, "Content and Object: Husserl, Twardowski and Psychologism", Phaenomenologica, 142, Dordrecht, Kluwer, 1997. Sandra Lapointe et al., (eds.), "The Golden Age of Polish philosophy. Kazimierz Twardowski's philosophical legacy". New York: Springer 2009.   == External links == Kazimierz Twardowski entry by Arianna Betti in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Kazimierz Twardowski at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Polish Philosophy Page: Kazimierz Twardowski Kazimierz Twardowski on the Content and Object of Presentations Annotated bibliography of and about Twardowski Archives of the Lvov-Varsovie School – Archiwum Kazimierza Twardowskiego Digital library of the works of Twardowski Lvov-Warsaw School entry by Jan Wolenski in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Kit Fine (born 26 March 1946) is a Silver Professor of Philosophy and Mathematics at New York University. He previously taught for several years at the University of Michigan and at UCLA. The author of several books and dozens of articles in international academic journals, he has made notable contributions to the fields of philosophical logic, metaphysics, and the philosophy of language and also has written on ancient philosophy, in particular on Aristotle's account of logic and modality. He is also a Distinguished Research Professor in the Department of Philosophy, University of Birmingham, UK.   == Life and writings == After graduating from the University of Oxford (B.A., 1967) Fine received his Ph.D. from the University of Warwick in 1969, under the supervision of A. N. Prior. He was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy in 2005 and a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences in 2006. He has held fellowships from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation and the American Council of Learned Societies and is a former editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic. In addition to his primary areas of research, he has written papers in ancient philosophy, linguistics, computer science, and economic theory. Fine has described his general approach to philosophy as follows: "I’m firmly of the opinion that real progress in philosophy can only come from taking common sense seriously. A departure from common sense is usually an indication that a mistake has been made." Fine has two daughters from his former mariage to Anne Fine. Anne Fine is an author of children's books; Cordelia Fine teaches at a university in Australia; Ione Fine is a professor at the University of Washington.   == Bibliography == Semantic Relationism. Blackwell, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4051-0844-7 Modality and Tense: Philosophical Papers. Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-19-927871-7 The Limits of Abstraction. Oxford University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-19-924618-1 Reasoning With Arbitrary Objects. Blackwell, 1986. ISBN 0-631-13844-7 Worlds, Times, and Selves (with A. N. Prior). University of Massachusetts Press, 1977. ISBN 0-87023-227-4   == Notes == ^ "Professor Kit Fine - Department of Philosophy - University of Birmingham". Birmingham.ac.uk. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "British Academy | Elections to the Fellowship 2005 - British Academy". Britac.ac.uk. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "Leiter Reports: A Philosophy Blog: New Philosophy Fellows of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences (Leiter)". Leiterreports.typepad.com. 2006-04-22. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "Kit Fine, Faculty of Philosophy | NYU". Philosophy.fas.nyu.edu. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ "Metaphysical Kit » 3:AM Magazine". 3ammagazine.com. 2012-03-23. Retrieved 2015-10-19.  ^ Salter, Jessica (14 September 2010). "World of Anne Fine, author". The Daily Telegraph (London).  ^ "FineLab homepage". Faculty.washington.edu. Retrieved 2015-07-15.    == References == Silver Dialogues: Kit Fine Kit Fine's CV   == External links == Fine's web page at New York University. Fine's web page at University of Birmingham. Annotated bibliography of Fine's writings (1970-1995). Annotated bibliography of Fine's writings (1996-2012). Interview with 3AM Magazine

Kurt Friedrich Gödel (/ˈkɜrt ɡɜrdəl/; German: [ˈkʊʁt ˈɡøːdəl]; April 28, 1906 – January 14, 1978) was an Austrian, and later American, logician, mathematician, and philosopher. Considered with Aristotle and Gottlob Frege to be one of the most significant logicians in history, Gödel made an immense impact upon scientific and philosophical thinking in the 20th century, a time when others such as Bertrand Russell, A. N. Whitehead, and David Hilbert were pioneering the use of logic and set theory to understand the foundations of mathematics. Gödel published his two incompleteness theorems in 1931 when he was 25 years old, one year after finishing his doctorate at the University of Vienna. The first incompleteness theorem states that for any self-consistent recursive axiomatic system powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natural numbers (for example Peano arithmetic), there are true propositions about the naturals that cannot be proved from the axioms. To prove this theorem, Gödel developed a technique now known as Gödel numbering, which codes formal expressions as natural numbers. He also showed that neither the axiom of choice nor the continuum hypothesis can be disproved from the accepted axioms of set theory, assuming these axioms are consistent. The former result opened the door for mathematicians to assume the axiom of choice in their proofs. He also made important contributions to proof theory by clarifying the connections between classical logic, intuitionistic logic, and modal logic.   == Early life and educationEdit ==   === ChildhoodEdit === Gödel was born April 28, 1906, in Brünn, Austria-Hungary (now Brno, Czech Republic) into the ethnic German family of Rudolf Gödel, the manager of a textile factory, and Marianne Gödel (born Handschuh). At the time of his birth the city had a German-speaking majority which included his parents. The marriage of his parents was confessionally mixed, his father being a Catholic and his mother a Protestant. The children were raised in the Protestant confession. The ancestors of Kurt Gödel were often active in Brünn's cultural life. For example, his grandfather Joseph Gödel was a famous singer of that time and for some years a member of the "Brünner Männergesangverein". Gödel automatically became a Czechoslovak citizen at age 12 when the Austro-Hungarian Empire broke up at the end of World War I. According to his classmate Klepetař, like many residents of the predominantly German Sudetenländer, "Gödel considered himself always Austrian and an exile in Czechoslovakia". He chose to become an Austrian citizen at age 23. When Germany annexed Austria in 1938, Gödel automatically became a German citizen at age 32. After World War II, at the age of 42, he became an American citizen. In his family, young Kurt was known as Herr Warum ("Mr. Why") because of his insatiable curiosity. According to his brother Rudolf, at the age of six or seven Kurt suffered from rheumatic fever; he completely recovered, but for the rest of his life he remained convinced that his heart had suffered permanent damage. Gödel attended the Evangelische Volksschule, a Lutheran school in Brünn from 1912 to 1916, and was enrolled in the Deutsches Staats-Realgymnasium from 1916 to 1924, excelling with honors in all his subjects, particularly in mathematics, languages and religion. Although Kurt had first excelled in languages, he later became more interested in history and mathematics. His interest in mathematics increased when in 1920 his older brother Rudolf (born 1902) left for Vienna to go to medical school at the University of Vienna. During his teens, Kurt studied Gabelsberger shorthand, Goethe's Theory of Colours and criticisms of Isaac Newton, and the writings of Immanuel Kant.   === Studying in ViennaEdit === At the age of 18, Gödel joined his brother in Vienna and entered the University of Vienna. By that time, he had already mastered university-level mathematics. Although initially intending to study theoretical physics, he also attended courses on mathematics and philosophy. During this time, he adopted ideas of mathematical realism. He read Kant's Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft, and participated in the Vienna Circle with Moritz Schlick, Hans Hahn, and Rudolf Carnap. Gödel then studied number theory, but when he took part in a seminar run by Moritz Schlick which studied Bertrand Russell's book Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, he became interested in mathematical logic. According to Gödel, mathematical logic was "a science prior to all others, which contains the ideas and principles underlying all sciences." Attending a lecture by David Hilbert in Bologna on completeness and consistency of mathematical systems may have set Gödel's life course. In 1928, Hilbert and Wilhelm Ackermann published Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik (Principles of Mathematical Logic), an introduction to first-order logic in which the problem of completeness was posed: Are the axioms of a formal system sufficient to derive every statement that is true in all models of the system? This became the topic that Gödel chose for his doctoral work. In 1929, at the age of 23, he completed his doctoral dissertation under Hans Hahn's supervision. In it, he established the completeness of the first-order predicate calculus (Gödel's completeness theorem). He was awarded his doctorate in 1930. His thesis, along with some additional work, was published by the Vienna Academy of Science.   == CareerEdit ==   === The Incompleteness TheoremEdit === In 1931 and while still in Vienna, Gödel published his incompleteness theorems in Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der "Principia Mathematica" und verwandter Systeme (called in English "On Formally Undecidable Propositions of "Principia Mathematica" and Related Systems"). In that article, he proved for any computable axiomatic system that is powerful enough to describe the arithmetic of the natural numbers (e.g. the Peano axioms or Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice), that: If the system is consistent, it cannot be complete. The consistency of the axioms cannot be proven within the system. These theorems ended a half-century of attempts, beginning with the work of Frege and culminating in Principia Mathematica and Hilbert's formalism, to find a set of axioms sufficient for all mathematics. In hindsight, the basic idea at the heart of the incompleteness theorem is rather simple. Gödel essentially constructed a formula that claims that it is unprovable in a given formal system. If it were provable, it would be false, which contradicts the idea that in a consistent system, provable statements are always true. Thus there will always be at least one true but unprovable statement. That is, for any computably enumerable set of axioms for arithmetic (that is, a set that can in principle be printed out by an idealized computer with unlimited resources), there is a formula that is true of arithmetic, but which is not provable in that system. To make this precise, however, Gödel needed to produce a method to encode (as natural numbers) statements, proofs, and the concept of provability; he did this using a process known as Gödel numbering. In his two-page paper Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkül (1932) Gödel refuted the finite-valuedness of intuitionistic logic. In the proof he implicitly used what has later become known as Gödel–Dummett intermediate logic (or Gödel fuzzy logic).   === The mid-1930s: further work and visits to the USEdit === Gödel earned his habilitation at Vienna in 1932, and in 1933 he became a Privatdozent (unpaid lecturer) there. In 1933 Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany, and over the following years the Nazis rose in influence in Austria, and among Vienna's mathematicians. In June 1936, Moritz Schlick, whose seminar had aroused Gödel's interest in logic, was assassinated by Johann Nelböck, a former student of Moritz Schlick. This triggered "a severe nervous crisis" in Gödel. He developed paranoid symptoms, including a fear of being poisoned, and spent several months in a sanitarium for nervous diseases. In 1933, Gödel first traveled to the U.S., where he met Albert Einstein, who became a good friend. He delivered an address to the annual meeting of the American Mathematical Society. During this year, Gödel also developed the ideas of computability and recursive functions to the point where he was able to present a lecture on general recursive functions and the concept of truth. This work was developed in number theory, using Gödel numbering. In 1934 Gödel gave a series of lectures at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) in Princeton, New Jersey, entitled On undecidable propositions of formal mathematical systems. Stephen Kleene, who had just completed his PhD at Princeton, took notes of these lectures that have been subsequently published. Gödel visited the IAS again in the autumn of 1935. The traveling and the hard work had exhausted him, and the next year he took a break to recover from a depressive episode. He returned to teaching in 1937. During this time, he worked on the proof of consistency of the axiom of choice and of the continuum hypothesis; he went on to show that these hypotheses cannot be disproved from the common system of axioms of set theory. He married Adele Nimbursky (née Porkert, 1899–1981), whom he had known for over 10 years, on September 20, 1938. Their relationship had been opposed by his parents on the grounds that she was a divorced dancer, six years older than he was. Subsequently, he left for another visit to the USA, spending the autumn of 1938 at the IAS and the spring of 1939 at the University of Notre Dame.   === Relocation to Princeton, Einstein and U.S. citizenshipEdit === After the Anschluss in 1938, Austria had become a part of Nazi Germany. Germany abolished the title Privatdozent, so Gödel had to apply for a different position under the new order. His former association with Jewish members of the Vienna Circle, especially with Hahn, weighed against him. The University of Vienna turned his application down. His predicament intensified when the German army found him fit for conscription. World War II started in September 1939. Before the year was up, Gödel and his wife left Vienna for Princeton. To avoid the difficulty of an Atlantic crossing, the Gödels took the trans-Siberian railway to the Pacific, sailed from Japan to San Francisco (which they reached on March 4, 1940), then crossed the U.S. by train to Princeton, where Gödel accepted a position at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS). Gödel very quickly resumed his mathematical work. In 1940, he published his work Consistency of the axiom of choice and of the generalized continuum-hypothesis with the axioms of set theory, which is a classic of modern mathematics. In that work he introduced the constructible universe, a model of set theory in which the only sets that exist are those that can be constructed from simpler sets. Gödel showed that both the axiom of choice (AC) and the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) are true in the constructible universe, and therefore must be consistent with the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms for set theory (ZF). This result has had considerable consequences for working mathematicians, as it means that they can assume the axiom of choice when proving the Hahn-Banach theorem. Paul Cohen later constructed a model of ZF in which AC and GCH are false; together these proofs mean that AC and GCH are independent of the ZF axioms for set theory. Albert Einstein was also living at Princeton during this time. Gödel and Einstein developed a strong friendship, and were known to take long walks together to and from the Institute for Advanced Study. The nature of their conversations was a mystery to the other Institute members. Economist Oskar Morgenstern recounts that toward the end of his life Einstein confided that his "own work no longer meant much, that he came to the Institute merely ... to have the privilege of walking home with Gödel". Gödel and his wife Adele spent the summer of 1942 in Blue Hill, Maine, at the Blue Hill Inn at the top of the bay. Gödel was not merely vacationing but had a very productive summer of work. Using Heft 15 [volume 15] of Gödel's still-unpublished Arbeitshefte [working notebooks], John W. Dawson, Jr. conjectures that Gödel discovered a proof for the independence of the axiom of choice from finite type theory, a weakened form of set theory, while in Blue Hill in 1942. Gödel's close friend Hao Wang supports this conjecture, noting that Gödel's Blue Hill notebooks contain his most extensive treatment of the problem. On December 5, 1947, Einstein and Morgenstern accompanied Gödel to his U.S. citizenship exam, where they acted as witnesses. Gödel had confided in them that he had discovered an inconsistency in the U.S. Constitution that could allow the U.S. to become a dictatorship. Einstein and Morgenstern were concerned that their friend's unpredictable behavior might jeopardize his application. Fortunately, the judge turned out to be Phillip Forman, who knew Einstein and had administered the oath at Einstein's own citizenship hearing. Everything went smoothly until Forman happened to ask Gödel if he thought a dictatorship like the Nazi regime could happen in the U.S. Gödel then started to explain his discovery to Forman. Forman understood what was going on, cut Gödel off, and moved the hearing on to other questions and a routine conclusion. Gödel became a permanent member of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton in 1946. Around this time he stopped publishing, though he continued to work. He became a full professor at the Institute in 1953 and an emeritus professor in 1976. During his many years at the Institute, Gödel's interests turned to philosophy and physics. In 1949, he demonstrated the existence of solutions involving closed time-like curves, to Albert Einstein's field equations in general relativity. He is said to have given this elaboration to Einstein as a present for his 70th birthday. His "rotating universes" would allow time travel to the past and caused Einstein to have doubts about his own theory. His solutions are known as the Gödel metric (an exact solution of the Einstein field equation). He studied and admired the works of Gottfried Leibniz, but came to believe that a hostile conspiracy had caused some of Leibniz's works to be suppressed. To a lesser extent he studied Immanuel Kant and Edmund Husserl. In the early 1970s, Gödel circulated among his friends an elaboration of Leibniz's version of Anselm of Canterbury's ontological proof of God's existence. This is now known as Gödel's ontological proof.   == Awards and honoursEdit == Gödel was awarded (with Julian Schwinger) the first Albert Einstein Award in 1951, and was also awarded the National Medal of Science, in 1974. Gödel was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1968.   == Later life and deathEdit == Later in his life, Gödel suffered periods of mental instability and illness. He had an obsessive fear of being poisoned; he would eat only food that his wife, Adele, prepared for him. Late in 1977, she was hospitalized for six months and could no longer prepare her husband's food. In her absence, he refused to eat, eventually starving to death. He weighed 65 pounds (approximately 30 kg) when he died. His death certificate reported that he died of "malnutrition and inanition caused by personality disturbance" in Princeton Hospital on January 14, 1978. Adele's death followed in 1981.   == Personal lifeEdit ==   === Religious viewsEdit === Gödel was a convinced theist, in the Christian tradition. He held the notion that God was personal, which differed from the religious views of his friend Albert Einstein. He believed firmly in an afterlife, stating: "Of course this supposes that there are many relationships which today's science and received wisdom haven't any inkling of. But I am convinced of this [the afterlife], independently of any theology." It is "possible today to perceive, by pure reasoning" that it "is entirely consistent with known facts." "If the world is rationally constructed and has meaning, then there must be such a thing [as an afterlife]." In an unmailed answer to a questionnaire, Gödel described his religion as "baptized Lutheran (but not member of any religious congregation). My belief is theistic, not pantheistic, following Leibniz rather than Spinoza." Describing religion(s) in general, Gödel said: "Religions are, for the most part, bad—but religion is not". According to his wife Adele, "Gödel, although he did not go to church, was religious and read the Bible in bed every Sunday morning", while of Islam, he said, "I like Islam: it is a consistent [or consequential] idea of religion and open-minded".   == LegacyEdit == The Kurt Gödel Society, founded in 1987, was named in his honor. It is an international organization for the promotion of research in the areas of logic, philosophy, and the history of mathematics. The University of Vienna hosts the Kurt Gödel Research Center for Mathematical Logic. The Association for Symbolic Logic has invited an annual Kurt Gödel lecturer each year since 1990. Five volumes of Gödel's collected works have been published. The first two include Gödel's publications; the third includes unpublished manuscripts from Gödel's Nachlass, and the final two include correspondence. A biography of Gödel was published by John Dawson in 2005. Gödel was also one of four mathematicians examined in the 2008 BBC documentary entitled Dangerous Knowledge by David Malone. Douglas Hofstadter wrote a popular book in 1979 called Gödel, Escher, Bach to celebrate the work and ideas of Gödel, along with those of artist M. C. Escher and composer Johann Sebastian Bach. The book partly explores the ramifications of the fact that Gödel's incompleteness theorem can be applied to any Turing-complete computational system, which may include the human brain. Gödel is the main character of Daniel Kehlmann's play Ghosts in Princeton (2011).   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Important publicationsEdit === In German: 1930, "Die Vollständigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalküls." Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 37: 349–60. 1931, "Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme, I." Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38: 173–98. 1932, "Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkül", Anzeiger Akademie der Wissenschaften Wien 69: 65–66. In English: 1940. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory. Princeton University Press. 1947. "What is Cantor's continuum problem?" The American Mathematical Monthly 54: 515–25. Revised version in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam, eds., 1984 (1964). Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Cambridge Univ. Press: 470–85. 1950, "Rotating Universes in General Relativity Theory." Proceedings of the international Congress of Mathematicians in Cambridge, 1: 175–81 In English translation: Kurt Godel, 1992. On Formally Undecidable Propositions Of Principia Mathematica And Related Systems, tr. B. Meltzer, with a comprehensive introduction by Richard Braithwaite. Dover reprint of the 1962 Basic Books edition. Kurt Godel, 2000. On Formally Undecidable Propositions Of Principia Mathematica And Related Systems, tr. Martin Hirzel Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. 1930. "The completeness of the axioms of the functional calculus of logic," 582–91. 1930. "Some metamathematical results on completeness and consistency," 595–96. Abstract to (1931). 1931. "On formally undecidable propositions of Principia Mathematica and related systems," 596–616. 1931a. "On completeness and consistency," 616–17.  "My philosophical viewpoint", c. 1960, unpublished. "The modern development of the foundations of mathematics in the light of philosophy", 1961, unpublished. Collected Works: Oxford University Press: New York. Editor-in-chief: Solomon Feferman. Volume I: Publications 1929–1936 ISBN 978-0-19-503964-1 / Paperback:ISBN 978-0-19-514720-9, Volume II: Publications 1938–1974 ISBN 978-0-19-503972-6 / Paperback:ISBN 978-0-19-514721-6, Volume III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures ISBN 978-0-19-507255-6 / Paperback:ISBN 978-0-19-514722-3, Volume IV: Correspondence, A–G ISBN 978-0-19-850073-5, Volume V: Correspondence, H–Z ISBN 978-0-19-850075-9.   == See alsoEdit ==  Gödel machine Gödel Prize Gödel's speed-up theorem List of Austrian scientists Original proof of Gödel's completeness theorem Slingshot argument   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Dawson, John W., 1997. Logical dilemmas: The life and work of Kurt Gödel. Wellesley MA: A K Peters. 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica/Brünn. (September 19, 2007). In Wikisource, The Free Library. Retrieved 10 pm EST March 13, 2008. Rebecca Goldstein, 2005. Incompleteness: The Proof and Paradox of Kurt Gödel. W. W. Norton & Company, New York. ISBN 0-393-32760-4 pbk.   == Further readingEdit == John L. Casti and Werner DePauli, 2000. Gödel: A Life of Logic, Basic Books (Perseus Books Group), Cambridge, MA. ISBN 0-7382-0518-4. John W. Dawson, Jr. Logical Dilemmas: The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel. AK Peters, Ltd., 1996. John W. Dawson, Jr, 1999. "Gödel and the Limits of Logic", Scientific American, vol. 280 num. 6, pp. 76–81 Torkel Franzén, 2005. Gödel's Theorem: An Incomplete Guide to Its Use and Abuse. Wellesley, MA: A K Peters. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton Univ. Press. Jaakko Hintikka, 2000. On Gödel. Wadsworth. Douglas Hofstadter, 1980. Gödel, Escher, Bach. Vintage. Stephen Kleene, 1967. Mathematical Logic. Dover paperback reprint ca. 2001. Stephen Kleene, 1980. Introduction to Metamathematics. North Holland ISBN 0-7204-2103-9 (Ishi Press paperback. 2009. ISBN 978-0-923891-57-2) J.R. Lucas, 1970. The Freedom of the Will. Clarendon Press, Oxford. Ernest Nagel and Newman, James R., 1958. Gödel's Proof. New York Univ. Press. Procházka, Jiří, 2006, 2006, 2008, 2008, 2010. Kurt Gödel: 1906–1978: Genealogie. ITEM, Brno. Volume I. Brno 2006, ISBN 80-902297-9-4. In Ger., Engl. Volume II. Brno 2006, ISBN 80-903476-0-6. In Germ., Engl. Volume III. Brno 2008, ISBN 80-903476-4-9. In Germ., Engl. Volume IV. Brno, Princeton 2008, ISBN 978-80-903476-5-6. In Germ., Engl. Volume V,Brno,Princeton 2010, ISBN 80-903476-9-X. In Germ., Engl. Procházka, Jiří, 2012. "Kurt Gödel: 1906–1978: Historie". ITEM,Brno, Wien, Princeton. Volume I. ISBN 978-80-903476-2-5. In Ger., Engl. Ed Regis, 1987. Who Got Einstein's Office? Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc. Raymond Smullyan, 1992. Godel's Incompleteness Theorems. Oxford University Press. Olga Taussky-Todd, 1983. Remembrances of Kurt Gödel. Engineering & Science, Winter 1988. Hao Wang, 1987. Reflections on Kurt Gödel. MIT Press. Hao Wang, 1996. A Logical Journey: From Godel to Philosophy. MIT Press. Yourgrau, Palle, 1999. Gödel Meets Einstein: Time Travel in the Gödel Universe. Chicago: Open Court. Yourgrau, Palle, 2004. A World Without Time: The Forgotten Legacy of Gödel and Einstein. Basic Books. Book review by John Stachel in the Notices of the American Mathematical Society (54 (7), pp. 861–868):   == External linksEdit == Kurt Gödel at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Weisstein, Eric W., Gödel, Kurt (1906–1978) from ScienceWorld. Kennedy, Juliette. "Kurt Gödel." In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Time Bandits: an article about the relationship between Gödel and Einstein by Jim Holt "Gödel and the limits of logic" by John W Dawson Jr. (June 2006) Notices of the AMS, April 2006, Volume 53, Number 4 Kurt Gödel Centenary Issue Paul Davies and Freeman Dyson discuss Kurt Godel "Gödel and the Nature of Mathematical Truth" Edge: A Talk with Rebecca Goldstein on Kurt Gödel. It's Not All In The Numbers: Gregory Chaitin Explains Gödel's Mathematical Complexities. Gödel photo g. Kurt Gödel at Find a Grave National Academy of Sciences Biographical Memoir O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Kurt Gödel", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Kurt Schütte (14 October 1909, Salzwedel – 18 August 1998, Munich) was a German mathematician who worked on proof theory and ordinal analysis. The Feferman–Schütte ordinal, which he showed to be the precise ordinal bound for predicativity, is named after him.   == PublicationsEdit == Schütte, Kurt (1977), Proof theory, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 225, Berlin-New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. xii+299, ISBN 3-540-07911-4, MR 0505313 Beweistheorie, Springer, Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften, 1960; new edition trans. into English as Proof Theory, Springer-Verlag 1977  Vollständige Systeme modaler und intuitionistischer Logik, Springer 1968 with Wilfried Buchholz: Proof Theory of Impredicative Subsystems of Analysis, Bibliopolis, Naples 1988 with Helmut Schwichtenberg: Mathematische Logik, in Fischer, Hirzebruch et al. (eds.) Ein Jahrhundert Mathematik 1890-1990, Vieweg 1990   == ReferencesEdit ==  Pohlers, Wolfram (2000), "In Memoriam: Kurt Schütte, 1909-1998", The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 6 (1): 101–102  Wilfried Buchholz (2007), "Schütte, Kurt", Neue Deutsche Biographie (NDB) (in German) 23, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot, pp. 653–654 ; (full text online)   == External linksEdit == Kurt Schütte at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

L. T. F. Gamut was a collective pseudonym for the Dutch logicians Johan van Benthem, Jeroen Groenendijk, Dick de Jongh, Martin Stokhof and Henk Verkuyl. Gamut stands for the Dutch universities of Groningen (G), Amsterdam (am), and Utrecht (ut), then the affiliations of the authors. The initials L. T. F. stand for the discussed topics, respectively, Logic (Dutch: Logica), Language (Dutch: Taal) and Philosophy (Dutch: Filosofie).   == References ==   == Publications == Logica, taal en betekenis I: inleiding in de logica, Het Spectrum, 1982. (Dutch) Logica, taal en betekenis II: intensionele logica en logische grammatica, Het Spectrum, 1982. (Dutch) Logic, Language and Meaning, Volume I: Introduction to Logic, University of Chicago Press, 1991. Translation and revision of Logica, taal en betekenis I. Logic, Language and Meaning, Volume II: Intensional Logic and Logical Grammar, University of Chicago Press, 1991. Translation and revision of Logica, taal en betekenis II.

Lennart Åqvist (born 1932 in Sweden) is a Swedish logician. He was a founding member of the editorial board of the Journal of Philosophical Logic. Åqvist received his PhD from Uppsala University in 1960 and has subsequently worked at Uppsala as Docent of Practical Philosophy. He is currently a Reader in Practical Philosophy in the College of Law at Uppsala.   == Published works == Some Logico-Semantical Themes in Karl Olivecrona's Philosophy of Law: A Non-Exegetical Approach. (2008) Theoria 74 (4):271-294. An Interpretation of Probability in the Law of Evidence Based on Pro-Et-Contra Argumentation. (2007) Artificial Intelligence and Law 15 (4). Some Remarks on Performatives in the Law. (2003) Artificial Intelligence and Law 11 (2-3). Old Foundations for the Logic of Agency and Action. (2002) Studia Logica 72 (3). The Logic of Historical Necessity as Founded on Two-Dimensional Modal Tense Logic. (1999) Journal of Philosophical Logic 28 (4). Discrete Tense Logic with Infinitary Inference Rules and Systematic Frame Constants: A Hilbert-Style Axiomatization. (1996) Journal of Philosophical Logic 25 (1). On the Logic of Causally Necessary and Sufficient Conditions: Towards a Theory of Motive-Explanations of Human Actions. (1989) Erkenntnis 31 (1). Some Results on Dyadic Deontic Logic and the Logic of Preference. (1986) Synthese 66 (1). On the Logical Syntax or Linguistic Deep Structure of Certain Crime Descriptions: Prolegomena to the Doctrine of Criminal Intent. (1985) Synthese 65 A Conjectured Axiomatization of Two-Dimensional Reichenbachian Tense Logic. (1979). Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1). Modal Logic with Subjunctive Conditionals and Dispositional Predicates. (1973) Journal of Philosophical Logic 2 (1). Improved Formulations of Act-Utilitarianism. (1969) Noûs 3 (3):299-323. Chisholm-Sosa Logics of Intrinsic Betterness and Value. (1968) Noûs 2 (3):253-270. Good Samaritans, Contrary-to-Duty Imperatives, and Epistemic Obligations. (1967) Noûs 1 (4):361-379. Semantic and Pragmatic Characterizability of Linguistic Usage. (1967) Synthese 17 (1). Results Concerning Some Modal Systems That Contain S. (1964) Journal of Symbolic Logic 29 (2). A Solution to Moore's Paradox. (1964) Philosophical Studies 15 (1-2). Interpretations of Deontic Logic. (1964) Mind 73 (290):246-253. Results Concerning Some Modal Systems That Contain S. (1964) Journal of Symbolic Logic 29 (2):79-87. A Note on Commitment. (1963) Philosophical Studies 14 (1-2). Semantic Concepts of Expression. (1962) Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 23 (1):89-100.   == References ==  Tom Pauli (Editor), Philosophical essays dedicated to Lennart Åqvist on his fiftieth birthday. Philosophical Society and Dept. of Philosophy, University of Uppsala, 1982

Leo Anthony Harrington (born 1946) is a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley who works in recursion theory, model theory, and set theory. Harrington and Jeff Paris proved the Paris–Harrington theorem. Harrington showed that if the Axiom of Determinacy holds for all analytic sets then x# exists for all reals x. Harrington and Saharon Shelah showed that the first order theory of the partially ordered set of recursively enumerable Turing degrees is undecidable.   == References ==   == External links == Home page. Leo Harrington at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Leon Chwistek (Kraków, Austria-Hungary, 13 June 1884 – 20 August 1944, Barvikha near Moscow, Russia) was a Polish avant-garde painter, theoretician of modern art, literary critic, logician, philosopher and mathematician.   == Logic and philosophy == Starting in 1929 Chwistek was a Professor of Logic at the University of Lwów in a position for which Alfred Tarski had also applied. His interests in the 1930s were in a general system of philosophy of science, which was published in a book translated in English 1948 as The Limits of Science. In the 1920s-30s, many European philosophers attempted to reform traditional philosophy by means of mathematical logic. Leon Chwistek did not believe that such reform could succeed. He thought that reality could not be described in one homogeneous system, based on the principles of formal logic, because there was not one reality but many. Chwistek demolishes the axiomatic method by demonstrating that the extant axiomatic systems are inconsistent.   == Artist == Chwistek developed his theory of the multiplicity of realities first with regard to the arts. He distinguished four basic types of realities, then matched them with four basic types of painting. The four types of realities were: 1. popular reality (common-sense realism) 2. physical reality (constructed by physics) 3. phenomenal reality (sensory impressions) 4. visionary/intuitive reality (dreams, hallucinations, subconscious states). The types of painting corresponding to the above were: 1. Primitivism 2. Realism 3. Impressionism 4. Futurism Chwistek never intended his views to constitute a new metaphysical theory. He was a defender of "common sense" against metaphysics and irrational feeling. His theory of plural reality was merely an attempt to specify the various ways in which the term, “real,” is used. Chwistek's fellow-artist and closest friend, Stanislaw Ignacy Witkiewicz, harshly criticized his philosophical views. Witkiewicz’s own philosophy was based on a monadic character to the individual's existence, embracing a multiplicity of existences, with the world being made up of a multiplicity of Particular Existences.   == Works == The limits of science. Outline of logic and of the methodology of the exact sciences. Translated from the Polish by Helen Charlotte Brodie and Arthur P. Coleman; introduction and appendix by Helen Charlotte Brodie. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1948   == See also == History of philosophy in Poland   == References ==   == External links == Polish Philosophy Page: Leon Chwistek at the Wayback Machine (archived October 30, 2007) Profile of Leon Chwistek at Culture.pl

Leon Albert Henkin (19 April 1921, Brooklyn – 1 November 2006, Oakland, California) was a logician at the University of California, Berkeley. He was principally known for the "Henkin's completeness proof": his version of the proof of the semantic completeness of standard systems of first-order logic.   == The completeness proof == Henkin's result was not novel; it had first been proved by Kurt Gödel in his doctoral dissertation, which was completed in 1929. (See Gödel's completeness theorem. Gödel published a version of the proof in 1930.) Henkin's 1949 proof is much easier to survey than Gödel's and has thus become the standard choice of completeness proof for presentation in introductory classes and texts. The proof is non-constructive, i.e. it is a pure existence proof. While it guarantees that if a sentence α follows (semantically) from a set of sentences Σ, then there is a proof of α from Σ, it gives no indication of the nature of that proof. Henkin originally proved the completeness of Church's higher-order logic, and then observed that the same methods of proof could be applied to first-order logic. Henkin's proof for higher-order logic uses a variant of the standard semantics. This variant uses general models (models in general or Henkin semantics; models in Henkin semantics are not to be confused with Henkin models, which are models in classical first-order logic): the higher types need not be interpreted by the full space of functions; a subset of the function space may be used instead.   == Early life == He was born in Brooklyn, into a Russian Jewish immigrant family. His father expressed his high expectations for him by giving him the middle name "Albert"; at the time, the New York Times ran a series of articles on Albert Einstein's theory of relativity. However, Henkin did not use his middle name in his mathematical publications. His first degree was in mathematics and philosophy from Columbia College, in 1941. He then worked in the Signal Corps Radar Laboratory, Belmar, New Jersey. As participant in the Manhattan project, he worked on isotope diffusion, in New York, and Oak Ridge, Tennessee.   == Academic career == He was a doctoral student of Alonzo Church at Princeton University, receiving his Ph.D. in 1947. He became Professor of Mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley, where he had a position from 1953. He received the 1964 Chauvenet Prize for exposition. He was a collaborator of Alfred Tarski, and an ally in promoting logic. Henkin was also a social activist who since the 1960s worked to increase higher education opportunities for women and minorities. In 1964 he spearheaded the formation of the Special Scholarships Committee at UC Berkeley, which resulted in setting up Special Opportunity Scholarships and other outreach programs at Berkeley. The Berkeley program served as a model for the federal Upward Bound Program that was founded several years later and for many outreach and special opportunities programs at other U.S. universities. His doctoral students include Carol Karp and Philip Treisman.   == Awards received == 1964 — The Chauvenet Prize, Mathematical Association of America award to the author of an outstanding expository article on a mathematical topic by a member of the Association. 1972 — Lester R. Ford Award — for Mathematical foundations for mathematics, American Mathematical Monthly 78 (1971), 463–487. 1990 — First recipient of the Gung and Hu Award for Distinguished Service to Mathematics. 1991 — Berkeley Citation — the highest honor/award bestowed by the University of California. 2000 — Leon Henkin Citation — for Distinguished Service, which is presented to a (UC) faculty member for "exceptional commitment to the educational development of students from groups who are underrepresented in the academy."   == See also == Branching quantifier   == References ==   == Further reading == G. Weaver (2001), "Henkin construction", in Hazewinkel, Michiel, Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4  George Weaver (1997). Henkin-Keisler models. Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-4366-0.  Henkin, Leon. 1949. "The Completeness of the First-Order Functional Calculus", Journal of Symbolic Logic. 14: 159–166. Henkin, Leon. 1950. "Completeness in the theory of types", Journal of Symbolic Logic 15: 81–91.   == External links == Leon Henkin at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Berkeley Citation Award An interview with Henkin and others about their experiences at Princeton An interview with Henkin about his experience at Princeton Leon Henkin, advocate for diversity in math & science, has died by Robert Sanders, UC Berkeley News press release, November 9, 2006. Obituaries: Leon Henkin, 85: professor steered minorities and women to math by Valerie J. Nelson, Los Angeles Times, November 16, 2006, p. B-6. Leon A. Henkin—Cal math educator by Rick DelVecchio, San Francisco Chronicle, November 20, 2006, p. B-3. In Memoriam: Leon Albert Henkin by John Addison, William Craig, Carolyn Kane, and Alan Schoenfeld (University of California Academic Senate memorial). In Memoriam: Leon Albert Henkin, 1921–2006 by J. Donald Monk, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, vol. 15, no. 3 (Sept. 2009), pp. 326–331.

Leopold Kronecker (7 December 1823 – 29 December 1891) was a German mathematician who worked on number theory and algebra. He criticized Cantor's work on set theory, and was quoted by Weber (1893) as having said, "Die ganzen Zahlen hat der liebe Gott gemacht, alles andere ist Menschenwerk" ("God made the integers, all else is the work of man."). Kronecker was a student and lifelong friend of Ernst Kummer.   == BiographyEdit == Leopold Kronecker was born on 7 December 1823 in Liegnitz, Prussia (now Legnica, Poland) in a wealthy Jewish family. His parents, Isidor and Johanna (née Prausnitzer), took care of their children's education and provided them with private tutoring at home – Leopold's younger brother Hugo Kronecker would also follow a scientific path, later becoming a notable physiologist. Kronecker then went to the Liegnitz Gymnasium where he was interested in a wide range of topics including science, history and philosophy, while also practicing gymnastics and swimming. At the gymnasium he was taught by Ernst Kummer, who noticed and encouraged the boy's interest in mathematics. In 1841 Kronecker became a student at the University of Berlin where his interest did not immediately focus on mathematics, but rather spread over several subjects including astronomy and philosophy. He spent the summer of 1843 at the University of Bonn studying astronomy and 1843–44 at the University of Breslau following his former teacher Kummer. Back in Berlin, Kronecker studied mathematics with Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet and in 1845 defended his dissertation in algebraic number theory written under Dirichlet's supervision. After obtaining his degree, Kronecker did not follow his interest in research on an academic career path. He went back to his hometown to manage a large farming estate built up by his mother's uncle, a former banker. In 1848 married his cousin Fanny Prausnitzer, and the couple had six children. For several years Kronecker focused on business, and although he continued to study mathematics as a hobby and corresponded with Kummer, he published no mathematical results. In 1853 he wrote a memoir on the algebraic solvability of equations extending the work of Évariste Galois on the theory of equations.  Due to his business activity, Kronecker was financially comfortable, and thus he could return to Berlin in 1855 to pursue mathematics as a private scholar. Dirichlet, whose wife Rebecka came from the wealthy Mendelssohn family, had introduced Kronecker to the Berlin elite. He became a close friend of Karl Weierstrass, who had recently joined the university, and his former teacher Kummer who had just taken over Dirichlet's mathematics chair. Over the following years Kronecker published numerous papers resulting from his previous years' independent research. As a result of this published research, he was elected a member of the Berlin Academy in 1861. Although he held no official university position, Kronecker had the right as a member of the Academy to hold classes at the University of Berlin and he decided to do so, starting in 1862. In 1866, when Riemann died, Kronecker was offered the mathematics chair at the University of Göttingen (previously held by Carl Gauss and Dirichlet), but he refused, preferring to keep his position at the Academy. Only in 1883, when Kummer retired from the University, was Kronecker invited to succeed him and became an ordinary professor. Kronecker was the supervisor of Kurt Hensel, Adolf Kneser, Mathias Lerch, and Franz Mertens, amongst others. His philosophical view of mathematics put him in conflict with several mathematicians over the years, notably straining his relationship with Weierstrass, who almost decided to leave the University in 1888. Kronecker died on 29 December 1891 in Berlin, several months after the death of his wife. In the last year of his life, he converted to Christianity. He is buried in the Alter St Matthäus Kirchhof cemetery in Berlin-Schöneberg, close to Gustav Kirchhoff.   == Scientific activityEdit ==   === Mathematics researchEdit === An important part of Kronecker's research focused on number theory and algebra. In an 1853 paper on the theory of equations and Galois theory he formulated the Kronecker–Weber theorem, without however offering a definitive proof (the theorem was proved completely much later by David Hilbert). He also introduced the structure theorem for finitely-generated abelian groups. Kronecker studied elliptic functions and conjectured his "liebster Jugendtraum" ("dearest dream of youth"), a generalization that was later put forward by Hilbert in a modified form as his twelfth problem. In an 1850 paper, On the Solution of the General Equation of the Fifth Degree, Kronecker solved the quintic equation by applying group theory (though his solution was not in terms of radicals: that was already proven impossible by the Abel–Ruffini theorem). In algebraic number theory Kronecker introduced the theory of divisors as an alternative to Dedekind's theory of ideals, which he did not find acceptable for philosophical reasons. Although the general adoption of Dedekind's approach led Kronecker's theory to be ignored for a long time, his divisors were found useful and were revived by several mathematicians in the 20th century. Kronecker also contributed to the concept of continuity, reconstructing the form of irrational numbers in real numbers. In analysis, Kronecker rejected the formulation of a continuous, nowhere differentiable function by his colleague, Karl Weierstrass. Also named for Kronecker are the Kronecker limit formula, Kronecker's congruence, Kronecker delta, Kronecker comb, Kronecker symbol, Kronecker product, Kronecker's method for factorizing polynomials, Kronecker substitution, Kronecker's theorem in number theory, Kronecker's lemma, and Eisenstein–Kronecker numbers.   === Philosophy of mathematicsEdit === Kronecker's finitism made him a forerunner of intuitionism in foundations of mathematics.   == HonoursEdit == Kronecker was elected as a member of several academies: Prussian Academy of Sciences (1861) French Academy of Sciences (1868) Royal Society (1884). The 25624 Kronecker asteroid is named after him.   == PublicationsEdit == Kronecker, Leopold (1978) [1901], Vorlesungen über Zahlentheorie, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-08277-4, MR 529431  Kronecker, Leopold (1968) [1895], Hensel, Kurt, ed., Leopold Kronecker's Werke. Bände I–V, New York: Chelsea Publishing Co., MR 0237286    == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Eric Temple Bell, 1986. Men of Mathematics, Simon and Schuster, New York. Harold Edwards (1987), An Appreciation of Kronecker, Mathematical Intelligencer, vol. 9 no. 1, pp. 28–35 Harold Edwards (1989), Kronecker's Views on the Foundations of Mathematics, in: "The History of Modern Mathematics," D. E. Rowe and J. McCleary, eds., vol. 1, 67–78, Academic Press Davis, Martin (2001). Engines of Logic Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-32229-3.  Jean Van Heijenoort (1977). From Frege to Gödel A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-32449-7.  1887. "On the concept of number" in Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press: 947–55. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Leopold Kronecker", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Weber, H. (1893), "Leopold Kronecker", Mathematische Annalen (Springer Berlin / Heidelberg) 43: 1–25, doi:10.1007/BF01446613, ISSN 0025-5831    == External linksEdit == Leopold Kronecker at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Leopold Löwenheim (26 June 1878 in Krefeld – 5 May 1957 in Berlin) was a German mathematician, known for his work in mathematical logic. The Nazi regime forced him to retire because under the Nuremberg Laws he was considered only three quarters Aryan. In 1943 much of his work was destroyed during a bombing raid on Berlin. Nevertheless, he survived the Second World War, after which he resumed teaching mathematics. Löwenheim (1915) gave the first proof of what is now known as the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem, often considered the starting point for model theory.   == Important publications == 1915, "Über Möglichkeiten im Relativkalkül," Mathematische Annalen 76: 447–470. Translated as "On possibilities in the calculus of relatives" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 228–251.   == References ==   == Further reading == Brady, Geraldine, 2000. From Peirce to Skolem. North Holland. Contains a detailed exegesis of the proof in Löwenheim (1915), and discusses how Thoralf Skolem simplified that proof and extended the scope and generality of the theorem.

Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (/ˈtʃɑrlz ˈlʌtwɪdʒ ˈdɒdsən/; 27 January 1832 – 14 January 1898), better known by his pen name Lewis Carroll (/ˈkærəl/), was an English writer, mathematician, logician, Anglican deacon, and photographer. His most famous writings are Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, its sequel Through the Looking-Glass, which includes the poem Jabberwocky, and the poem The Hunting of the Snark, all examples of the genre of literary nonsense. He is noted for his facility at word play, logic, and fantasy. There are societies in many parts of the world dedicated to the enjoyment and promotion of his works and the investigation of his life.   == Antecedents == Dodgson's family was predominantly northern English, with Irish connections, conservative and High Church Anglican. Most of Dodgson's male ancestors were army officers or Church of England clergy. His great-grandfather, also named Charles Dodgson, had risen through the ranks of the church to become the Bishop of Elphin. His paternal grandfather, another Charles, had been an army captain, killed in action in Ireland in 1803 when his two sons were hardly more than babies. The oldest of these sons – yet another Charles Dodgson – was Carroll's father. He went to Westminster School and then to Christ Church, Oxford. He reverted to the other family tradition and took holy orders. He was mathematically gifted and won a double first degree, which could have been the prelude to a brilliant academic career. Instead, he married his first cousin Frances Jane Lutwidge in 1827 and became a country parson. Dodgson was born in the small parsonage at Daresbury in Cheshire near the towns of Warrington and Runcorn, the eldest boy but already the third child of the four-and-a-half-year-old marriage. Eight more children followed. When Charles was 11, his father was given the living of Croft-on-Tees in North Yorkshire, and the whole family moved to the spacious rectory. This remained their home for the next twenty-five years. Charles' father was an active and highly conservative cleric of the Church of England who later became the Archdeacon of Richmond and involved himself, sometimes influentially, in the intense religious disputes that were dividing the church. He was High Church, inclining to Anglo-Catholicism, an admirer of John Henry Newman and the Tractarian movement, and did his best to instill such views in his children. Young Charles was to develop an ambiguous relationship with his father's values and with the Church of England as a whole.   == Education ==   === Home life === During his early youth, Dodgson was educated at home. His "reading lists" preserved in the family archives testify to a precocious intellect: at the age of seven, he was reading books such as The Pilgrim's Progress. He also suffered from a stammer – a condition shared by most of his siblings – that often influenced his social life throughout his years. At the age of twelve, he was sent to Richmond Grammar School (now part of Richmond School) at nearby Richmond.   === Rugby === In 1846, Dodgson entered Rugby School where he was evidently unhappy, as he wrote some years after leaving:  I cannot say ... that any earthly considerations would induce me to go through my three years again ... I can honestly say that if I could have been ... secure from annoyance at night, the hardships of the daily life would have been comparative trifles to bear.  Scholastically, though, he excelled with apparent ease. "I have not had a more promising boy at his age since I came to Rugby", observed mathematics master R. B. Mayor.   === Oxford === He left Rugby at the end of 1849 and matriculated at Oxford in May 1850 as a member of his father's old college, Christ Church. After waiting for rooms in college to become available, he went into residence in January 1851. He had been at Oxford only two days when he received a summons home. His mother had died of "inflammation of the brain" – perhaps meningitis or a stroke – at the age of forty-seven. His early academic career veered between high promise and irresistible distraction. He did not always work hard, but was exceptionally gifted and achievement came easily to him. In 1852, he obtained first-class honours in Mathematics Moderations, and was shortly thereafter nominated to a Studentship by his father's old friend Canon Edward Pusey. In 1854, he obtained first-class honours in the Final Honours School of Mathematics, standing first on the list, graduating Bachelor of Arts. He remained at Christ Church studying and teaching, but the next year he failed an important scholarship through his self-confessed inability to apply himself to study. Even so, his talent as a mathematician won him the Christ Church Mathematical Lectureship in 1855, which he continued to hold for the next twenty-six years. Despite early unhappiness, Dodgson was to remain at Christ Church, in various capacities, until his death.   == Character and appearance ==   === Health challenges === The young adult Charles Dodgson was about 6 feet (1.83 m) tall and slender, and he had curly brown hair and blue or grey eyes (depending on the account). He was described in later life as somewhat asymmetrical, and as carrying himself rather stiffly and awkwardly, although this might be on account of a knee injury sustained in middle age. As a very young child, he suffered a fever that left him deaf in one ear. At the age of 17, he suffered a severe attack of whooping cough, which was probably responsible for his chronically weak chest in later life. Another defect which he carried into adulthood was what he referred to as his "hesitation", a stammer that he acquired in early childhood and which plagued him throughout his life. The stammer has always been a significant part of the image of Dodgson. It is said that he stammered only in adult company and was free and fluent with children, but there is no evidence to support this idea. Many children of his acquaintance remembered the stammer, while many adults failed to notice it. Dodgson himself seems to have been far more acutely aware of it than most people whom he met; it is said that he caricatured himself as the Dodo in Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, referring to his difficulty in pronouncing his last name, but this is one of the many "facts" often repeated for which no first-hand evidence remains. He did indeed refer to himself as the dodo, but whether or not this reference was to his stammer is simply speculation. Dodgson's stammer did trouble him, but it was never so debilitating that it prevented him from applying his other personal qualities to do well in society. He lived in a time when people commonly devised their own amusements and when singing and recitation were required social skills, and the young Dodgson was well equipped to be an engaging entertainer. He reportedly could sing tolerably well and was not afraid to do so before an audience. He was adept at mimicry and storytelling, and was reputedly quite good at charades.   === Social connections === In the interim between his early published writing and the success of the Alice books, Dodgson began to move in the pre-Raphaelite social circle. He first met John Ruskin in 1857 and became friendly with him. He developed a close relationship with Dante Gabriel Rossetti and his family, and also knew William Holman Hunt, John Everett Millais, and Arthur Hughes, among other artists. He also knew fairy-tale author George MacDonald well – it was the enthusiastic reception of Alice by the young MacDonald children that convinced him to submit the work for publication.   === Politics, religion, and philosophy === In broad terms, Dodgson has traditionally been regarded as politically, religiously, and personally conservative. Martin Gardner labels Dodgson as a Tory who was "awed by lords and inclined to be snobbish towards inferiors." The Reverend W. Tuckwell, in his Reminiscences of Oxford (1900), regarded him as "austere, shy, precise, absorbed in mathematical reverie, watchfully tenacious of his dignity, stiffly conservative in political, theological, social theory, his life mapped out in squares like Alice's landscape." In The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll, the editor states that "his Diary is full of such modest depreciations of himself and his work, interspersed with earnest prayers (too sacred and private to be reproduced here) that God would forgive him the past, and help him to perform His holy will in the future." When a friend asked him about his religious views, Dodgson wrote in response that he was a member of the Church of England, but "doubt[ed] if he was fully a 'High Churchman'". He added:  I believe that when you and I come to lie down for the last time, if only we can keep firm hold of the great truths Christ taught us—our own utter worthlessness and His infinite worth; and that He has brought us back to our one Father, and made us His brethren, and so brethren to one another—we shall have all we need to guide us through the shadows. Most assuredly I accept to the full the doctrines you refer to—that Christ died to save us, that we have no other way of salvation open to us but through His death, and that it is by faith in Him, and through no merit of ours, that we are reconciled to God; and most assuredly I can cordially say, "I owe all to Him who loved me, and died on the Cross of Calvary."  Dodgson also expressed interest in other fields. He was an early member of the Society for Psychical Research, and one of his letters suggests that he accepted as real what was then called "thought reading". Dodgson wrote some studies of various philosophical arguments. In 1895, he developed a philosophical regressus-argument on deductive reasoning in his article "What the Tortoise Said to Achilles", which appeared in one of the early volumes of Mind. The article was reprinted in the same journal a hundred years later in 1995, with a subsequent article by Simon Blackburn titled "Practical Tortoise Raising".   == Artistic activities ==   === Literature === From a young age, Dodgson wrote poetry and short stories, contributing heavily to the family magazine Mischmasch and later sending them to various magazines, enjoying moderate success. Between 1854 and 1856, his work appeared in the national publications The Comic Times and The Train, as well as smaller magazines such as the Whitby Gazette and the Oxford Critic. Most of this output was humorous, sometimes satirical, but his standards and ambitions were exacting. "I do not think I have yet written anything worthy of real publication (in which I do not include the Whitby Gazette or the Oxonian Advertiser), but I do not despair of doing so some day," he wrote in July 1855. Sometime after 1850, he did write puppet plays for his siblings' entertainment, of which one has survived: La Guida di Bragia. In 1856, he published his first piece of work under the name that would make him famous. A romantic poem called "Solitude" appeared in The Train under the authorship of "Lewis Carroll". This pseudonym was a play on his real name: Lewis was the anglicised form of Ludovicus, which was the Latin for Lutwidge, and Carroll an Irish surname similar to the Latin name Carolus, from which comes the name Charles. The transition went as follows: "Charles Lutwidge" translated into Latin as "Carolus Ludovicus". This was then translated back into English as "Carroll Lewis" and then reversed to make "Lewis Carroll". This pseudonym was chosen by editor Edmund Yates from a list of four submitted by Dodgson, the others being Edgar Cuthwellis, Edgar U. C. Westhill, and Louis Carroll.   ==== Alice books ====  In 1856, Dean (i.e., head of the college) Henry Liddell arrived at Christ Church, bringing with him his young family, all of whom would figure largely in Dodgson's life over the following years, and would greatly influence his writing career. Dodgson became close friends with Liddell's wife Lorina and their children, particularly the three sisters Lorina, Edith, and Alice Liddell. He was widely assumed for many years to have derived his own "Alice" from Alice Liddell; the acrostic poem at the end of Through the Looking Glass spells out her name in full, and there are also many superficial references to her hidden in the text of both books. It has been noted that Dodgson himself repeatedly denied in later life that his "little heroine" was based on any real child, and he frequently dedicated his works to girls of his acquaintance, adding their names in acrostic poems at the beginning of the text. Gertrude Chataway's name appears in this form at the beginning of The Hunting of the Snark, and it is not suggested that this means that any of the characters in the narrative are based on her. Information is scarce (Dodgson's diaries for the years 1858–1862 are missing), but it seems clear that his friendship with the Liddell family was an important part of his life in the late 1850s, and he grew into the habit of taking the children on rowing trips (first the boy Harry, and later the three girls) accompanied by an adult friend to nearby Nuneham Courtenay or Godstow. It was on one such expedition on 4 July 1862 that Dodgson invented the outline of the story that eventually became his first and greatest commercial success. He told the story to Alice Liddell and she begged him to write it down, and Dodgson eventually (after much delay) presented her with a handwritten, illustrated manuscript entitled Alice's Adventures Under Ground in November 1864. Before this, the family of friend and mentor George MacDonald read Dodgson's incomplete manuscript, and the enthusiasm of the MacDonald children encouraged Dodgson to seek publication. In 1863, he had taken the unfinished manuscript to Macmillan the publisher, who liked it immediately. After the possible alternative titles were rejected — Alice Among the Fairies and Alice's Golden Hour — the work was finally published as Alice's Adventures in Wonderland in 1865 under the Lewis Carroll pen-name, which Dodgson had first used some nine years earlier. The illustrations this time were by Sir John Tenniel; Dodgson evidently thought that a published book would need the skills of a professional artist. Annotated versions provide insights into many of the ideas and hidden meanings that are prevalent in these books. The overwhelming commercial success of the first Alice book changed Dodgson's life in many ways. The fame of his alter ego "Lewis Carroll" soon spread around the world. He was inundated with fan mail and with sometimes unwanted attention. Indeed, according to one popular story, Queen Victoria herself enjoyed Alice In Wonderland so much that she commanded that he dedicate his next book to her, and was accordingly presented with his next work, a scholarly mathematical volume entitled An Elementary Treatise on Determinants. Dodgson himself vehemently denied this story, commenting "... It is utterly false in every particular: nothing even resembling it has occurred"; and it is unlikely for other reasons. As T.B. Strong comments in a Times article, "It would have been clean contrary to all his practice to identify [the] author of Alice with the author of his mathematical works". He also began earning quite substantial sums of money, but continued with his seemingly disliked post at Christ Church. Late in 1871, he published the sequel Through the Looking-Glass and What Alice Found There. (The title page of the first edition erroneously gives "1872" as the date of publication.) Its somewhat darker mood possibly reflects the changes in Dodgson's life. His father had recently died (1868), plunging him into a depression that lasted some years.   ==== The Hunting of the Snark ==== In 1876, Dodgson produced his next great work The Hunting of the Snark, a fantastical "nonsense" poem exploring the adventures of a bizarre crew of tradesmen and one beaver, who set off to find the snark. Painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti reputedly became convinced that the poem was about him.   ==== Sylvie and Bruno ==== In 1895, 30 years after publication of his masterpieces, Carroll attempted a comeback, producing a two-volume tale of the fairy siblings Sylvie and Bruno. Carroll entwines two plots set in two alternate worlds, one set in rural England and the other in the fairytale kingdoms of Elfland, Outland, and others. The fairytale world satirizes English society, and more specifically the world of academia. Sylvie and Bruno came out in two volumes and is considered a lesser work, although it has remained in print for over a century.   === Photography ===  In 1856, Dodgson took up the new art form of photography under the influence first of his uncle Skeffington Lutwidge, and later of his Oxford friend Reginald Southey. He soon excelled at the art and became a well-known gentleman-photographer, and he seems even to have toyed with the idea of making a living out of it in his very early years. A study by Roger Taylor and Edward Wakeling exhaustively lists every surviving print, and Taylor calculates that just over half of his surviving work depicts young girls, though this may be a highly distorted figure, as about 60% of his original photographic portfolio is now missing. Dodgson also made many studies of men, women, boys, and landscapes; his subjects also include skeletons, dolls, dogs, statues, paintings, and trees. His pictures of children were taken with a parent in attendance and many of the pictures were taken in the Liddell garden because natural sunlight was required for good exposures. He also found photography to be a useful entrée into higher social circles. During the most productive part of his career, he made portraits of notable sitters such as John Everett Millais, Ellen Terry, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Julia Margaret Cameron, Michael Faraday, Lord Salisbury, and Alfred, Lord Tennyson. By the time that Dodgson abruptly ceased photography (1880, over 24 years), he had established his own studio on the roof of Tom Quad, created around 3,000 images, and was an amateur master of the medium, though fewer than 1,000 images have survived time and deliberate destruction. Dodgson reported that he stopped taking photographs because keeping his studio working was too time-consuming. He used the wet collodion process; commercial photographers who started using the dry-plate process in the 1870s took pictures more quickly. Popular taste changed with the advent of Modernism, affecting the types of photographs that he produced. In a 2015 BBC programme presented by journalist Martha Kearney, experts indicated their belief that a full-frontal photograph of a naked teenage girl was that of the oldest Liddell girl Lorina, and was the work of Dodgson. Nicolas Burnett, a photographic conservation specialist, ruled out the idea that the print is a modern fake. He also said that the image had been taken by a camera similar to the one which Carroll is known to have used, and that the developing process and paper was the same as that used by Carroll. He gave his "gut instinct" that the photograph was by Lewis Carroll. Forensic imagery analyst David Anley compared known images of Lorina at different ages with the suspected photograph. He said, "In my opinion, I would say it's her".   === Inventions === To promote letter writing, Dodgson invented "The Wonderland Postage-Stamp Case" in 1889. This was a cloth-backed folder with twelve slots, two marked for inserting the most commonly used penny stamp, and one each for the other current denominations up to one shilling. The folder was then put into a slip case decorated with a picture of Alice on the front and the Cheshire Cat on the back. All could be conveniently carried in a pocket or purse. The pack also included a copy of Carroll's pamphletted lecture Eight or Nine Wise Words About Letter-Writing.  Another invention was a writing tablet called the nyctograph that allowed note-taking in the dark, thus eliminating the need to get out of bed and strike a light when one woke with an idea. The device consisted of a gridded card with sixteen squares and system of symbols representing an alphabet of Dodgson's design, using letter shapes similar to the Graffiti writing system on a Palm device. He also devised a number of games, including an early version of what today is known as Scrabble. He appears to have invented — or at least certainly popularized — the "doublet" (see word ladder), a form of brain-teaser that is still popular today, changing one word into another by altering one letter at a time, each successive change always resulting in a genuine word. For instance, CAT is transformed into DOG by the following steps: CAT, COT, DOT, DOG. Other items include a rule for finding the day of the week for any date; a means for justifying right margins on a typewriter; a steering device for a velociam (a type of tricycle); new systems of parliamentary representation; more fair elimination rules for tennis tournaments; a new sort of postal money order; rules for reckoning postage; rules for a win in betting; rules for dividing a number by various divisors; a cardboard scale for the Senior Common Room at Christ Church which, held next to a glass, ensured the right amount of liqueur for the price paid; a double-sided adhesive strip to fasten envelopes or mount things in books; a device for helping a bedridden invalid to read from a book placed sideways; and at least two ciphers for cryptography.   == Mathematical work ==  Within the academic discipline of mathematics, Dodgson worked primarily in the fields of geometry, linear and matrix algebra, mathematical logic, and recreational mathematics, producing nearly a dozen books under his real name. Dodgson also developed new ideas in linear algebra (e.g., the first printed proof of the Kronecker-Capelli theorem), probability, and the study of elections (e.g., Dodgson's method) and committees; some of this work was not published until well after his death. His occupation as Mathematical Lecturer at Christ Church gave him some financial security. His mathematical work attracted renewed interest in the late 20th century. Martin Gardner's book on logic machines and diagrams, and William Warren Bartley's posthumous publication of the second part of Carroll's symbolic logic book have sparked a reevaluation of Carroll's contributions to symbolic logic. Robbins' and Rumsey's investigation of Dodgson condensation, a method of evaluating determinants, led them to the Alternating Sign Matrix conjecture, now a theorem. The discovery in the 1990s of additional ciphers that Carroll had constructed, in addition to his "Memoria Technica", showed that he had employed sophisticated mathematical ideas to their creation.   == Correspondence == Dodgson wrote and received as many as 98,721 letters, according to a special letter register which he devised. He documented his advice about how to write more satisfying letters in a missive entitled "Eight or Nine Wise Words About Letter-Writing".   == Later years ==  Dodgson's existence remained little changed over the remaining twenty years of his life, throughout his growing wealth and fame. He continued to teach at Christ Church until 1881, and remained in residence there until his death. The two volumes of his last novel Sylvie and Bruno were published in 1889 and 1893, but the intricacy of this work was apparently not appreciated by contemporary readers; it achieved nothing like the success of the Alice books, with disappointing reviews and sales of only 13,000 copies. The only known occasion on which he travelled abroad was a trip to Russia in 1867 as an ecclesiastical, together with the Reverend Henry Liddon. He recounts the travel in his "Russian Journal", which was first commercially published in 1935. On his way to Russia and back, he also saw different cities in Belgium, Germany, the partitioned Poland, and France. He died of pneumonia following influenza on 14 January 1898 at his sisters' home, "The Chestnuts" in Guildford. He was two weeks away from turning 66 years old. He is buried in Guildford at the Mount Cemetery.   == Controversies and mysteries ==   === Discussion of Dodgson's sexuality === Catherine Robson refers to Carroll as "the Victorian era's most famous (or infamous) girl lover", and writes:  For those who wish to map the contours of the don's desires, both his public, and more especially his voluminous private, writings provide acres and acres of relevant territory. Letter after letter, journal upon journal, dedicatory poem and book inscription bear witness to Carroll's ceaseless pursuit of juvenile feminine company. ... Is it innocent? Is it sexual?  Some late twentieth century biographers have suggested that Dodgson's interest in children had an erotic element, including Morton N. Cohen in his Lewis Carroll: A Biography (1995), Donald Thomas in his Lewis Carroll: A Portrait with Background (1995), and Michael Bakewell in his Lewis Carroll: A Biography (1996). Cohen, in particular, claims that Dodgson's "sexual energies sought unconventional outlets", and further writes:  We cannot know to what extent sexual urges lay behind Charles's preference for drawing and photographing children in the nude. He contended the preference was entirely aesthetic. But given his emotional attachment to children as well as his aesthetic appreciation of their forms, his assertion that his interest was strictly artistic is naïve. He probably felt more than he dared acknowledge, even to himself.  Cohen goes on to note that Dodgson "apparently convinced many of his friends that his attachment to the nude female child form was free of any eroticism", but adds that "later generations look beneath the surface" (p. 229). He and other biographers argue that Dodgson may have wanted to marry the 11-year-old Alice Liddell, and that this was the cause of the unexplained "break" with the family in June 1863, an event for which other explanations are offered. Biographers Derek Hudson and Roger Lancelyn Green stop short of identifying Dodgson as a paedophile (Green also edited Dodgson's diaries and papers), but they concur that he had a passion for small female children and next to no interest in the adult world. Several other writers and scholars have challenged the evidential basis for Cohen's and others' views about this interest of Dodgson. Lebailly has endeavoured to set Dodgson's child-photography within the "Victorian Child Cult", which perceived child-nudity as essentially an expression of innocence. Lebailly claims that studies of child nudes were mainstream and fashionable in Dodgson's time, and that most photographers made them as a matter of course, including Oscar Gustave Rejlander and Julia Margaret Cameron. Lebailly continues that child nudes even appeared on Victorian Christmas cards, implying a very different social and aesthetic assessment of such material. Lebailly concludes that it has been an error of Dodgson's biographers to view his child-photography with 20th- or 21st-century eyes, and to have presented it as some form of personal idiosyncrasy, when it was in fact a response to a prevalent aesthetic and philosophical movement of the time. Leach's reappraisal of Dodgson focused in particular on his controversial sexuality. She argues that the allegations of paedophilia rose initially from a misunderstanding of Victorian morals, as well as the mistaken idea—fostered by Dodgson's various biographers—that he had no interest in adult women. She termed the traditional image of Dodgson "the Carroll Myth". She drew attention to the large amounts of evidence in his diaries and letters that he was also keenly interested in adult women, married and single, and enjoyed several scandalous relationships with them (scandalous by the social standards of his time). She also pointed to the fact that many of those whom he described as "child-friends" were girls in their late teens and even twenties. She argues that suggestions of paedophilia emerged only many years after his death, when his well-meaning family had suppressed all evidence of his relationships with women in an effort to preserve his reputation, thus giving a false impression of a man interested only in little girls. Similarly, Leach points to a 1932 biography by Langford Reed as the source of the dubious claim that many of Carroll's female friendships ended when the girls reached the age of fourteen. In addition to the biographical works that have discussed Dodgson's sexuality, there are modern artistic interpretations of his life and work that do so as well — in particular, Dennis Potter in his play Alice and his screenplay for the motion picture Dreamchild, and Robert Wilson in his film Alice.   === Ordination === Dodgson had been groomed for the ordained ministry in the Church of England from a very early age and was expected to be ordained within four years of obtaining his master's degree, as a condition of his residency at Christ Church. He delayed the process for some time but was eventually ordained as a deacon on 22 December 1861. But when the time came a year later to be ordained as a priest, Dodgson appealed to the dean for permission not to proceed. This was against college rules and initially Dean Liddell told him that he would have to consult the college ruling body, which would almost certainly have resulted in his being expelled. For unknown reasons, Liddell changed his mind overnight and permitted Dodgson to remain at the college in defiance of the rules. Dodgson never became a priest, unique amongst senior students of his time. There is currently no conclusive evidence about why Dodgson rejected the priesthood. Some have suggested that his stammer made him reluctant to take the step, because he was afraid of having to preach. Wilson quotes letters by Dodgson describing difficulty in reading lessons and prayers rather than preaching in his own words. But Dodgson did indeed preach in later life, even though not in priest's orders, so it seems unlikely that his impediment was a major factor affecting his choice. Wilson also points out that Bishop of Oxford Samuel Wilberforce, who ordained Dodgson, had strong views against clergy going to the theatre, one of Dodgson's great interests. Others have suggested that he was having serious doubts about Anglicanism. He was interested in minority forms of Christianity (he was an admirer of F.D. Maurice) and "alternative" religions (theosophy). Dodgson became deeply troubled by an unexplained sense of sin and guilt at this time (the early 1860s) and frequently expressed the view in his diaries that he was a "vile and worthless" sinner, unworthy of the priesthood and this sense of sin and unworthiness may well have affected his decision to abandon being ordained to the priesthood.   === Missing diaries === At least four complete volumes and around seven pages of text are missing from Dodgson's 13 diaries. The loss of the volumes remains unexplained; the pages have been removed by an unknown hand. Most scholars assume that the diary material was removed by family members in the interests of preserving the family name, but this has not been proven. Except for one page, material is missing from his diaries for the period between 1853 and 1863 (when Dodgson was 21–31 years old). This was a period when Dodgson began suffering great mental and spiritual anguish and confessing to an overwhelming sense of his own sin. This was also the period of time when he composed his extensive love poetry, leading to speculation that the poems may have been autobiographical. Many theories have been put forward to explain the missing material. A popular explanation for one missing page (27 June 1863) is that it might have been torn out to conceal a proposal of marriage on that day by Dodgson to the 11-year-old Alice Liddell. However, there has never been any evidence to suggest that this was so, and a paper offers some evidence to the contrary which was discovered by Karoline Leach in the Dodgson family archive in 1996.  This paper is known as the "cut pages in diary document", and was compiled by various members of Carroll's family after his death. Part of it may have been written at the time when the pages were destroyed, though this is unclear. The document offers a brief summary of two diary pages that are missing, including the one for 27 June 1863. The summary for this page states that Mrs. Liddell told Dodgson that there was gossip circulating about him and the Liddell family's governess, as well as about his relationship with "Ina", presumably Alice's older sister Lorina Liddell. The "break" with the Liddell family that occurred soon after was presumably in response to this gossip. An alternative interpretation has been made regarding Carroll's rumoured involvement with "Ina": Lorina was also the name of Alice Liddell's mother. What is deemed most crucial and surprising is that the document seems to imply that Dodgson's break with the family was not connected with Alice at all; until a primary source is discovered, the events of 27 June 1863 will remain in doubt.   === Migraine and epilepsy === In his diary for 1880, Dodgson recorded experiencing his first episode of migraine with aura, describing very accurately the process of 'moving fortifications' that are a manifestation of the aura stage of the syndrome. Unfortunately, there is no clear evidence to show whether this was his first experience of migraine per se, or if he may have previously suffered the far more common form of migraine without aura, although the latter seems most likely, given the fact that migraine most commonly develops in the teens or early adulthood. Another form of migraine aura called Alice in Wonderland syndrome has been named after Dodgson's little heroine because its manifestation can resemble the sudden size-changes in the book. It is also known as micropsia and macropsia, a brain condition affecting the way that objects are perceived by the mind. For example, an afflicted person may look at a larger object such as a basketball and perceive it as if it were the size of a golf ball. Some authors have suggested that Dodgson may have suffered from this type of aura and used it as an inspiration in his work, but there is no evidence that he did. Dodgson also suffered two attacks in which he lost consciousness. He was diagnosed by a Dr. Morshead, Dr. Brooks, and Dr. Stedman, and they believed the attack and a consequent attack to be an "epileptiform" seizure (initially thought to be fainting, but Brooks changed his mind). Some have concluded from this that he was a lifetime sufferer of this condition, but there is no evidence of this in his diaries beyond the diagnosis of the two attacks already mentioned. Some authors, in particular Sadi Ranson, have suggested that Carroll may have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy in which consciousness is not always completely lost, but altered, and in which the symptoms mimic many of the same experiences as Alice in Wonderland. Carroll had at least one incident in which he suffered full loss of consciousness and awoke with a bloody nose, which he recorded in his diary and noted that the episode left him not feeling himself for "quite sometime afterward". This attack was diagnosed as possibly "epileptiform" and Carroll himself later wrote of his "seizures" in the same diary. Most of the standard diagnostic tests of today were not available in the nineteenth century. Recently, Dr Yvonne Hart, consultant neurologist at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, considered Dodgson's symptoms. Her conclusion, quoted in Jenny Woolf's The Mystery of Lewis Carroll, is that Dodgson very likely had migraine, and may have had epilepsy, but she emphasises that she would have considerable doubt about making a diagnosis of epilepsy without further information.   == Memorials == On Copenhagen Street in Islington is the Lewis Carroll Children's Library. In 1982, his great-nephew unveiled a memorial stone to him in Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey.   == Works ==   == See also == Lewis Carroll identity Lewis Carroll Shelf Award RGS Worcester and The Alice Ottley School – Miss Ottley, the first Headmistress of The Alice Ottley School, was a friend of Lewis Carroll. One of the school's houses was named after him.   == References ==   == Bibliography == Clark, Ann (1979). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. London: J. M. Dent. ISBN 0-460-04302-1.  Cohen, Morton (1996). Lewis Carroll: A Biography. Vintage Books. pp. 30–35. ISBN 978-0-679-74562-4.  Collingwood, Stuart Dodgson (1898). The Life and Letters of Lewis Carroll. London: T. Fisher Unwin.  Leach, Karoline (1999). In the Shadow of the Dreamchild: A New Understanding of Lewis Carroll. London: Peter Owen.  Reed, Langford, The Life of Lewis Carroll (1932. London: W. and G. Foyle) Taylor, Alexander L., Knight, The White Knight (1952. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd) Taylor, Roger & Wakeling, Edward, Lewis Carroll, Photographer (2002. Princeton University Press) (ISBN 0691074437). Catalogues nearly every Carroll photograph known to be still in existence. Thomas, Donald (1996). Lewis Carroll / A Biography. Barnes and Noble, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7607-1232-0.  Wilson, Robin (2008). Lewis Carroll in Numberland: His Fantastical Mathematical Logical Life. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9757-6.    == Further reading == Black, Duncan (1958). The Circumstances in which Rev. C. L. Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) wrote his Three Pamphlets and Appendix: Text of Dodgson's Three Pamphlets and of 'The Cyclostyled Sheet' in The Theory of Committees and Elections, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Bowman, Isa (1899). The Story of Lewis Carroll: Told for Young People by the Real Alice in Wonderland, Miss Isa Bowman. London: J.M. Dent & Co.  Dodgson, Charles L., Euclid and His Modern Rivals (1879. Macmillan; reissued 2009 by Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-1-108-00100-7) Dodgson, Charles L. "The Pamphlets of Lewis Carroll" v.1 The Oxford Pamphlets (1993) ISBN 0-8139-1250-4 v.2 The Mathematical Pamphlets (1994) ISBN 0-9303-26-09-1 v.3 The Political Pamphlets (2001) ISBN 0-930326-14-8 v.4 The Logic Pamphlets (2010) ISBN 978-0-930326-25-8.  Goodacre, Selwyn (2006). All the snarks : the illustrated editions of the hunting of the snark. Oxford: Inky Parrot Press.  Graham-Smith, Darien (2005), Contextualising Carroll, University of Wales, Bangor: PhD Thesis (library.bangor.ac.uk) Huxley, Francis The Raven and the Writing Desk (1976) (ISBN 0-06-012113-0). Kelly, Richard, Lewis Carroll (1990. Boston: Twayne Publishers) Kelly, Richard, ed. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (2000. Peterborough, Ontario: broadviewpress.com) Lovett, Charlie, 'Lewis Carroll Among His Books: A Descriptive Catalogue of the Private Library of Charles L. Dodgson' (2005) (ISBN 0786421053) Wullschläger, Jackie, Inventing Wonderland, (ISBN 0-7432-2892-8)—also looks at Edward Lear (of the "nonsense" verses), J. M. Barrie (Peter Pan), Kenneth Grahame (The Wind in the Willows), and A. A. Milne (Winnie-the-Pooh). n.n., Dreaming in Pictures: The Photography of Lewis Carroll. Yale University Press & SFMOMA, 2004. (Places Carroll firmly in the art photography tradition.)   == External links == A calendar of events in 2015 commemorating the 150th anniversary of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland The Fales Library Guide to the Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll Works by Lewis Carroll at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Lewis Carroll at Internet Archive Works by Lewis Carroll at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Works by Lewis Carroll at Open Library Lewis Carroll at Goodreads Lewis Carroll at the Internet Book List Lewis Carroll at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Lewis Carroll at the Internet Movie Database Edward Wakeling's Lewis Carroll site — extensive information on Lewis Carroll by scholar Edward Wakeling. Lewis Carroll: Reality & Myth — comparing some of the legends with the factual reality. The Poems of Lewis Carroll The Nude Photography of Lewis Carroll The Lewis Carroll Society Lewis Carroll Society of North America Lewis Carroll at victorianweb.org Contrariwise: the Association for New Lewis Carroll Studies — articles by leading members of the 'new scholarship' Sewell, Byron W.; Sewell, Susan R. "Byron W. Sewell and Susan R. Sewell: A Preliminary Inventory of Their Collection of Lewis Carroll at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center". Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin. Archived from the original on 12 September 2009. Retrieved 12 September 2009.  Archival material relating to Lewis Carroll listed at the UK National Archives Lewis Carroll online exhibition at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin Lewis Carroll's Shifting Reputation Guide to The Alfred C. Berol Collection of Lewis Carroll in the Fales Library at New York University Guide to Harcourt Amory collection of Lewis Carroll at Houghton Library, Harvard University Lists and images of 1st editions Images of the illustrated editions of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland from 1899 to the present day Illustrators of The Hunting of the Snark Lewis Carroll Scrapbook Collection at the Library of Congress


Lorenzo Peña (born August 29, 1944) is a Spanish philosopher, lawyer, logician and political thinker. His rationalism is a neo-Leibnizian approach both in metaphysics and law.   == Life == Lorenzo Peña was born in Alicante, Spain, on August 29, 1944. Persecuted by Franco's regime, his mother (born in the Madrid Royal Palace in 1911) was not allowed to return to the Spanish capital city until 1952. In Madrid Peña was taught Greek and Indoeuropean linguistics by the renowned Spanish philologist Francisco Rodríguez-Adrados and ethics by J.L. Aranguren. Upon becoming a political activist in February 1962, he was forced to emigrate in the spring 1965. In early 1969 he married his class-mate María Teresa Alonso in Meudon (France). While staying in Paris he was a disciple of the French historian Pierre Vilar and he witnessed the upheaval of May 1968. He gave up all clandestine activities in 1972. After spending 18 years in exile, he went back to Spain in 1983.   == Career == In 1974 Peña was awarded his philosophy degree (licenciatura) from the PUCE (the Ecuadorian Pontifical University in Quito), with a thesis on Anselm of Canterbury's Ontological argument for the existence of God, his adviser being Julio C. Terán, S.J., who taught him hermeneutics. He then spent four years in Liège, Belgium, (1975–1979) where, under Paul Gochet's supervision, he wrote his dissertation on a system of contradictorial (paraconsistent) logic. At that time he was also granted a complementary degree in American Studies by the University of Liège. Upon receiving his Ph.D. in 1979, he came back to Ecuador. He was a professor at the PUCE for four years and later on, after returning to Spain, at León University for another three years. In 1987 he was appointed senior scientific researcher at the CSIC (Spanish National Research Council, Spain's main academic research institution). He spent six months in Canberra as a visiting scholar (1992–1993), under the guidance of the late Richard Sylvan, and was a colleague of Philip Pettit at the philosophy department of the Australian National University. Later on he shifted his research orientation to the philosophy of law. He became a lawyer by earning an M.L. (DEA) from Autonomous University of Madrid in 2007. He then affiliated with the Madrid Bar. He reached the highest academic professional level (Research Professor) in 2006. Peña is the founder and Editor of the digital journal SORITES and also the founder and former leader of JuriLog (Logical Jurisprudence), the logic-and-law research group at the CSIC, which is carrying out an inquiry into nomological concepts and values.   == Philosophical views ==   === Ontophantics === Ontophantics is the system of philosophical conceptions developed by Peña in the years 1974–1995 (which do not necessarily coincide with those he has developed in recent years). Although ontophantics is essentially a metaphysical doctrine, its starting point was a methodological approach through the philosophy of language, based on a realist semiotic theory to the effect that what is shown by language is also said (as against the Tractarian dichotomy), namely reality or being. Rather than regarding sentences and states of affairs in a static way, as logical atomists have done, ontophantics looks upon them dynamically, as transitions or processes. To utter a statement is not a mere series of successive actions of uttering the sentence's components but a transit from one saying into another along a temporal dimension. Likewise facts are nontemporal transitions consisting in a relation passing from one thing to another. Since all passages seem to be subject to Zeno's paradox of the arrow, a paraconsistent logic is resorted to in order to solve the puzzle. Instead of blaming contradictions on thought or language Peña ascribes them to reality by embracing a non-classical logic. Another feature of ontophantics is the rejection of all forms of essentialism in the sense of considering attributions of being-so independent of assertions of being or existence—an opinion Peña attributes to Aristotle and Alexius Meinong. Peña's existence-oriented ontology identifies each entity with a fact, its existence. Ontological truth is also identified with existence, which is a reduplicative property. Ontophantics follows Frege's view of sentences as names of objects, but in this case the objects under consideration are states of affairs. From a linguistic perspective phenomena of nominalization are thus gone into from an outlook which eliminates any categorical cleavages. Such a metaphysical theory is strongly Platonistic. Ontophantics is also a modal realism, which takes reality to be all-encompassing, and thus comprising non-actual worlds. Ontophantics contains a holistic theory of knowledge influenced by Gonseth and Quine, considering the cleavage between analytic and synthetic judgments a matter of degree. This epistemological holism is a sort of empirical coherentism, for which the task of human knowledge is to set up theories, to confront them with experience taken as a whole and to gradually modify them. Not only foundationalism of any kind is rejected but reliabilism is not accepted either, since no procedure is to be unconditionally trusted come what may. Peña rehabilitates induction as a sound ground even for logical truths (he follows the outdated opinion of John Stuart Mill). The choice among alternative logical systems has to be made in accordance with plausible criteria, one of which is fitness with the best explanation of available evidence, thus resorting to an optimization postulate, which in turn gets circularly warranted by its epistemological fruitness. That optimization postulate is a rationality ideal which also provides a ground for assuming God's existence. Peña's first published book, The coincidence of opposites in God (Quito, 1981), was a discussion of the proofs of God's inexistence canvassed in the analytical philosophy of religion. He broached the question through a combination of a contradictorial logic and a non-standard set theory (in a way a mirror reversion of Quine's ML system), which regards infinite entities as not being subject to the principle of separation in virtue of which a thing is comprised by the set of entities with a certain characteristic only to the extent it has that characteristic. In that book he adopted determinism and rejected free will, a position he has maintained ever since, using it as a lever while grappling with issues in the philosophy of law.   === Contradictorial gradualism === As against other persuasions in paraconsistent logic (such as relevantism and the Brazilian school), the paraconsistent treatment developed by Peña, which belongs in the fuzzy family founded by Lotfi A. Zadeh, regards true contradictions as situations wherein a state of affairs enjoys only partial existence. His approach to fuzziness deviates from Zadeh's main-stream orthodoxy in rejecting alethic maximalism and so embracing the principle of excluded middle, regarding all intermediaries as degrees of both truth and falseness, being and non-being (Plato's influence is discernable here).   === Transitive logic === In order to clarify his philosophical proposal Peña has set up several systems of sentential and quantificational logic which he calls «transitive logic», TL, as partial implementations of his programme. TL is characterized by a couple of negations, one strong («not at all»), which has all classical properties, and a weak one (a mere «not»), which is degree-sensitive. The fragment of TL without strong negation is a non-conservative extension of Alan Ross Anderson and Nuel Belnap's logic of relevance, E, (by adding the funnel principle, namely that either A implies B or else A; in other words, what is not true at all implies anything). Transitive implication is partly similar to relevant implication (although much stronger), but its underlying philosophical motivation is entirely different, since it is read «to the extent [at least] that...». The fragment of TL without weak negation and the implication operator is classical logic. TL is thus a logical blend or rather a crossbreed. Peña's plan to investigate the grounds of his logical system as a nonclassical combinatory logic has thus far remained programmatic, but the combinatory account fits his metaphysical approach.   === Cumulativism === Cumulativism is Peña's philosophical orientation as developed from 1996 onwards. Cumulativism is contradictorial gradualism with an added emphasis on six hitherto partly implicit components of his approach: (1) All transitions are either continuous or at least supervene on underlying continuous mutations, going through successive steps; hence change is always slow and implies a succession of stages, each of which keeps many qualities of the previous stage. (2) All transitions are either aggregations or disaggregations (processes of sedimentation or erosion) since cumulation, gathering, is reality's most prominent feature (ontophantics had already conceived of all entities as sets, but now the principle of togetherness is made the mainstay of the philosophical system). (3) Metaphysical isolationism is avoided by espousing collectivism both in metaphysics and political philosophy. (4) A programme of conceptual flexibilization is proposed, by which concepts become soft, fluid, with shifting borders. (5) The gatherings or clusters this approach advances are called cumuli, cumulations—so as not to be mistaken for sets in the sense of standard set-theory—the main idea remaining that not all things congregated by a cluster necessarily share the cluster's defining charasterictic (and, more generally, the Meinongian description principle fails, namely that the entity which is thus-and-so is indeed thus-and-so). (6) As a compendium, cumulativism is taken to be the philosophy of conjunction: A-and-B is a conjunctive state of affairs which exists to the extent A and B exist. A-and-B's own properties supervene on those held by A and B.   === Juristic logic === Peña's work on deontic logic began short after his 1979 Ph.D. diss. The first paper he published on the issue appeared in 1988. At that time, he essentially clung to von Wright's standard approach, departing from it only by introducing degrees and admitting normative contradictions or antinomies. He soon became dissatisfied with that scheme which proved to be incompatible with serious applications of deontic logic to the practice of legal reasoning. He found out the flaw was to think of deontic logic as a species of the genus modal logic by stressing the similarities between duty and necessity, and between licitness and possibility. The underlying mistake, according to Peña, is a wrong metaphysical assumption which denies the existence of deontic states of affairs connected by implications. That denial pushes deontic logicians to conceive of deontic logic as the logic of duty-compliances. Thus if A necessarily implies B, standard deontic logic believes that the duty to do A implies a duty to do B—this is the rule of logical closure. That rule is one of the first dogmas waived by Peña's deontic approach. Peña was thus prompted to produce a new system of deontic logic, Juristic Logic, or JL, combining a number of particularities which make it unique: All standard deontic principles are relinquished except Bentham's law (namely that what is obligatory is also licit). More precisely, the two following rules are abandoned: logical closure and the usual distribution rules (the obligatoriness of A-and-B implies the obligatoriness of A and that of B, and conversely). Deontic detachment is embraced: If it is licit that either A or B, and in fact A happens not to be realized at all, then B is licit; and the same applies for obligatoriness. (Some restrictions are needed in order to avoid paradoxes.) The principle of co-licitness is espoused, namely that, to the extent A is licit and so is B, A-and-B is licit too. New deontic principles are introduced by resorting to two non-standard operators of hindering and causation: the causal effects of licit causes are licit and thwarting a licit behaviour is forbidden. A non-standard rule of liberty is added: if the prohibition of A cannot be proved, then A must be taken to be licit. Degrees of licitness and obligation are accounted for by apposite axioms involving implication; in particular a proportionality axiom is introduced linking degrees of realization of a factual antecedent with degrees of licitness or obligatoriness of the normative consequence. Peña claims that the valid principles of logic in general and deontic logic in particular are found by induction, or rather abduction, through a circular holistic process. It is only by studying normative reasoning as it really happens in legal practice that sanitized sets of axioms and inference rules can be devised and then subject to the acid test of applicability.   === Pluralistic axiology === Peña has proposed a pluralistic axiology in order to deal with the debate between deontological and consequentialist approaches in ethics. Peña classifies ethical theories into two groups: internalism and externalism, the former valuing conducts according to intrinsic features. Externalism comes in two ways: antecedentalism and consequentialism. There are two sorts of consequentialism: monistic and pluralistic, the former maintaining that there is one ethical property practical consequences of actions must have in order to render the action ethically valuable. Utilitarianism is a monist consequentialism. Peña is a pluralist. He is inclined to a pluralistic consequentialism, but his approach can be taken to transcend the very dichotomy, since, once no unique criterion is looked for, actions ought to be assessed in a number of ways according to different values, some of which are not necessarily teleological. Since the approach is gradualistic, ethical valuations are taken to be scales with infinitely many degrees combined in infinitely complex compositions. Withal, the nearer a causal consequence of our action is, the higher its ethical significance. Peña implements ethical pluralistic gradualism through his paraconsistent fuzzy logic: actions can be regarded as both good and bad, better in certain respects and worse in other respects. As for the units of behaviour to be assessed, Peña's ideas are close to virtue ethics in that he thinks isolated actions are generally too narrow unities to be reasonably appraised, although a whole course of life is too broad. Something in-between is a more adequate candidate, which means a span of one's life evincing a continuation of purposes, choices and habits. Peña admits that a pluralistic axiology faces a serious difficulty, namely that it provides no clear guidance for action, unless there is an objective all-things-considered perspective. He claims that sometimes there is no such perspective and that in those cases choices are justified by one's previous allegiance to the prevalence of certain values. But even when an all-things-considered outlook is warranted, its existence does not mean that contradictory valuations are merely prima facie. Thus ethical contradictions cannot be evaded.   === Social evolutionism === As against all who claim that progress is a vapid concept and that there is no continuous improvement along history, Peña's philosophy of history argues that progress is the necessary outcome of our cultural rationality—weak and partial though it is—thanks to which any human society will tend to ameliorate its welfare by blending the scattered wisdom of its members into a combined collective purposive intelligence, thus increasing, little by little, its social accumulation of material and intellectual assets, establishing more workable, reliable and socially acceptable laws and making distribution practices more consonant with the public interest. Human progress being continuous, no historic leaps are possible and so there is no objective ground for any periodization. Any delimitation of epochs is a matter of mere convenience. The law of human progress is not to be assimilated to grand schemes postulating a predetermined succession of ages, such as those of the Stoics, Vico, Hegel, A. Comte and K. Marx. Peña's philosophy of history shares with those forerunners the view of human history as universal, both backwards and forwards. There is a common ancestry, which entails that at least a few elements of disparate human traditions go back to our shared origin. Those elements have been, time and again, strengthened by the mutual borrowing of concepts, techniques, institutions and procedures. There is also a common destination, owing to our shared Planet and a converging tendency, which needs no mysterious invisible hand but results from objective constraints. Peña's philosophy of history acknowledges collective minds, which supervene on individual minds. No society can exist without a common memory and common plans of living-together and reaching common aims (which does not mean that all members of the body politic share those feelings; Peña rejects any mandatory imposition of beliefs or values). Peña does not deny the existence of historic breaks caused by social involutions and disasters (wars, foreign subjugations, natural catastrophes) but thinks that every human society finds its way to restart the ascending march. Peña maintains that future-oriented improvement is the sense of human life, both individual and collective; so much so that a fundamental right of man is the right to have a better life—as far as possible. This general right encompasses particular welfare rights, such as the rights to food, to work, to have a dwelling, to mobility and so on, all of which ought to be considered dynamically.   === Republican republicanism === Peña's legal philosophy is a natural-law theory deriving from Aquinas's conception of law as an ordinance of reason for the common good. Some of those ordinances are promulgated by legislators by means of certain speech acts; others, natural-law norms, stem from the very nature of social relations. As against social-covenant views, Peña regards human beings as naturally social, antecedently banded together into a community under an established authority, whose duty is to pursue the public interest. Peña claims that inhabitants of the land enter a quasi-contract by growing up within society and benefiting from established social institutions, thus committing themselves to contribute to the common good and to subordinate their particular interests to those of society as a whole and to the needs of such people as are worse-off. One of the main claims this social philosophy advances is the rejection of the dichotomy between State and civil society, a contrived duality which he blames as the root of serious misconceptions. The primeval meaning of «Republic» being the State, «republicanism» primarily means giving some prominence to the public mission vested in the State, by promoting or favouring the government's intervention and the domain of resources publicly managed—provided, that is, that such a State has no hereditary ruler. Peña has coined the pleonastic phrase «republican republicanism» (or its alternative wording «public republicanism») to designate his political ideas, according to which the State's job is to pursue the common welfare by organizing the public services. Peña claims that there has never been a minimal state concerned with keeping law and order and nothing else. On the contrary, all states have undertaken a broad range of productive activities without which no private enterprise would have been workable at all. Republican republicanism is thus a political philosophy tending to increase the scope of activities entrusted to the State, by setting up a planned economy with a powerful public sector and a gradual socialization of property; in the meanwhile private ownership has to be fraught with legal burdens for the common good. This doctrine borrows a number of ideas from the traditions of the British Fabian Society, French solidarism and German chair-socialism as well as the Spanish school of Krausist philosophers and lawyers who inspired the II Republic (1931–1939), whose Constitution he takes as a paradigm. Peña's republicanism implies the rejection of all forms of market economy, including market socialism. He contends that the State's patronage and intervention can alone bring a sense of directedness and unity of purpose, failing which the only practicable way is mercantile competition, with its dreary, ruthless consequences. According to Peña, republican republicanism differs in four ways from civic neo-republicanism, or civicism. For one thing, it rejects monarchy, while civicism is not concerned over the political form of government. For another, it is statist, while civicists in the main agree with libertarians and liberals in viewing the public arena as a neutral ground within which private endeavours and undertakings are pursued by citizens, companies or other private clubs. Third, civicism promotes such private virtues as foster participation in public institutions, whereas Peña's republicanism recognizes the right of individuals not to be concerned with public issues. And fourth, civicism professes one value, freedom, understood as non-domination, while, as we have already seen, Peña espouses a plurality of values: thriving or welfare (akin to Martha Nussbaum's flourishing), love, liberty, rationality, brotherhood, equality and living-together, owing to which normative and axiological contradictions are unavoidable. Dealing with those contradictions needs weighing and proportion (contradictorial gradualism bears out this proposal). An essential component of Peña's republicanism is the proposal of an Earthian Republic. Peña views regional blocks as splits of the human family bringing about enmities and conflicts of interest rather than a fraternal union, which he champions on the ground of both prudential and axiological considerations.   == Writings by Lorenzo Peña == [1] 2012. «Soft Deontic Logic», in Soft Computing in Humanities and Social Sciences, ed. by Rudolf Seising & Veronica Sanz. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, Volume 273, 2012, pp 157–172. Springer V. DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-24672-2_8. Print ISBN 978-3-642-24671-5. Online ISBN 978-3-642-24672-2. (Coauthored with Txetxu Ausín.) [2] 2012. «Cultural Entities», in The furniture of the world: Essays in ontology and metaphysics, ed. by Guillermo Hurtado & Óscar Nudler. Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi, pp. 281–302. ISBN 978-90-420-3503-4. [3] 2012. «Derechos y deberes de nuestros hermanos inferiores», in Animales no humanos entre animales humanos, ed. by Jimena Rodríguez Carreño, Madrid: Plaza y Valdés, pp. 277–328. ISBN 978-84-15271-15-4. [4] 2010. Ética y servicio público, México/Madrid: Plaza y Valdés. ISBN 978-84-92751-94-5. (Coedited with Txetxu Ausín and Oscar Diego.) [5] 2010. «Paso a paso: Una solución gradualista a la paradoja del sorites, lejos de la indeterminación y del agnosticismo», Bajo Palabra, II Época, Nº 5, pp. 399–418. ISSN 1576-3935. (Coauthored with Marcelo Vásconez.) [6] 2010. Los derechos fundamentales del hombre en el mundo de hoy (Human Rights nowadays), Special Issue of Arbor, ISSN 0210-1963, # 745. (DOI: 10.3989/arbor.2010.745n1237). (Coedited with Txetxu Ausín.) [7] 2009. Estudios Republicanos: Contribución a la filosofía política y jurídica, México/Madrid: Plaza y Valdés. ISBN 978-84-96780-53-8. [8] 2009. «Normatividad y contingencia», in Aproximaciones a la contingencia, ed. by Concha Roldán & Óscar Moro, Madrid: Los libros de la Catarata, pp. 25–64. ISBN 978-84-8319-437-9. [9] 2007. «El cumulativismo», in Pluralidad de la filosofía analítica, ed. by David P. Chico & Moisés Barroso, Madrid-México: Plaza y Valdés, pp. 343–386. ISBN 978-84-96780-02-6. [10] 2006. Los derechos positivos: Las demandas justas de acciones y prestaciones, (co-edited with Txetxu Ausín). México/Madrid: Plaza y Valdés. ISBN 978-84-934395-5-2. [11] 2000. «Paraconsistent Deontic Logic with Enforceable Rights», in Frontiers of Paraconsistent Logic ed. by D. Batens, Ch. Mortensen, G. Priest & J.-P. van Bendegem. Baldford (England): Research Studies Press Ltd. (RSP) [Logic and Computation Series]. ISBN 0863802532, pp. 29–47. [Coauthored with Txetxu Ausín.] [12] 1999. «The Coexistence of Contradictory Properties in the Same Subject According to Aristotle», Apeiron 32/3, pp. 203–30. ISSN 0003-6390. [13] 1998. «C1-Compatible Transitive Extensions of System CT», Logique et Analyse, Nº 161-162-163, pp. 135–143. [14] 1993. «In Defense of Full-Scale Planning», Science and Society 57/2 (New York: Guilford Press), pp. 204–13. ISSN 0036-8237. [15] 1993. Introducción a las lógicas no-clásicas. México: UNAM Pp. 240. ISBN 968-36-3451-6. [16] 1992. Hallazgos filosóficos. Salamanca: Ediciones de la Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca. ISBN 84-7299-289-6. Pp. 363. [17] 1991. Rudimentos de lógica matemática. Madrid: CSIC. Pp. vi+324. ISBN 84-00-07156-5. [18] 1990. «Partial Truth, Fringes and Motion: Three Applications of a Contradictorial Logic». Studies in Soviet Thought, vol 37 (Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 83–122. ISSN 0039-3797. 1989. «Verum et ens conuertuntur: The Identity between Truth and Existence within the Framework of a Contradictorial Modal Set-Theory», in Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on the Inconsistent, ed. by G. Priest, R. Routley & J. Norman. Munich: Philosophia Verlag, pp. 563–612 ISBN 3-88405-058-3. [19] 1987. Fundamentos de ontología dialéctica. Madrid: Siglo XXI. Pp. 427. ISBN 84-323-0606-1. [20] 1985. El ente y su ser: un estudio lógico-metafísico. León: Servicio de Publicaciones de la Universidad de León. Pp. 568. ISBN 84-600-3973-0. [21] 1981. La coincidencia de los opuestos en Dios. Quito: Educ (Ediciones de la Universidad Católica). Pp. 568. ISBN 9978-44-473-4.   == References == [22] Antonella Attili, Interview to Lorenzo Peña (Modus Ponens, #7 and #8. [23] Mauricio Beuchot, «La esencia y la existencia en el sistema ontofántico de Lorenzo Peña», Cuadernos Salmantinos de Filosofía XVI (1989), pp. 255–261. [24] José Biedma, «Dialéctica de la plenitud» Revista de Filosofía, Univ. Complutense, #24 (2000) (also [25] http://www.adamar.org/archivo/i_epoca/num4/pag44_27.htm (Adamar #4, spring 2001). [26] Newton C.A. da Costa, «Aspectos de la filosofía de la lógica de Lorenzo Peña», Arbor #520 (1989). [27] Manuel Liz, «Guía de bolsillo con notas y comentarios) del libro de Lorenzo Peña El ente y su ser: Un estudio lógico-metafísico», Contextos, # 17-18, 1991), pp. 67–111. [28] Francesco Paoli, «Comparing Two Views of Comparison: Peña and Casari on Vagueness and Comparatives», Logic & Philosophy of Science, Vol. IV, # 1 (2006), pp. 105–121. [29] Marcelo Vásconez Carrasco, «Justicia, mercado libre y comunismo. El pensamiento socio-político de Lorenzo Peña», in Memorias del VII Encuentro Ecuatoriano de Filosofía, Cuenca, Universidad de Cuenca, 1998, pp. 363–371. [30] Marcelo Vásconez Carrasco, "Ideario ético-político de Lorenzo Peña".   == External links == [31] Lorenzo Peña's home page (http://lp.jurid.net) [32] SORITES (http://www.sorites.org) [33] The CSIC digital repository [34] Google Profile of Lorenzo Peña [35] Profile of Lorenzo Peña at the site academia.edu [36] His current publisher's site

Lorenzo (or Laurentius) Valla (Italian pronunciation: [loˈrɛntso ˈvalla]; c.1407 – 1 August 1457) was an Italian humanist, rhetorician, and educator. He is best known for his textual analysis that proved that the Donation of Constantine was a forgery.   == Early lifeEdit == Valla was born in Rome. His family was from Piacenza; his father, Luciave della Valla, was a lawyer who worked at the papal court. In 1431, he entered the priesthood, and after trying in vain to secure a position as apostolic secretary, he went to Piacenza, whence he proceeded to Pavia, where he obtained a professorship of eloquence. His tenure at Pavia was made unpleasant by his attack on the Latin style of the great jurist Bartolus de Saxoferrato. Valla wandered from one university to another, accepting short engagements and lecturing in many cities.   == Latin stylisticsEdit == By this time Valla had won a high reputation for two works: his dialogue De Voluptate, and his treatise De Elegantiis Latinae Linguae. In De Voluptate (On Pleasure), he contrasted the principles of the Stoics with the tenets of Epicurus, openly proclaiming his sympathy with those who claimed the right of free indulgence for man's natural appetites. It was a remarkable utterance. Here for the first time in the Renaissance the ideas of Epicurus found deliberate and positive expression in a work of scholarly and philosophical value. De Elegantiis was no less original, although in a different sphere of thought. This work subjected the forms of Latin grammar and the rules of Latin style and rhetoric to a critical examination, and placed the practice of composition upon a foundation of analysis and inductive reasoning. It was a basis for the movement of the Humanists to reform Latin prose style to a more classical and Ciceronian direction on a scientific basis. Valla's work was controversial when it appeared, but its arguments carried the day. As a result, humanistic Latin sought to purge itself of post-Classical words and features, and became stylistically very different from the Christian Latin of the European Middle Ages. This was thought to be a major improvement in style and elegance in Latin usage.   == Exposing historical hoaxesEdit == Valla's originality, critical acumen, and knowledge of classical Latin style were put to good use in an essay he wrote between 1439 and 1440, De falso credita et ementita Constantini Donatione declamatio. In this he demonstrated that the document known as the Constitutum Constantini (or "donatio Constantini" as he refers to it in his writings), or the Donation of Constantine, could not possibly have been written in the historical era of Constantine I (4th Century), as its vernacular style dated conclusively to a later era (8th Century). One of Valla's reasons was that the document contained the word satrap which he believed Romans such as Constantine I would not have used. The document, though met with great criticism at its introduction, was accepted as legitimate, in part owing to the beneficial nature of the document for the western church. The Donation of Constantine suggests that Constantine I "donated" the whole of the Western Roman Empire to the Roman Catholic Church as an act of gratitude for having been miraculously cured of leprosy by Pope Sylvester I. This would have obviously discounted Pepin the Short's own Donation of Pepin, which consigned to the Church the Lombard holdings north of Rome. Valla was motivated to reveal the Donation of Constantine as a fraud by his patron of the time, Alfonso V of Aragon, who was involved in a territorial conflict with the Papal States, then under Pope Eugene IV. The Donation of Constantine had often been cited to support the temporal power of the Papacy, since at least the 11th century. Valla’s work in proving the Donation of Constantine to be a forgery was written at the behest of his patron, Alfonso V of Aragon. Alfonso was in conflict with the Papal States over disputed territory and Valla’s work could be used to weaken or possibly negate the Church’s authority and claim over the territory. Valla did not expose the donation out of any hatred of Christianity however. He was a Christian himself after all; he simply wished to expose the leaders of the Church who he felt had been gaining too much power and were beginning to act more as sovereigns than religious officials. In his most famous work, De Falso Credita et Ementita Constantini Donatione Declamatio, Valla proves the donation of Constantine to be false and deceitful. He does so by comparing the document philologically to surviving documents from the time of Constantine to show that the language used in the document does not match with the language used as the time of in which the Donation of Constantine was supposedly written. Valla also points out a number of logical impossibilities that exist within the document. The essay began circulating in 1440, but was heavily rejected by the Church. It was not formally published until 1517. It became popular among Protestants. An English translation was published for Thomas Cromwell in 1534. Valla's case was so convincingly argued that it still stands today, and the illegitimacy of the Donation of Constantine is generally conceded.   == Subsequent careerEdit == From Naples, Valla continued his philological work. He showed that the supposed letter of Christ to Abgarus was a forgery, and by throwing doubt upon the authenticity of other spurious documents, and by questioning the utility of monastic life, he aroused the anger of some of the faithful. He was compelled to appear before a tribunal composed of his enemies, and he only escaped by the special intervention of Alfonso. He was not, however, silenced; he ridiculed the Latin of the Vulgate and accused St Augustine of heresy. In 1444 he visited Rome, but in this city also his enemies were numerous and powerful, and he only saved his life by fleeing in disguise to Barcelona, whence he returned to Naples. But a better fortune attended him after the death of Eugene IV in February 1447. Again he journeyed to Rome, where he was welcomed by the new pope, Nicholas V, who made him an apostolic secretary. This entrance of Valla into the Roman Curia has been called "the triumph of humanism over orthodoxy and tradition." On 7 March, the feast of St. Thomas Aquinas the studium generale of the Dominican Order at Rome, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum, invited Valla to deliver the annual encomium of the "angelic doctor," pressing him not only to praise but also to voice humanist criticism of scholastic thomism. Valla also enjoyed the favour of Pope Calixtus III.   == Textual criticismEdit == One of Valla's most remarkable achievements lay in his emendations of Latin texts. He made countless suggestions for better readings in his manuscript of Livy's Ab urbe condita, which, in the previous century, had belonged to Petrarch, who, likewise had inserted emendations. The emendation of Livy was also a topic discussed in book IV of his Antidotum in Facium, an invective against Bartolomeo Facio. In this part of the treatise, which also circulated independently under the title Emendationes in T. Livium, Valla elucidates numerous corrupt passages and criticises the attempts at emendation made by Panormita and Facio, his rivals at the court of Alfonso the Magnanimous.   == Biographies and critical esteemEdit == All the older biographical notices of Valla are loaded with long accounts of his many literary and theological disputes, the most famous of which was the one with Poggio, which took place after his settlement in Rome. It is almost impossible to form a just estimate of Valla's private life and character owing to the clouds of dust which were stirred up by this and other controversies, in which the most virulent and obscene language was employed. He appears, however, as a vain, jealous and quarrelsome man, but he combined the qualities of an elegant humanist, an acute critic and a venomous writer, who had committed himself to a violent polemic against the temporal power of Rome. In him posterity honors not so much the scholar and the stylist as the man who initiated a bold method of criticism, which he applied alike to language, to historical documents and to ethical opinions. Luther had a very high opinion of Valla and of his writings, and Cardinal Bellarmine calls him praecursor Lutheri, while Sir Richard Jebb says that his De Elegantiis "marked the highest level that had yet been reached in the critical study of Latin." Erasmus stated in his De ratione studii that for Latin Grammar, there was "no better guide than Lorenzo Valla."   == WorksEdit == Collected, but not quite complete, editions of Valla's works were published at Basel in 1540 and at Venice in 1592, and Elegantiae linguae Latinae was reprinted nearly sixty times between 1471 and 1536. Opera omnia, Basel 1540; reprinted with a second volume (Turin: Bottega d'Erasmo, 1962). Repastinatio dialectice et philosophie, ed. G. Zippel, 2 vols. (First critical edition of the three versions: Padua: Antenore, 1982). Elegantiae linguae Latinae, Venice 1471, edited by S. López Moreda (Cáceres: Universidad de Extremadura, 1999). De vero falsoque bono, edited by M. de Panizza Lorch, Bari, 1970. Collatio Novi Testamenti, edited by A. Perosa (Florence: Sansoni, 1970). De falso credita et ementita Constantini donatione, ed. W. Setz (Weimar: Hermann Böhlaus Nachfolger, 1976; reprinted Leipzig: Teubner, 1994). Ars Grammatica, ed. P. Casciano with Italian translation (Milan: Mondadori, Fondazione Lorenzo Valla, 1990).   == English translationsEdit == On the donation of Constantine translated by G. W. Bowersock, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008. Dialogue on Free Will, translated by C. Trinkaus. In: 'The Renaissance Philosophy of Man', edited by Ernst Cassirer et al., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948. The profession of the religious and selections from The falsely-believed and forged donation of Constantine translated, and with an introduction and notes, by Olga Zorzi Pugliese, Toronto: Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies, 1998. De vero falsoque bono translated by A. K. Hieatt and M. Lorch, New York: Abaris Books 1977. In Praise of Saint Thomas Aquinas, translated by M. E. Hanley. In Renaissance Philosophy, ed. L. A. Kennedy, Mouton: The Hague, 1973. Dialectical Disputations, Latin text and English translation of the Repastinatio by B. P. Copenhaver and L. Nauta, Harvard University Press, 2012 (I Tatti Renaissance Library, two volumes).   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Valla, Lorenzo". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == Further readingEdit == For detailed accounts of Valla's life and work see: G. Voigt, Die Wiederbelebung des classischen Alterthums (1880–81); John Addington Symonds, Renaissance in Italy (1897–99); G. Mancini, Vita di Lorenzo Valla (Florence, 1891); M. von Wolff, Lorenzo Valla (Leipzig, 1893); Jakob Burckhardt, Kultur der Renaissance (1860); J. Vahlen, Laurentius Valla (Berlin, 1870); L Pastor, Geschichte der Päpste, Band ii. English trans. by FI Antrobus (1892); The article in Herzog-Hauck's Realencyklopädie, Band xx. (Leipzig, 1908). John Edwin Sandys, Hist. of Class. Schol. ii. (1908), pp. 66‑70. Lisa Jardine, "Lorenzo Valla and the Intellectual Origins of Humanist Dialectic," Journal of the History of Philosophy 15 (1977): 143-64. Maristella de Panizza Lorch, A defense of life: Lorenzo Valla's theory of pleasure., Humanistische Bibliothek 1/36, Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 1985, ISBN 978-3-7705-2193-7 Peter Mack, Renaissance Argument: Valla and Agricola in the Traditions of Rhetoric and Dialectic, Leiden ; New York : E.J. Brill, 1993. Matthew DeCoursey, "Continental European Rhetoricians, 1400-1600, and Their Influence in Renaissance England," British Rhetoricians and Logicians, 1500-1660, First Series, DLB 236, Detroit: Gale, 2001, pp. 309–343. Melissa Meriam Bullard, "The Renaissance Project of Knowing: Lorenzo Valla and Salvatore Camporeale's Contributions to the Querelle Between Rhetoric and Philosophy," Journal of the History of Ideas 66.4 (2005): 477-81. Brian P. Copenhaver, "Valla Our Contemporary: Philosophy and Philology," Journal of the History of Ideas 66.4 (2005): 507-25. Christopher S. Celenza, "Lorenzo Valla and the Traditions and Transmissions of Philosophy,” Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 483-506. Lodi Nauta, In Defense of Common Sense: Lorenzo Valla's Humanist Critique of Scholastic Philosophy, Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Press, 2009. Byrne, Phillipa (2013). "‘Cast out into the hellish night’: Pagan Virtue and Pagan Poetics in Lorenzo Valla's De voluptate" (PDF). Ex Historia 5: 48–73. ISSN 2041-0824.    == External linksEdit == Lorenzo Valla entry by Lodi Nauta in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Lorenzo Valla, Discourse on the Forgery of the Alleged Donation of Constantine Lorenzo Valla: Elegantiarum Laurentii Vallae. Naples (c. 1473). At Somni Tomb of Lorenzo Valla

Lotfali Askar Zadeh (/ˈzɑːdeɪ/; Azerbaijani: Lütfəli Rəhimoğlu Əsgərzadə; born February 4, 1921), better known as Lotfi A. Zadeh, is a mathematician, computer scientist, electrical engineer, artificial intelligence researcher and professor emeritus of computer science at the University of California, Berkeley. He is best known for proposing the fuzzy mathematics consisting of those fuzzy related concepts: fuzzy sets, fuzzy logic, fuzzy algorithms, fuzzy semantics, fuzzy languages, fuzzy control, fuzzy systems, fuzzy probabilities, fuzzy events, and fuzzy information.   == Life and career == Zadeh was born in Baku, Azerbaijan SSR, as Lotfi Aliaskerzadeh, to an Iranian Azerbaijani father from Ardabil, Rahim Aleskerzade, who was a journalist on assignment from Iran, and a Russian Jewish mother, Fanya Korenman, who was a pediatrician from Odessa. The Soviet government at this time courted foreign correspondents, and the family lived well while in Baku. Zadeh attended elementary school for three years there, which he has said "had a significant and long-lasting influence on my thinking and my way of looking at things." In 1931, when Zadeh was ten years old, his family moved to Tehran in Iran, his father's homeland. Zadeh was enrolled in Alborz College, which was a Presbyterian missionary school, where he was educated for the next eight years, and where he met his future wife, Fay. Zadeh says that he was "deeply influenced" by the "extremely decent, fine, honest and helpful" missionaries from the United States who ran the college. "To me they represented the best that you could find in the United States – people from the Midwest with strong roots. They were really 'Good Samaritans' – willing to give of themselves for the benefit of others. So this kind of attitude influenced me deeply. It also instilled in me a deep desire to live in the United States." During this time, Zadeh was awarded several patents. Despite being more fluent in Russian than in Persian, Zadeh sat for the national university exams and placed third in the entire country. As a student, he ranked first in his class in his first two years. In 1942, he graduated from the University of Tehran with a degree in electrical engineering (Fanni), one of only three students in that field to graduate that year, due to the turmoil created by World War II, when the United States, Britain, and the Soviet Union invaded Iran whose ruler, the Shah, was pro-German. Over 30,000 American soldiers were based there, and Zadeh worked with his father, who did business with them as a contractor for hardware and building materials. In 1943, Zadeh decided to emigrate to the United States, and traveled to Philadelphia by way of Cairo after months of delay waiting for the proper papers or for the right ship to appear. He arrived in mid-1944, and entered M.I.T. as a graduate student later that year. While in the United States, he changed his name to Lotfi Asker Zadeh. He received an MS degree in electrical engineering from M.I.T. in 1946, and then applied to Columbia University, as his parents had settled in New York City. Columbia admitted him as a doctoral student, and offered him an instructorship as well. He received his PhD in electrical engineering from Columbia in 1949, and became an assistant professor the next year. Zadeh taught for ten years at Columbia, was promoted to Full Professor in 1957, and has taught at the University of California, Berkeley since 1959. He published his seminal work on fuzzy sets in 1965, in which he detailed the mathematics of fuzzy set theory. In 1973 he proposed his theory of fuzzy logic.   == Personal life and beliefs ==  Zadeh is noted to be "quick to shrug off nationalism, insisting there are much deeper issues in life", and is quoted as stating in an interview: "The question really isn't whether I'm American, Russian, Iranian, Azerbaijani, or anything else. I've been shaped by all these people and cultures and I feel quite comfortable among all of them." Zadeh also notes in the same interview: "Obstinacy and tenacity. Not being afraid to get embroiled in controversy. That's very much a Turkish tradition. That's part of my character, too. I can be very stubborn. That's probably been beneficial for the development of Fuzzy Logic." He describes himself as "an American, mathematically oriented, electrical engineer of Iranian descent, born in Russia." Zadeh is married to Fay Zadeh and has two children, Stella Zadeh and Norman Zadeh.   == Work == According to Google Scholar, as of September 2015 Zadeh's work had been cited 150,852 times with the 1965 "Fuzzy Sets" paper receiving 58,251.   === Fuzzy sets and systems === Zadeh, in his theory of fuzzy sets, proposed using a membership function (with a range covering the interval [0,1]) operating on the domain of all possible values. He proposed new operations for the calculus of logic and showed that fuzzy logic was a generalisation of classical and Boolean logic. He also proposed fuzzy numbers as a special case of fuzzy sets, as well as the corresponding rules for consistent mathematical operations (fuzzy arithmetic).   === Other contributions === Lotfi Zadeh is also credited, along with John R. Ragazzini, in 1952, with having pioneered the development of the z-transform method in discrete time signal processing and analysis. These methods are now standard in digital signal processing, digital control, and other discrete-time systems used in industry and research. He is an editor of International Journal of Computational Cognition. Zadeh's latest work includes computing with words and perceptions. His recent papers include From Search Engines to Question-Answering Systems—The Role of Fuzzy Logic, Progress in Informatics, No. 1, 1-3, 2005; and Toward a Generalized Theory of Uncertainty (GTU)—An Outline, Information Sciences, Elsevier, Vol. 172, 1-40, 2005.   == Selected publications == 1965. Fuzzy sets. Information and Control. 1965; 8: 338–353. 1965. "Fuzzy sets and systems". In: Fox J, editor. System Theory. Brooklyn, NY: Polytechnic Press, 1965: 29–39. 1972. "A fuzzy-set-theoretical interpretation of linguistic hedges". Journal of Cybernetics 1972; 2: 4–34. 1973. "Outline of a new approach to the analysis of complex systems and decision processes". IEEE Trans. Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 1973; 3: 28–44. 1974. "Fuzzy logic and its application to approximate reasoning". In: Information Processing 74, Proc. IFIP Congr. 1974 (3), pp. 591–594. 1975. "Fuzzy logic and approximate reasoning". Synthese, 1975; 30: 407–428. 1975. "Calculus of fuzzy restrictions". In: Zadeh LA, Fu KS, Tanaka K, Shimura M, editors. Fuzzy Sets and their Applications to Cognitive and Decision Processes. New York: Academic Press, 1975: 1–39. 1975. "The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning", I-III, Information Sciences 8 (1975) 199–251, 301–357; 9 (1976) 43–80. 2002. "From computing with numbers to computing with words — from manipulation of measurements to manipulation of perceptions" in International Journal of Applied Math and Computer Science, pp. 307–324, vol. 12, no. 3, 2002. 2012. Computing With Words. Principal Concepts and Ideas. Berlin: Springer, 2012. A complete list of publications is on the website: http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~zadeh/   == Awards and honors == Zadeh is a Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Association for Computing Machinery, the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence and the International Fuzzy Systems Association, and a member of the National Academy of Engineering. He is also a member of the Academies of Science of Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Finland, Korea and Poland and of the International Academy of Systems Studies in Moscow. He has received 24 honorary doctorates. Awards received by Zadeh include, among many others: IEEE Education Medal; 1973 IEEE Richard W. Hamming Medal, for "seminal contributions to information science and systems, including the conceptualization of fuzzy sets"; 1992 American Society of Mechanical Engineers Rufus Oldenburger Medal; 1993. Honorary Professorship from the Azerbaijan State Oil Academy; 1993 IEEE Medal of Honor, for "pioneering development of fuzzy logic and its many diverse applications"; 1995 American Automatic Control Council's Richard E. Bellman Control Heritage Award; 1998. ACM Allen Newell Award; 2001 Outstanding Contribution Award, Web Intelligence Consortium (WIC), Halifax, Canada, 2003. Wall of Fame, Heinz Nixdorf MuseumsForum (HNF), Paderborn, Germany, 2004. V. Kaufmann Prize and Gold Medal, International Association for Fuzzy-Set Management and Economy (SIGEF), Barcelona, Spain, Nov. 15, 2004. J. Keith Brimacombe IPMM Award in recognition of his development of fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic, 2005. Benjamin Franklin Medal in Electrical Engineering from The Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, for inventing and developing the field of "fuzzy logic"; 2009 Induction into the IEEE Intelligent Systems' AI's Hall of Fame, 2011, "for his work on soft computing, fuzzy logic, and neural-net theory". BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in the category of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), Spain, 2012.   == References == Notes  Sources McNeil, Daniel and Freiberger, Paul. Fuzzy Logic: The discovery of a revolutionary computer technology - and how it is changing our world. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993. ISBN 0-671-73843-7 Further reading Fuzzy Sets and Systems. The main journal of the field which contains many contributions by its founder. Zadeh, Fay. "My Life and Travels with the Father of Fuzzy Logic". 1998, TSI Press, Albuquerque, NM. Zadeh, Lofti A. "Lotfi Visions", two-part interview with Jack J. Woehr, Dr. Dobb's Journal, July, 1994 (part 1) and August, 1994 (part 2). Seising, Rudolf: The Fuzzification of Systems. The Genesis of Fuzzy Set Theory and Its Initial Applications - Developments up to the 1970s (Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, Vol. 216) Berlin, New York, [et al.]: Springer 2007.   == External links == Lotfi Zadeh, Berkeley Commencement Speech: "Commercialism and Human Values: When You Can't Stop for Lunch," in Azerbaijan International, Vol. 6:1 (Spring 1998), p. 65. "Famous People: Then and Now, Lotfi Zadeh (reflecting on his childhood) in Azerbaijan International, Vol. 7:4 (Winter 1999), pp. 28-29. "Lotfi Zadeh: Short Biographical Sketch". Azerbaijan International, Vol. 2:4 (Winter 1994), p. 49. CS.Berkeley.edu, Academic profile – Berkeley, University of California. Univagora.ro, Honorary Chair and Keynote Speaker, ICCCC 2008, A conference dedicated to the Centenary of John Bardeen. 1965 seminal work on CS.Berkeley.edu, Fuzzy Sets [1], Zadeh's Google Scholar Citations Zadeh's PhD students Lotfi A. Zadeh at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Lotfi A. Zadeh at the AI Genealogy Project.

Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein (/ˈvɪtɡənˌstaɪn/; German: [ˈvɪtgənˌʃtaɪn]; 26 April 1889 – 29 April 1951) was an Austrian-British philosopher who worked primarily in logic, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of mind, and the philosophy of language. From 1929 to 1947, Wittgenstein taught at the University of Cambridge. During his lifetime he published just one slim book, the 75-page Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921), one article, one book review and a children's dictionary. His voluminous manuscripts were edited and published posthumously. Philosophical Investigations appeared as a book in 1953, and by the end of the century it was considered an important modern classic. His teacher Bertrand Russell described Wittgenstein as "the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally conceived; passionate, profound, intense, and dominating." Born in Vienna into one of Europe's richest families, he inherited a large fortune from his father in 1913. He gave some considerable sums to poor artists. In a period of severe personal depression after the first World War, he then gave away his entire fortune to his brothers and sisters. Three of his brothers committed suicide, with Wittgenstein contemplating it too. He left academia several times—serving as an officer on the front line during World War I, where he was decorated a number of times for his courage; teaching in schools in remote Austrian villages where he encountered controversy for hitting children when they made mistakes in mathematics; and working as a hospital porter during World War II in London where he told patients not to take the drugs they were prescribed while largely managing to keep secret the fact that he was one of the world's most famous philosophers. He described philosophy, however, as "the only work that gives me real satisfaction." His philosophy is often divided into an early period, exemplified by the Tractatus, and a later period, articulated in the Philosophical Investigations. The early Wittgenstein was concerned with the logical relationship between propositions and the world and believed that by providing an account of the logic underlying this relationship, he had solved all philosophical problems. The later Wittgenstein rejected many of the assumptions of the Tractatus, arguing that the meaning of words is best understood as their use within a given language-game. Wittgenstein's influence has been felt in nearly every field of the humanities and social sciences, yet there are diverging interpretations of his thought. In the words of his friend and colleague Georg Henrik von Wright:  He was of the opinion... that his ideas were generally misunderstood and distorted even by those who professed to be his disciples. He doubted he would be better understood in the future. He once said he felt as though he was writing for people who would think in a different way, breathe a different air of life, from that of present-day men.   == BackgroundEdit ==   === The WittgensteinsEdit ===  According to a family tree prepared in Jerusalem after World War II, Wittgenstein's paternal great-grandfather was Moses Meier, a Jewish land agent who lived with his wife, Brendel Simon, in Bad Laasphe in the Principality of Wittgenstein, Westphalia. In July 1808, Napoleon issued a decree that everyone, including Jews, must adopt an inheritable family surname, and so Meier's son, also Moses, took the name of his employers, the Sayn-Wittgensteins, and became Moses Meier Wittgenstein. His son, Hermann Christian Wittgenstein—who took the middle name "Christian" to distance himself from his Jewish background—married Fanny Figdor, also Jewish, who converted to Protestantism just before they married, and the couple founded a successful business trading in wool in Leipzig. Ludwig's grandmother Fanny was a first cousin of the famous violinist Joseph Joachim. They had 11 children—among them Wittgenstein's father. Karl Otto Clemens Wittgenstein (1847–1913) became an industrial tycoon, and by the late 1880s was one of the richest men in Europe, with an effective monopoly on Austria's steel cartel. Thanks to Karl, the Wittgensteins became the second wealthiest family in Austria-Hungary, behind only the Rothschilds. As a result of his decision in 1898 to invest substantially in the Netherlands and in Switzerland as well as overseas, particularly in the US, the family was to an extent shielded from the hyperinflation that hit Austria in 1922. However, their wealth diminished due to post-1918 hyperinflation and subsequently during the Great Depression, although even as late as 1938 they owned 13 mansions in Vienna alone.   === Early lifeEdit ===  Wittgenstein's mother was Leopoldine Maria Josefa Kalmus, known among friends as Poldi. Her father was a Bohemian Jew and her mother was Austrian-Slovene Catholic—she was Wittgenstein's maternal grandmother and only non-Jewish grandparent, whose ancestry was Austrian, and so by Jewish law Wittgenstein was not Jewish. She was an aunt of the Nobel Prize laureate Friedrich Hayek on her maternal side. Wittgenstein was born at 8:30 pm on 26 April 1889 in the so-called "Wittgenstein Palace" at Alleegasse 16, now the Argentinierstrasse, near the Karlskirche. Karl and Poldi had nine children in all. There were four girls: Hermine, Margaret (Gretl), Helene, and a fourth daughter Dora who died as a baby; and five boys: Johannes (Hans), Kurt, Rudolf (Rudi), Paul—who became a concert pianist despite losing an arm in World War I—and Ludwig, who was the youngest of the family. The children were baptized as Catholics, received formal Catholic instruction, and raised in an exceptionally intense environment. The family was at the center of Vienna's cultural life; Bruno Walter described the life at the Wittgensteins' palace as an "all-pervading atmosphere of humanity and culture." Karl was a leading patron of the arts, commissioning works by Auguste Rodin and financing the city's exhibition hall and art gallery, the Secession Building. Gustav Klimt painted Wittgenstein's sister for her wedding portrait, and Johannes Brahms and Gustav Mahler gave regular concerts in the family's numerous music rooms. For Wittgenstein, who highly valued precision and discipline, contemporary music was never considered acceptable at all. "Music," he said to his friend Drury in 1930, "came to a full stop with Brahms; and even in Brahms I can begin to hear the noise of machinery." Wittgenstein himself had absolute pitch, and his devotion to music remained vitally important to him throughout his life: he made frequent use of musical examples and metaphors in his philosophical writings, and was unusually adept at whistling lengthy and detailed musical passages. He also learnt to play the clarinet in his thirties. A fragment of music (three bars), composed by Wittgenstein, was discovered in one of his 1931 notebooks, by Dr Michael Nedo, Director of the Wittgenstein Institute in Cambridge.   === Family temperament; brothers' suicidesEdit ===  Ray Monk writes that Karl's aim was to turn his sons into captains of industry; they were not sent to school lest they acquire bad habits, but were educated at home to prepare them for work in Karl's industrial empire. Three of the five brothers would later commit suicide. Psychiatrist Michael Fitzgerald argues that Karl was a harsh perfectionist who lacked empathy, and that Wittgenstein's mother was anxious and insecure, unable to stand up to her husband. Johannes Brahms said of the family, whom he visited regularly: "They seemed to act towards one another as if they were at court." The family appeared to have a strong streak of depression running through it. Anthony Gottlieb tells a story about Paul practicing on one of the seven grand pianos in the Wittgensteins' main family mansion, when he suddenly shouted at Ludwig in the next room: "I cannot play when you are in the house, as I feel your scepticism seeping towards me from under the door!"  The family Palais housed seven grand pianos and each of the siblings pursued music "with an enthusiasm that, at times, bordered on the pathological." The eldest brother, Hans, was hailed as a musical prodigy. At the age of four, writes Alexander Waugh, Hans could identify the Doppler effect in a passing siren as a quarter-tone drop in pitch, and at five started crying "Wrong! Wrong!" when two brass bands in a carnival played the same tune in different keys. But he died in mysterious circumstances in May 1902, when he ran away to America and disappeared from a boat in Chesapeake Bay, most likely having committed suicide. Two years later, aged 22 and studying chemistry at the Berlin Academy, the third eldest brother, Rudi, committed suicide in a Berlin bar. He had asked the pianist to play Thomas Koschat's "Verlassen, verlassen, verlassen bin ich" ("Forsaken, forsaken, forsaken am I"), before mixing himself a drink of milk and potassium cyanide. He had left several suicide notes, one to his parents that said he was grieving over the death of a friend, and another that referred to his "perverted disposition". It was reported at the time that he had sought advice from the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee, an organization that was campaigning against Paragraph 175 of the German Criminal Code, which prohibited homosexual sex. His father forbade the family from ever mentioning his name again. The second eldest brother, Kurt, an officer and company director, shot himself on 27 October 1918 at the end of World War I, when the Austrian troops he was commanding refused to obey his orders and deserted en masse. According to Gottlieb, Hermine had said Kurt seemed to carry "...the germ of disgust for life within himself." Later Wittgenstein wrote: "I ought to have... become a star in the sky. Instead of which I have remained stuck on earth."   == 1903–1906: Realschule in LinzEdit ==   === Realschule in LinzEdit ===  Wittgenstein was taught by private tutors at home until he was fourteen years old. Subsequently, for three years, he attended a school. After the deaths of Hans and Rudi, Karl relented, and allowed Paul and Ludwig to be sent to school. Waugh writes that it was too late for Wittgenstein to pass his exams for the more academic Gymnasium in Wiener Neustadt; having had no formal schooling, he failed his entrance exam and only barely managed after extra tutoring to pass the exam for the more technically oriented K.u.k. Realschule in Linz, a small state school with 300 pupils. In 1903, when he was 14, he began his three years of formal schooling there, lodging nearby in term time with the family of a Dr. Srigl, a master at the local gymnasium, the family giving him the nickname Luki. On starting at the Realschule, Wittgenstein had been moved forward a year. Historian Brigitte Hamann writes that he stood out from the other boys: he spoke an unusually pure form of High German with a stutter, dressed elegantly, and was sensitive and unsociable. Monk writes that the other boys made fun of him, singing after him: "Wittgenstein wandelt wehmütig widriger Winde wegen Wienwärts" ("Wittgenstein strolls wistfully Vienna-wards due to adverse winds"). In his leaving certificate, he received a top mark (5) in religious studies; a 2 for conduct and English, 3 for French, geography, history, mathematics and physics, and 4 for German, chemistry, geometry and freehand drawing. He had particular difficulty with spelling and failed his written German exam because of it. He wrote in 1931: "My bad spelling in youth, up to the age of about 18 or 19, is connected with the whole of the rest of my character (my weakness in study)."   === FaithEdit === Wittgenstein was baptized as an infant by a Catholic priest and received formal instruction in Catholic doctrine as a child. It was while he was at the Realschule that he decided he had lost his faith in God. He nevertheless believed in the importance of the idea of confession. He wrote in his diaries about having made a major confession to his oldest sister, Hermine, while he was at the Realschule; Monk writes that it may have been about his loss of faith. He also discussed it with Gretl, his other sister, who directed him to Arthur Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation. As a teenager, Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism. However, after his study of the philosophy of mathematics, he abandoned epistemological idealism for Gottlob Frege's conceptual realism. In later years, Wittgenstein was highly dismissive of Schopenhauer, describing him as an ultimately "shallow" thinker: "Schopenhauer has quite a crude mind... where real depth starts, his comes to an end." Wittgenstein's faith would undergo developmental transformations over time, much like his philosophical ideas; his relationship with Christianity and religion, in general, for which he professed a sincere and devoted reverence, would eventually flourish. Undoubtedly, amongst other Christian thinkers, Wittgenstein was influenced by St. Augustine, with whom he would occasionally converse in his Philosophical Investigations. Philosophically, Wittgenstein's thought shows fundamental alignment with religious discourse. For example, Wittgenstein would become one of the century's fiercest critics of Scientism. With age, his deepening Christianity led to many religious elucidations and clarifications, as he untangled language problems in religion, attacking, for example, the temptation to think of God's existence as a matter of scientific evidence. In 1947, finding it more difficult to work, he wrote, "I have had a letter from an old friend in Austria, a priest. In it he says that he hopes my work will go well, if it should be God's will. Now that is all I want: if it should be God's will."  In Wittgenstein's Culture and Value, it is found, "Is what I am doing [my work in philosophy] really worth the effort? Yes, but only if a light shines on it from above." His close friend Norman Malcolm would write, “Wittgenstein’s mature life was strongly marked by religious thought and feeling. I am inclined to think that he was more deeply religious than are many people who correctly regard themselves as religious believers.”  At last, Wittgenstein writes, "Bach wrote on the title page of his Orgelbuechlein, ‘To the glory of the most high God, and that my neighbour may be benefited thereby.’ That is what I would have liked to say about my work.”    === Influence of Otto WeiningerEdit ===  While a student at the Realschule, Wittgenstein was influenced by Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger's 1903 book Geschlecht und Charakter (Sex and Character). Weininger (1880–1903), who was also Jewish, argued that the concepts male and female exist only as Platonic forms, and that Jews tend to embody the platonic femininity. Whereas men are basically rational, women operate only at the level of their emotions and sexual organs. Jews, Weininger argued, are similar, saturated with femininity, with no sense of right and wrong, and no soul. Weininger argues that man must choose between his masculine and feminine sides, consciousness and unconsciousness, Platonic love and sexuality. Love and sexual desire stand in contradiction, and love between a woman and a man is therefore doomed to misery or immorality. The only life worth living is the spiritual one—to live as a woman or a Jew means one has no right to live at all; the choice is genius or death. Weininger committed suicide, shooting himself in 1903, shortly after publishing the book. Many years later, as a professor at Cambridge, Wittgenstein distributed copies of Weininger's book to his bemused academic colleagues. He said that Weininger's arguments were wrong, but that it was the way they were wrong that was interesting.   === Jewish background and HitlerEdit ===  There is much debate about the extent to which Wittgenstein and his siblings, who were of 3/4 Jewish descent, saw themselves as Jews. The issue has arisen in particular regarding Wittgenstein's schooldays, because Adolf Hitler was at the same school for part of the same time. Laurence Goldstein argues it is "overwhelmingly probable" the boys met each other: that Hitler would have disliked Wittgenstein, a "stammering, precocious, precious, aristocratic upstart ..." Other commentators have dismissed as irresponsible and uninformed any suggestion that Wittgenstein's wealth and unusual personality may have fed Hitler's antisemitism, in part because there is no indication that Hitler would have seen Wittgenstein as Jewish. Wittgenstein and Hitler were born just six days apart, though Hitler had been held back a year, while Wittgenstein was moved forward by one, so they ended up two grades apart at the Realschule. Monk estimates they were both at the school during the 1904–1905 school year, but says there is no evidence they had anything to do with each other. Several commentators have argued that a school photograph of Hitler may show Wittgenstein in the lower left corner, but Hamann says the photograph stems from 1900 or 1901, before Wittgenstein's time. In his own writings Wittgenstein frequently referred to himself as Jewish, at times as part of an apparent self-flagellation. For example, while berating himself for being a "reproductive" as opposed to "productive" thinker, he attributed this to his own Jewish sense of identity, writing: "The saint is the only Jewish genius. Even the greatest Jewish thinker is no more than talented. (Myself for instance)." While Wittgenstein would later claim that "[m]y thoughts are 100% Hebraic," as Hans Sluga has argued, if so, "His was a self-doubting Judaism, which had always the possibility of collapsing into a destructive self-hatred (as it did in Weininger's case) but which also held an immense promise of innovation and genius."   == 1906–1913: UniversityEdit ==   === Engineering at Berlin and ManchesterEdit ===  He began his studies in mechanical engineering at the Technische Hochschule in Charlottenburg, Berlin, on 23 October 1906, lodging with the family of professor Dr. Jolles. He attended for three semesters, and was awarded a diploma on 5 May 1908. During his time at the Institute, Wittgenstein developed an interest in aeronautics. He arrived at the Victoria University of Manchester in the spring of 1908 to do his doctorate, full of plans for aeronautical projects, including designing and flying his own plane. He conducted research into the behavior of kites in the upper atmosphere, experimenting at a meteorological observation site near Glossop. He also worked on the design of a propeller with small jet engines on the end of its blades, something he patented in 1911, and which earned him a research studentship from the university in the autumn of 1908.  It was at this time that he became interested in the foundations of mathematics, particularly after reading Bertrand Russell's The Principles of Mathematics (1903), and Gottlob Frege's Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, vol. 1 (1893) and vol. 2 (1903). Wittgenstein's sister Hermine said he became obsessed with mathematics as a result, and was anyway losing interest in aeronautics. He decided instead that he needed to study logic and the foundations of mathematics, describing himself as in a "constant, indescribable, almost pathological state of agitation." In the summer of 1911 he visited Frege at the University of Jena to show him some philosophy of mathematics and logic he had written, and to ask whether it was worth pursuing. He wrote: "I was shown into Frege's study. Frege was a small, neat man with a pointed beard who bounced around the room as he talked. He absolutely wiped the floor with me, and I felt very depressed; but at the end he said 'You must come again', so I cheered up. I had several discussions with him after that. Frege would never talk about anything but logic and mathematics, if I started on some other subject, he would say something polite and then plunge back into logic and mathematics."   === Arrival at CambridgeEdit ===  Wittgenstein wanted to study with Frege, but Frege suggested he attend the University of Cambridge to study under Russell, so on 18 October 1911 Wittgenstein arrived unannounced at Russell's rooms in Trinity College. Russell was having tea with C. K. Ogden, when, according to Russell, "an unknown German appeared, speaking very little English but refusing to speak German. He turned out to be a man who had learned engineering at Charlottenburg, but during this course had acquired, by himself, a passion for the philosophy of mathematics & has now come to Cambridge on purpose to hear me." He was soon not only attending Russell's lectures, but dominating them. The lectures were poorly attended and Russell often found himself lecturing only to C. D. Broad, E. H. Neville, and H. T. J. Norton. Wittgenstein started following him after lectures back to his rooms to discuss more philosophy, until it was time for the evening meal in Hall. Russell grew irritated; he wrote to his lover Lady Ottoline Morrell: "My German friend threatens to be an infliction." Russell soon came to believe that Wittgenstein was a genius, especially after he had examined Wittgenstein's written work. He wrote in November 1911 that he had at first thought Wittgenstein might be a crank, but soon decided he was a genius: "Some of his early views made the decision difficult. He maintained, for example, at one time that all existential propositions are meaningless. This was in a lecture room, and I invited him to consider the proposition: 'There is no hippopotamus in this room at present.' When he refused to believe this, I looked under all the desks without finding one; but he remained unconvinced." Three months after Wittgenstein's arrival Russell told Morrell: "I love him & feel he will solve the problems I am too old to solve ... He is the young man one hopes for." The role-reversal between him and Wittgenstein was such that he wrote in 1916, after Wittgenstein had criticized his own work: "His criticism, 'tho I don't think he realized it at the time, was an event of first-rate importance in my life, and affected everything I have done since. I saw that he was right, and I saw that I could not hope ever again to do fundamental work in philosophy."   === Cambridge Moral Sciences Club and ApostlesEdit ===  In 1912 Wittgenstein joined the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club, an influential discussion group for philosophy dons and students, delivering his first paper there on 29 November that year, a four-minute talk defining philosophy as "all those primitive propositions which are assumed as true without proof by the various sciences." He dominated the society and stopped attending entirely in the early 1930s after complaints that he gave no one else a chance to speak. The club became infamous within popular philosophy because of a meeting on 25 October 1946 at Richard Braithwaite's rooms in King's, where Karl Popper, another Viennese philosopher, had been invited as the guest speaker. Popper's paper was Are there philosophical problems?, in which he struck up a position against Wittgenstein's, contending that problems in philosophy are real, not just linguistic puzzles as Wittgenstein argued. Accounts vary as to what happened next, but Wittgenstein apparently started waving a hot poker, demanding that Popper give him an example of a moral rule. Popper offered one—"Not to threaten visiting speakers with pokers"—at which point Russell told Wittgenstein he had misunderstood and Wittgenstein left. Popper maintained that Wittgenstein 'stormed out', but it had become accepted practice for him to leave early (because of his aforementioned ability to dominate discussion). It was the only time the philosophers, three of the most eminent in the world, were ever in the same room together. The minutes record that the meeting was "charged to an unusual degree with a spirit of controversy." John Maynard Keynes also invited him to join the Cambridge Apostles, an elite secret society formed in 1820, which both Russell and G. E. Moore had joined as students, but Wittgenstein did not enjoy it and attended infrequently. Russell had been worried that Wittgenstein would not appreciate the group's unseriousness, style of humour, or the fact that the members were in love with one another. He was admitted in 1912 but resigned almost immediately because he could not tolerate the level of the discussion on the Hearth Rug; they took him back though in the 1920s when he returned to Cambridge. (He also had trouble tolerating the discussions in the Moral Sciences Club.)   === Sexual orientation and relationship with David PinsentEdit === Wittgenstein had romantic relations with both men and women. He is generally believed to have fallen in love with at least three men: David Hume Pinsent in 1912, Francis Skinner in 1930, and Ben Richards in the late 1940s. He later revealed that, as a teenager in Vienna, he had had an affair with a woman. Additionally, in the 1920s Wittgenstein became infatuated with a young Swiss woman, Marguerite Respinger, modelling a sculpture of her and proposing marriage, albeit on condition that they did not have children. Wittgenstein's platonic relationship with David Pinsent (1891–1918) occurred during an intellectually formative period, and is well documented. Bertrand Russell introduced Wittgenstein to Pinsent in the summer of 1912. A mathematics undergraduate and descendant of David Hume, Pinsent soon became Wittgenstein's closest friend. The men worked together on experiments in the psychology laboratory about the role of rhythm in the appreciation of music, and Wittgenstein delivered a paper on the subject to the British Psychological Association in Cambridge in 1912. They also travelled together, including to Iceland in September 1912—the expenses paid by Wittgenstein, including first class travel, the hiring of a private train, and new clothes and spending money for Pinsent—and later to Norway. Pinsent's diaries provide valuable insights into Wittgenstein's personality - sensitive, nervous and attuned to the tiniest slight or change in mood from Pinsent. In his diaries Pinsent wrote about shopping for furniture with Wittgenstein in Cambridge when the latter was given rooms in Trinity; most of what they found in the stores was not minimalist enough for Wittgenstein's aesthetics: "I went and helped him interview a lot of furniture at various shops ... It was rather amusing: he is terribly fastidious and we led the shopman a frightful dance, Vittgenstein [sic] ejaculating "No—Beastly!" to 90 percent of what he shewed [archaic spelling] us!" He wrote in May 1912 that Wittgenstein had just begun to study the history of philosophy: "He expresses the most naive surprise that all the philosophers he once worshipped in ignorance are after all stupid and dishonest and make disgusting mistakes!" The last time they saw each other was at a Birmingham railway station on 8 October 1913, when they said goodbye before Wittgenstein left to live in Norway.   == 1913–1920: World War I and the TractatusEdit ==   === Work on LogikEdit ===  Karl Wittgenstein died on 20 January 1913, and after receiving his inheritance Wittgenstein became one of the wealthiest men in Europe. He donated some of his money, at first anonymously, to Austrian artists and writers, including Rainer Maria Rilke and Georg Trakl. Wittgenstein came to feel that he could not get to the heart of his most fundamental questions while surrounded by other academics, and so in 1913 he retreated to the village of Skjolden in Norway, where he rented the second floor of a house for the winter. He later saw this as one of the most productive periods of his life, writing Logik (Notes on Logic), the predecessor of much of the Tractatus. While in Norway, Wittgenstein learned Norwegian to converse with the local villagers, and Danish to read the works of the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard. At Wittgenstein's insistence, Moore, who was now a Cambridge don, visited him in Norway in 1914, reluctantly because Wittgenstein exhausted him. David Edmonds and John Eidinow write that Wittgenstein regarded Moore, an internationally-known philosopher, as an example of how far someone could get in life with "absolutely no intelligence whatever." In Norway it was clear that Moore was expected to act as Wittgenstein's secretary, taking down his notes, with Wittgenstein falling into a rage when Moore got something wrong. When he returned to Cambridge, Moore asked the university to consider accepting Logik as sufficient for a bachelor's degree, but they refused, saying it wasn't formatted properly: no footnotes, no preface. Wittgenstein was furious, writing to Moore in May 1914: "If I am not worth your making an exception for me even in some STUPID details then I may as well go to Hell directly; and if I am worth it and you don't do it then—by God—you might go there." Moore was apparently distraught; he wrote in his diary that he felt sick and could not get the letter out of his head. The two did not speak again until 1929.   === Military serviceEdit ===  On the outbreak of World War I, Wittgenstein immediately volunteered for the Austro-Hungarian Army, despite being eligible for a medical exemption. He served first on a ship and then in an artillery workshop 'several miles from the action'. He was wounded in an accidental explosion, and hospitalised to Kraków. In March 1916, he was posted to a fighting unit on the front line of the Russian front, as part of the Austrian 7th Army, where his unit was involved in some of the heaviest fighting, defending against the Brusilov Offensive. Wittgenstein directed the fire of his own artillery from an observation post in no-man's land against Allied troops - one of the most dangerous jobs there was, since he was targeted by enemy snipers. In action against British troops, he was decorated with the Military Merit with Swords on the Ribbon, and was commended by the army for "His exceptionally courageous behaviour, calmness, sang-froid, and heroism," that "won the total admiration of the troops." In January 1917, he was sent as a member of a howitzer regiment to the Russian front, where he won several more medals for bravery including the Silver Medal for Valour, First Class. In 1918, he was promoted to lieutenant and sent to the Italian front as part of an artillery regiment. For his part in the final Austrian offensive of June 1918, he was recommended for the Gold Medal for Valour, one of the highest honours in the Austrian army, but was instead awarded the Band of the Military Service Medal with Swords — it being decided that this particular action, although extraordinarily brave, had been insufficiently consequential to merit the highest honour. Throughout the war, he kept notebooks in which he frequently wrote philosophical reflections alongside personal remarks, including his contempt for the character of the other soldiers. He discovered Leo Tolstoy's 1896 The Gospel in Brief at a bookshop in Tarnów, and carried it everywhere, recommending it to anyone in distress, to the point where he became known to his fellow soldiers as "the man with the gospels." In 1916 Wittgenstein read Dostoevsky's The Brothers Karamazov so often that he knew whole passages of it by heart, particularly the speeches of the elder Zosima, who represented for him a powerful Christian ideal, a holy man "who could see directly into the souls of other people." Iain King has suggested his writing changed substantially in 1916, when he started confronting much greater dangers. Russell said he returned from the war a changed man, one with a deeply mystical and ascetic attitude.   === Completion of the TractatusEdit === In the summer of 1918 Wittgenstein took military leave and went to stay in one of his family's Vienna summer houses, Neuwaldegg. It was there in August 1918 that he completed the Tractatus, which he submitted with the title Der Satz (German: proposition, sentence, phrase, set, but also "leap") to the publishers Jahoda and Siegel. A series of events around this time left him deeply upset. On 13 August, his uncle Paul died. On 25 October, he learned that Jahoda and Siegel had decided not to publish the Tractatus, and on 27 October, his brother Kurt killed himself, the third of his brothers to commit suicide. It was around this time he received a letter from David Pinsent's mother to say that Pinsent had been killed in a plane crash on 8 May. Wittgenstein was distraught to the point of being suicidal. He was sent back to the Italian front after his leave and, as a result of the defeat of the Austrian army, was captured by Allied forces on 3 November in Trentino. He subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp. He returned to his family in Vienna on 25 August 1919, by all accounts physically and mentally spent. He apparently talked incessantly about suicide, terrifying his sisters and brother Paul. He decided to do two things: to enroll in teacher training college as an elementary school teacher, and to get rid of his fortune. In 1914, it had been providing him with an income of 300,000 Kronen a year, but by 1919 was worth a great deal more, with a sizable portfolio of investments in the United States and the Netherlands. He divided it among his siblings, except for Margarete, insisting that it not be held in trust for him. His family saw him as ill, and acquiesced.   == 1920–1928: Teaching, the Tractatus, Haus WittgensteinEdit ==   === Teacher training in ViennaEdit === In September 1919 he enrolled in the Lehrerbildungsanstalt (teacher training college) in the Kundmanngasse in Vienna. His sister Hermine said that Wittgenstein working as an elementary teacher was like using a precision instrument to open crates, but the family decided not to interfere. Thomas Bernhard, more critically, wrote of this period in Wittgenstein's life: "the multi-millionaire as a village schoolmaster is surely a piece of perversity."   === Teaching posts in AustriaEdit === In the summer of 1920, Wittgenstein worked as a gardener for a monastery. At first he applied, under a false name, for a teaching post at Reichenau, was awarded the job, but he declined it when his identity was discovered. As a teacher, he wished to no longer be recognized as a member of the famous Wittgenstein family. In response, his brother Paul wrote:  "It is out of the question, really completely out of the question, that anybody bearing our name and whose elegant and gentle upbringing can be seen a thousand paces off, would not be identified as a member of our family... That one can neither simulate nor dissimulate anything including a refined education I need hardly tell you."  In 1920, Wittgenstein was given his first job as a primary school teacher in Trattenbach, under his real name, in a remote village of a few hundred people. His first letters describe it as beautiful, but in October 1921, he wrote to Russell: "I am still at Trattenbach, surrounded, as ever, by odiousness and baseness. I know that human beings on the average are not worth much anywhere, but here they are much more good-for-nothing and irresponsible than elsewhere." He was soon the object of gossip among the villagers, who found him eccentric at best. He did not get on well with the other teachers; when he found his lodgings too noisy, he made a bed for himself in the school kitchen. He was an enthusiastic teacher, offering late-night extra tuition to several of the students, something that did not endear him to the parents, though some of them came to adore him; his sister Hermine occasionally watched him teach and said the students "literally crawled over each other in their desire to be chosen for answers or demonstrations." To the less able, it seems that he became something of a tyrant. The first two hours of each day were devoted to mathematics, hours that Monk writes some of the pupils recalled years later with horror. They reported that he caned the boys and boxed their ears, and also that he pulled the girls' hair; This was not unusual at the time for boys, but for the villagers he went too far in doing it to the girls too; girls were not expected to understand algebra, much less have their ears boxed over it. The violence apart, Monk writes that he quickly became a village legend, shouting "Krautsalat!" ("coleslaw" - i.e. shredded cabbage) when the headmaster played the piano, and "Nonsense!" when a priest was answering children's questions.   === Publication of the TractatusEdit === While Wittgenstein was living in isolation in rural Austria, the Tractatus was published to considerable interest, first in German in 1921 as Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, part of Wilhelm Ostwald's journal Annalen der Naturphilosophie, though Wittgenstein was not happy with the result and called it a pirate edition. Russell had agreed to write an introduction to explain why it was important, because it was otherwise unlikely to have been published: it was difficult if not impossible to understand, and Wittgenstein was unknown in philosophy. In a letter to Russell, Wittgenstein wrote "The main point is the theory of what can be expressed (gesagt) by prop[osition]s—i.e. by language—(and, which comes to the same thing, what can be thought) and what can not be expressed by pro[position]s, but only shown (gezeigt); which, I believe, is the cardinal problem of philosophy." But Wittgenstein was not happy with Russell's help. He had lost faith in Russell, finding him glib and his philosophy mechanistic, and felt he had fundamentally misunderstood the Tractatus. An English translation was prepared in Cambridge by Frank Ramsey, a mathematics undergraduate at King's commissioned by C. K. Ogden. It was Moore who suggested Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus for the title, an allusion to Baruch Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. Initially there were difficulties in finding a publisher for the English edition too, because Wittgenstein was insisting it appear without Russell's introduction; Cambridge University Press turned it down for that reason. Finally in 1922 an agreement was reached with Wittgenstein that Kegan Paul would print a bilingual edition with Russell's introduction and the Ramsey-Ogden translation. This is the translation that was approved by Wittgenstein, but it is problematic in a number of ways. Wittgenstein's English was poor at the time, and Ramsey was a teenager who had only recently learned German, so philosophers often prefer to use a 1961 translation by David Pears and Brian McGuinness. An aim of the Tractatus is to reveal the relationship between language and the world: what can be said about it, and what can only be shown. Wittgenstein argues that language has an underlying logical structure, a structure that provides the limits of what can be said meaningfully, and therefore the limits of what can be thought. The limits of language, for Wittgenstein, are the limits of philosophy. Much of philosophy involves attempts to say the unsayable: "What we can say at all can be said clearly," he argues. Anything beyond that—religion, ethics, aesthetics, the mystical—cannot be discussed. They are not in themselves nonsensical, but any statement about them must be. He wrote in the preface: "The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, or rather—not to thinking, but to the expression of thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit (we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought)." The book is 75 pages long—"As to the shortness of the book, I am awfully sorry for it ... If you were to squeeze me like a lemon you would get nothing more out of me," he told Ogden—and presents seven numbered propositions (1–7), with various sub-levels (1, 1.1, 1.11): Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist. The world is everything that is the case.  Was der Fall ist, die Tatsache, ist das Bestehen von Sachverhalten. What is the case, the fact, is the existence of atomic facts.  Das logische Bild der Tatsachen ist der Gedanke. The logical picture of the facts is the thought.  Der Gedanke ist der sinnvolle Satz. The thought is the signiﬁcant proposition.  Der Satz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion der Elementarsätze. Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions.  Die allgemeine Form der Wahrheitsfunktion ist: . Dies ist die allgemeine Form des Satzes. The general form of a truth-function is: . This is the general form of proposition.  Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darüber muß man schweigen. Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.   === Visit from Frank Ramsey, PuchbergEdit ===  In September 1922 he moved to a secondary school in a nearby village, Hassbach, but considered the people there just as bad—"These people are not human at all but loathsome worms," he wrote to a friend—and he left after a month. In November he began work at another primary school, this time in Puchberg in the Schneeberg mountains. There, he told Russell, the villagers were "one-quarter animal and three-quarters human." Frank P. Ramsey visited him on 17 September 1923 to discuss the Tractatus; he had agreed to write a review of it for Mind. He reported in a letter home that Wittgenstein was living frugally in one tiny whitewashed room that only had space for a bed, washstand, a small table, and one small hard chair. Ramsey shared an evening meal with him of coarse bread, butter, and cocoa. Wittgenstein's school hours were eight to twelve or one, and he had afternoons free. After Ramsey returned to Cambridge a long campaign began among Wittgenstein's friends to persuade him to return to Cambridge and away from what they saw as a hostile environment for him. He was accepting no help even from his family. Ramsey wrote to John Maynard Keynes:  "[Wittgenstein's family] are very rich and extremely anxious to give him money or do anything for him in any way, and he rejects all their advances; even Christmas presents or presents of invalid's food, when he is ill, he sends back. And this is not because they aren't on good terms but because he won't have any money he hasn't earned ... It is an awful pity."   === Haidbauer incident, OtterthalEdit ===  He moved schools again in September 1924, this time to Otterthal, near Trattenbach; the socialist headmaster, Josef Putre, was someone Wittgenstein had become friends with while at Trattenbach. While he was there, he wrote a 42-page pronunciation and spelling dictionary for the children, Wörterbuch für Volksschulen, published in Vienna in 1926 by Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, the only book of his apart from the Tractatus that was published in his lifetime. A first edition sold in 2005 for £75,000. An incident occurred in April 1926 and became known as Der Vorfall Haidbauer (the Haidbauer incident). Josef Haidbauer was an 11-year-old pupil whose father had died and whose mother worked as a local maid. He was a slow learner, and one day Wittgenstein hit him two or three times on the head, causing him to collapse. Wittgenstein carried him to the headmaster's office, then quickly left the school, bumping into a parent, Herr Piribauer, on the way out. Piribauer had been sent for by the children when they saw Haidbauer collapse; Wittgenstein had previously pulled Piribauer's daughter, Hermine, so hard by the ears that her ears had bled. Piribauer said that when he met Wittgenstein in the hall that day: "I called him all the names under the sun. I told him he wasn't a teacher, he was an animal-trainer! And that I was going to fetch the police right away!" Piribauer tried to have Wittgenstein arrested, but the village's police station was empty, and when he tried again the next day he was told Wittgenstein had disappeared. On 28 April 1926, Wittgenstein handed in his resignation to Wilhelm Kundt, a local school inspector, who tried to persuade him to stay; however, Wittgenstein was adamant that his days as a schoolteacher were over. Proceedings were initiated in May, and the judge ordered a psychiatric report; in August 1926 a letter to Wittgenstein from a friend, Ludwig Hänsel, indicates that hearings were ongoing, but nothing is known about the case after that. Alexander Waugh writes that Wittgenstein's family and their money may have had a hand in covering things up. Waugh writes that Haidbauer died shortly afterwards of haemophilia; Monk says he died when he was 14 of leukaemia. Ten years later, in 1936, as part of a series of "confessions" he engaged in that year, Wittgenstein appeared without warning at the village saying he wanted to confess personally and ask for pardon from the children he had hit. He visited at least four of the children, including Hermine Piribauer, who apparently replied only with a "Ja, ja," though other former students were more hospitable. Monk writes that the purpose of these confessions was not "to hurt his pride, as a form of punishment; it was to dismantle it—to remove a barrier, as it were, that stood in the way of honest and decent thought." Of the apologies, Wittgenstein wrote, "This brought me into more settled waters... and to greater seriousness."   === The Vienna CircleEdit ===  The Tractatus was now the subject of much debate amongst philosophers, and Wittgenstein was a figure of increasing international fame. In particular, a discussion group of philosophers, scientists and mathematicians, known as the Vienna Circle, had built up largely as a result of the inspiration they had been given by reading the Tractatus. From 1926, with the members of the Vienna Circle, Wittgenstein would take part in many discussions. However, during these discussions, it soon became evident that Wittgenstein held a different attitude towards philosophy than the members of the Circle whom his work had inspired. For example, during meetings of the Vienna Circle, he would express his disagreement with the group's misreading of his work by turning his back to them and reading poetry aloud. In his autobiography, Rudolf Carnap describes Wittgenstein as the thinker who gave him the greatest inspiration. However, he also wrote that "there was a striking difference between Wittgenstein's attitude toward philosophical problems and that of Schlick and myself. Our attitude toward philosophical problems was not very different from that which scientists have toward their problems." As for Wittgenstein:  His point of view and his attitude toward people and problems, even theoretical problems, were much more similar to those of a creative artist than to those of a scientist; one might almost say, similar to those of a religious prophet or a seer... When finally, sometimes after a prolonged arduous effort, his answers came forth, his statement stood before us like a newly created piece of art or a divine revelation ... the impression he made on us was as if insight came to him as through divine inspiration, so that we could not help feeling that any sober rational comment or analysis of it would be a profanation.   === Haus WittgensteinEdit ===  In 1926 Wittgenstein was again working as a gardener for a number of months, this time at the monastery of Hütteldorf, where he had also inquired about becoming a monk. His sister, Margaret, invited him to help with the design of her new townhouse in Vienna's Kundmanngasse. Wittgenstein, his friend Paul Engelmann, and a team of architects developed a spare modernist house. In particular, Wittgenstein focused on the windows, doors, and radiators, demanding that every detail be exactly as he specified. When the house was nearly finished Wittgenstein had an entire ceiling raised 30mm so that the room had the exact proportions he wanted. Monk writes that "This is not so marginal as it may at first appear, for it is precisely these details that lend what is otherwise a rather plain, even ugly house its distinctive beauty." It took him a year to design the door handles and another to design the radiators. Each window was covered by a metal screen that weighed 150 kg, moved by a pulley Wittgenstein designed. Bernhard Leitner, author of The Architecture of Ludwig Wittgenstein, said there is barely anything comparable in the history of interior design: "It is as ingenious as it is expensive. A metal curtain that could be lowered into the floor." The house was finished by December 1928 and the family gathered there at Christmas to celebrate its completion. Wittgenstein's sister Hermine wrote: "Even though I admired the house very much....It seemed indeed to be much more a dwelling for the gods." Wittgenstein said "the house I built for Gretl is the product of a decidedly sensitive ear and good manners, and expression of great understanding... But primordial life, wild life striving to erupt into the open - that is lacking." Monk comments that the same might be said of the technically excellent, but austere, terracotta sculpture Wittgenstein had modelled of Marguerite Respinger in 1926, and that, as Russell first noticed, this "wild life striving to be in the open" was precisely the substance of Wittgenstein's philosophical work.   == 1929–1941: Fellowship at CambridgeEdit ==   === PhD and fellowshipEdit === At the urging of Ramsey and others, Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in 1929. Keynes wrote in a letter to his wife: "Well, God has arrived. I met him on the 5.15 train." Despite this fame, he could not initially work at Cambridge as he did not have a degree, so he applied as an advanced undergraduate. Russell noted that his previous residency was sufficient for a PhD , and urged him to offer the Tractatus as his thesis. It was examined in 1929 by Russell and Moore; at the end of the thesis defence, Wittgenstein clapped the two examiners on the shoulder and said, "Don't worry, I know you'll never understand it." Moore wrote in the examiner's report: "I myself consider that this is a work of genius; but, even if I am completely mistaken and it is nothing of the sort, it is well above the standard required for the Ph.D. degree." Wittgenstein was appointed as a lecturer and was made a fellow of Trinity College.   === AnschlussEdit ===  From 1936 to 1937, Wittgenstein lived again in Norway, where he worked on the Philosophical Investigations. In the winter of 1936/7, he delivered a series of "confessions" to close friends, most of them about minor infractions like white lies, in an effort to cleanse himself. In 1938, he travelled to Ireland to visit Maurice O'Connor Drury, a friend who became a psychiatrist, and considered such training himself, with the intention of abandoning philosophy for it. The visit to Ireland was at the same time a response to the invitation of the then Irish Taoiseach, Éamon de Valera, himself a mathematics teacher. De Valera hoped Wittgenstein's presence would contribute to an academy for advanced mathematics. While he was in Ireland in March 1938, Germany annexed Austria in the Anschluss; the Viennese Wittgenstein was now a citizen of the enlarged Germany and a Jew under the 1935 Nuremberg racial laws, because three of his grandparents had been born as Jews. The Nuremberg Laws classified people as Jews (Volljuden) if they had three or four Jewish grandparents, and as mixed blood (Mischling) if they had one or two. It meant inter alia that the Wittgensteins were restricted in whom they could marry or have sex with, and where they could work. After the Anschluss, his brother Paul left almost immediately for England, and later the US. The Nazis discovered his relationship with Hilde Schania, a brewer's daughter with whom he had had two children but whom he had never married, though he did later. Because she was not Jewish, he was served with a summons for Rassenschande (racial defilement). He told no one he was leaving the country, except for Hilde who agreed to follow him. He left so suddenly and quietly that for a time people believed he was the fourth Wittgenstein brother to have committed suicide. Wittgenstein began to investigate acquiring British or Irish citizenship with the help of Keynes, and apparently had to confess to his friends in England that he had earlier misrepresented himself to them as having just one Jewish grandparent, when in fact he had three. A few days before the invasion of Poland, Hitler personally granted Mischling status to the Wittgenstein siblings. In 1939 there were 2,100 applications for this, and Hitler granted only 12. Anthony Gottlieb writes that the pretext was that their paternal grandfather had been the bastard son of a German prince, which allowed the Reichsbank to claim the gold, foreign currency, and stocks held in Switzerland by a Wittgenstein trust. Gretl, an American citizen by marriage, started the negotiations over the racial status of their grandfather, and the family's large foreign currency reserves were used as a bargaining tool. Paul had escaped to Switzerland and then the US in July 1938, and disagreed with the negotiations, leading to a permanent split between the siblings. After the war, when Paul was performing in Vienna, he did not visit Hermine who was dying there, and he had no further contact with Ludwig or Gretl.   === Professor of philosophyEdit === After G. E. Moore resigned the chair in philosophy in 1939, Wittgenstein was elected, and acquired British citizenship soon afterwards. In July 1939 he travelled to Vienna to assist Gretl and his other sisters, visiting Berlin for one day to meet an official of the Reichsbank. After this, he travelled to New York to persuade Paul, whose agreement was required, to back the scheme. The required Befreiung was granted in August 1939. The unknown amount signed over to the Nazis by the Wittgenstein family, a week or so before the outbreak of war, included amongst many other assets, 1700 kg of gold. There is a report Wittgenstein visited Moscow a second time in 1939, travelling from Berlin, and again met the philosopher Sophia Janowskaya. Norman Malcolm, at the time a post-graduate research fellow at Cambridge, describes his first impressions of Wittgenstein in 1938:  "At a meeting of the Moral Science Club, after the paper for the evening was read and the discussion started, someone began to stammer a remark. He had extreme difficulty in expressing himself and his words were unintelligible to me. I whispered to my neighbour, 'Who's that?': he replied, 'Wittgenstein'. I was astonished because I had expected the famous author of the Tractatus to be an elderly man, whereas this man looked young – perhaps about 35. (His actual age was 49.) His face was lean and brown, his profile was aquiline and strikingly beautiful, his head was covered with a curly mass of brown hair. I observed the respectful attention that everyone in the room paid to him. After this unsuccessful beginning he did not speak for a time but was obviously struggling with his thoughts. His look was concentrated, he made striking gestures with his hands as if he was discoursing... Whether lecturing or conversing privately, Wittgenstein always spoke emphatically and with a distinctive intonation. He spoke excellent English, with the accent of an educated Englishman, although occasional Germanisms would appear in his constructions. His voice was resonant... His words came out, not fluently, but with great force. Anyone who heard him say anything knew that this was a singular person. His face was remarkably mobile and expressive when he talked. His eyes were deep and often fierce in their expression. His whole personality was commanding, even imperial."  Describing Wittgenstein's lecture program, Malcolm continues:  "It is hardly correct to speak of these meetings as 'lectures', although this is what Wittgenstein called them. For one thing, he was carrying on original research in these meetings... Often the meetings consisted mainly of dialogue. Sometimes, however, when he was trying to draw a thought out of himself, he would prohibit, with a peremptory motion of the hand, any questions or remarks. There were frequent and prolonged periods of silence, with only an occasional mutter from Wittgenstein, and the stillest attention from the others. During these silences, Wittgenstein was extremely tense and active. His gaze was concentrated; his face was alive; his hands made arresting movements; his expression was stern. One knew that one was in the presence of extreme seriousness, absorption, and force of intellect... Wittgenstein was a frightening person at these classes."  After work, Wittgenstein would often relax by watching Westerns, where he preferred to sit at the very front of the cinema, or reading detective stories especially the ones written by Norbert Davis.  Norman Malcolm wrote that he would rush to the cinema when class ended. By this time, Wittgenstein's view on the foundations of mathematics had changed considerably. In his early 20s, Wittgenstein had thought logic could provide a solid foundation, and he had even considered updating Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica. Now he denied there were any mathematical facts to be discovered. He gave a series of lectures on mathematics, discussing this and other topics, documented in a book, with lectures by Wittgenstein and discussions between him and several students, including the young Alan Turing.   === World War II and Guy's HospitalEdit === Monk writes that Wittgenstein found it intolerable that a war was going on and he was teaching philosophy. He grew angry when any of his students wanted to become professional philosophers. In September 1941 he asked John Ryle, the brother of the philosopher Gilbert Ryle, if he could get a manual job at Guy's Hospital in London. John Ryle was professor of medicine at Cambridge and had been involved in helping Guy's prepare for the Blitz. Wittgenstein told Ryle he would die slowly if left at Cambridge, and he would rather die quickly. He started working at Guy's shortly afterwards as a dispensary porter, meaning that he delivered drugs from the pharmacy to the wards—where he apparently advised the patients not to take them. The hospital staff were not told he was one of the world's most famous philosophers, though some of the medical staff did recognize him—at least one had attended Moral Sciences Club meetings—but they were discreet. "Good God, don't tell anybody who I am!" Wittgenstein begged one of them. Some of them nevertheless called him Professor Wittgenstein, and he was allowed to dine with the doctors. He wrote on 1 April 1942: "I no longer feel any hope for the future of my life. It is as though I had before me nothing more than a long stretch of living death. I cannot imagine any future for me other than a ghastly one. Friendless and joyless." He had developed a friendship with Keith Kirk, a working-class teenage friend of Francis Skinner, the mathematics undergraduate he had had a relationship with until Skinner's death in 1941 from polio. Skinner had given up academia, thanks at least in part to Wittgenstein's influence, and had been working as a mechanic in 1939, with Kirk as his apprentice. Kirk and Wittgenstein struck up a friendship, with Wittgenstein giving him lessons in physics to help him pass a City and Guilds exam. During his period of loneliness at Guy's he wrote in his diary: "For ten days I've heard nothing more from K, even though I pressed him a week ago for news. I think that he has perhaps broken with me. A tragic thought!" Kirk had in fact got married, and they never saw one another again. While Wittgenstein was at Guy's he met Basil Reeve, a young doctor with an interest in philosophy, who, with Dr R T Grant, was studying the effect of shock on air-raid casualties. When the blitz ended there were fewer casualties to study. In November 1942, Grant and Reeve moved to the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, to study road traffic and industrial casualties. Grant offered Wittgenstein a position as a laboratory assistant at a wage of £4 per week, and he lived in Newcastle (at 28 Brandling Park, Jesmond) from 29 April 1943 until February 1944.   == 1947–1951: Final yearsEdit == He resigned the professorship at Cambridge in 1947 to concentrate on his writing, and in 1947 and 1948 travelled to Ireland, staying at Ross's Hotel in Dublin and at a farmhouse in Redcross, County Wicklow, where he began the manuscript volume MS 137, Band R. Seeking solitude he moved to Rosro, a holiday cottage in Connemara owned by Maurice O'Connor-Drury. He also accepted an invitation from Norman Malcolm, then professor at Cornell University, to stay with him and his wife for several months at Ithaca, New York. He made the trip in April 1949, although he told Malcolm he was too unwell to do philosophical work: "I haven't done any work since the beginning of March & I haven't had the strength of even trying to do any." A doctor in Dublin had diagnosed anaemia and prescribed iron and liver pills. The details of Wittgenstein's stay in America are recounted in Norman Malcolm's Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. During his summer in America, Wittgenstein began his epistemological discussions, in particular his engagement with philosophical skepticism, that would eventually become the final fragments On Certainty.  He returned to London, where he was diagnosed with an inoperable prostate cancer, which had spread to his bone marrow. He spent the next two months in Vienna, where his sister Hermine died on 11 February 1950; he went to see her every day, but she was hardly able to speak or recognize him. "Great loss for me and all of us," he wrote. "Greater than I would have thought." He moved around a lot after Hermine's death staying with various friends: to Cambridge in April 1950, where he stayed with G. H. von Wright; to London to stay with Rush Rhees; then to Oxford to see Elizabeth Anscombe, writing to Norman Malcolm that he was hardly doing any philosophy. He went to Norway in August with Ben Richards, then returned to Cambridge, where on 27 November he moved into Storey's End at 76 Storey's Way, the home of his doctor, Edward Bevan, and his wife Joan; he had told them he did not want to die in a hospital, so they said he could spend his last days in their home instead. Joan at first was afraid of Wittgenstein, but they soon became good friends. By the beginning of 1951, it was clear that he had little time left. He wrote a new will in Oxford on 29 January, naming Rhees as his executor, and Anscombe and von Wright his literary administrators, and wrote to Norman Malcolm that month to say, "My mind's completely dead. This isn't a complaint, for I don't really suffer from it. I know that life must have an end once and that mental life can cease before the rest does." In February he returned to the Bevans' home to work on MS 175 and MS 176. These and other manuscripts were later published as Remarks on Colour and On Certainty. He wrote to Malcolm on 16 April 13 days before his death: "An extraordinary thing happened to me. About a month ago I suddenly found myself in the right frame of mind for doing philosophy. I had been absolutely certain that I'd never again be able to do it. It's the first time after more than 2 years that the curtain in my brain has gone up.—Of course, so far I've only worked for about 5 weeks & it may be all over by tomorrow; but it bucks me up a lot now."   === DeathEdit === Wittgenstein began work on his final manuscript, MS 177, on 25 April 1951. It was his 62nd birthday on 26 April. He went for a walk the next afternoon, and wrote his last entry that day, 27 April. That evening, he became very ill; when his doctor told him he might live only a few days, he reportedly replied, "Good!" Joan stayed with him throughout that night, and just before losing consciousness for the last time on 28 April, he told her: "Tell them I've had a wonderful life." Norman Malcolm describes this as a "...strangely moving utterance." Four of Wittgenstein's former students arrived at his bedside—Ben Richards, Elizabeth Anscombe, Yorick Smythies, and Maurice O'Connor Drury. Anscombe and Smythies were Catholics; and, at the latter's request, a Dominican friar, Father Conrad Pepler, also attended. They were at first unsure what Wittgenstein would have wanted, but then remembered he had said he hoped his Catholic friends would pray for him, so they did, and he was pronounced dead shortly afterwards. Wittgenstein was given a Catholic burial at Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in Cambridge. Drury later said he had been troubled ever since about whether that was the right thing to do. The ledger gravestone has recently been refurbished by the British Wittgenstein Society. On his religious views, Wittgenstein was said to be greatly interested in Catholicism and was sympathetic to it. In his university years, he expressed belief in the Resurrection of Jesus. However, he did not consider himself to be a Catholic. According to Norman Malcolm, Wittgenstein saw Catholicism as more of a way of life than as a set of beliefs he personally held, considering that he did not accept any religious faith. Wittgenstein was said to be agnostic, in a qualified sense, in the last years of his life.   == 1953: Publication of the Philosophical InvestigationsEdit ==  The Blue Book, a set of notes dictated to his class at Cambridge in 1933–1934, contains the seeds of Wittgenstein's later thoughts on language, and is widely read as a turning-point in his philosophy of language. Philosophical Investigations was published in two parts in 1953. Most of Part I was ready for printing in 1946, but Wittgenstein withdrew the manuscript from his publisher. The shorter Part II was added by his editors, Elizabeth Anscombe and Rush Rhees. Wittgenstein asks the reader to think of language as a multiplicity of language-games within which parts of language develop and function. He argues that philosophical problems are bewitchments that arise from philosophers' misguided attempts to consider the meaning of words independently of their context, usage, and grammar, what he called "language gone on holiday." According to Wittgenstein, philosophical problems arise when language is forced from its proper home into a metaphysical environment, where all the familiar and necessary landmarks and contextual clues are removed. He describes this metaphysical environment as like being on frictionless ice: where the conditions are apparently perfect for a philosophically and logically perfect language, all philosophical problems can be solved without the muddying effects of everyday contexts; but where, precisely because of the lack of friction, language can in fact do no work at all. Wittgenstein argues that philosophers must leave the frictionless ice and return to the "rough ground" of ordinary language in use. Much of the Investigations consists of examples of how the first false steps can be avoided, so that philosophical problems are dissolved, rather than solved: "the clarity we are aiming at is indeed complete clarity. But this simply means that the philosophical problems should completely disappear."   == LegacyEdit == Wittgenstein left a voluminous archive of unpublished papers, including 83 manuscripts, 46 typescripts and 11 dictations, amounting to an estimated 20,000 pages. Choosing among repeated drafts, revisions, corrections and loose notes editorial work has found nearly one third of the total suitable for print. An Internet facility hosted by the University of Bergen allows access to images of almost all the material and to search the available transcriptions. In 2011 two new boxes of Wittgenstein papers were found. Philosophical Investigations was the only nearly finished project and the book was published in 1953. In 1999 a survey among American university and college teachers ranked the Investigations as the most important book of 20th-century philosophy, standing out as "the one crossover masterpiece in twentieth-century philosophy, appealing across diverse specializations and philosophical orientations." The Investigations also ranked 54th on a list of most influential twentieth-century works in cognitive science prepared by the University of Minnesota's Center for Cognitive Sciences. Peter Hacker argues that Wittgenstein's influence on 20th-century analytical philosophy can be attributed to his early influence on the Vienna Circle and later influence on the Oxford "ordinary language" school and Cambridge philosophers.   === InterpretersEdit === Since Wittgenstein's death, scholarly interpretations of his philosophy have differed. Scholars have differed on the continuity between "early" and "late" Wittgenstein (that is, the difference between his views expressed in the Tractatus and those in Philosophical Investigations), with some seeing the two as starkly disparate and others stressing the gradual transition between the two works through analysis of Wittgenstein's unpublished papers (the Nachlass). One significant debate in Wittgenstein scholarship concerns the work of interpreters who are referred to under the banner of the New Wittgenstein school such as Cora Diamond, Alice Crary and James F. Conant. While the Tractatus, particularly in its conclusion, seems paradoxical and self-undermining, New Wittgenstein scholars advance a "therapeutic" understanding of Wittgenstein's work—"an understanding of Wittgenstein as aspiring, not to advance metaphysical theories, but rather to help us work ourselves out of confusions we become entangled in when philosophizing." To support this goal, the New Wittgenstein scholars propose a reading of the Tractatus as "plain nonsense"—arguing it does not attempt to convey a substantive philosophical project but instead simply tries to push the reader to abandon philosophical speculation. The therapeutic approach traces its roots to the philosophical work of John Wisdom and the review of The Blue Book written by Oets Kolk Bouwsma. The therapeutic approach is not without critics: Hans-Johann Glock argues that the "plain nonsense" reading of the Tractatus "...is at odds with the external evidence, writings and conversations in which Wittgenstein states that the Tractatus is committed to the idea of ineffable insight."   == Cultural referencesEdit == Wittgenstein is the subject of the 1993 film Wittgenstein, by English director Derek Jarman, which is loosely based on his life story as well as his philosophical thinking. The adult Wittgenstein is played by the Welsh actor Karl Johnson. Critic Terry Eagleton has described Wittgenstein as the philosopher of poets and composers, playwrights and novelists. For Wittgenstein's philosophy as therapy, see: Peterman, James F. Philosophy as Therapy, SUNY Press, 1992, p. 13,ff. For the poetic and literary quality of his work, see: Perloff, Marjorie. Wittgenstein's Ladder: Poetic Language and the Strangeness of the Ordinary, University of Chicago Press, 1999; and Gibson, John and Wolfgang Huemer (eds.). The Literary Wittgenstein, Routledge, 2004, p 2. See also: Eagleton, Terry. "My Wittgenstein" in Stephen Regan (ed.). The Eagleton Reader, Wiley-Blackwell, 1997, pp. 337,ff James Burke's The Day the Universe Changed contains a story:  Someone apparently went up to the great philosopher Wittgenstein and said "What a lot of morons back in the Middle Ages must have been to have looked, every morning, at the dawn and to have thought what they were seeing was the Sun going around the Earth," when every school kid knows that the Earth goes around the Sun, to which Wittgenstein replied, "Yeah, but I wonder what it would have looked like if the Sun had been going around the Earth?"    == WorksEdit ==   == See alsoEdit ==  International Wittgenstein Symposium   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Works by Ludwig Wittgenstein at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Ludwig Wittgenstein at Internet Archive Works by Ludwig Wittgenstein at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Trinity College Chapel Ludwig Wittgenstein at Find a Grave John Searle on Ludwig Wittgenstein on YouTube Chronology of Wittgenstein's Life and Work (constructed day-by-day, one hundred years on) BBC Radio 4 programme on Wittgenstein (listen online) A. J. Ayer’s Critique of Wittgenstein’s Private Language Argument



Marsilius of Inghen (1340 – August 20, 1396) was a medieval Dutch Scholastic philosopher who studied with Albert of Saxony and Nicole Oresme under Jean Buridan. He was Magister at the University of Paris as well as at the University of Heidelberg from 1386 to 1396.   == Life == He was born near Nijmegen. Details about his family and early life are not well known, the first known date of his biography being September 27, 1362. On that day he gave his Magister Artium lecture at the University of Paris. There, he received his masters of arts, then took up work and was rector in 1367 and 1371. Aside from his philosophical and logical studies, he also studied theology, in which subject his lectures enjoyed large popularity. In 1378, Marsilius was the delegate of University of Paris for the Pope Urban VI in Tivoli. After 1379 the name of Marsilius of Inghen was not mentioned anymore in the recordings of the University of Paris. He was probably driven out of the university because of a schism. In 1383 Marsilius and Albert of Saxony went to spread the nominalist doctrine at. In 1386, Marsiluis became the first rector of the University of Heidelberg, which he founded with the help of Rupert I, Elector Palatine. He was, furthermore, the first theologian to receive a doctorate from the university. In 1386 Marsilius became Magister at the University of Heidelberg, of which he was rector nine times altogether: From 1386, the year of the foundation of the university, to 1392 and still from June 23 up to his death. From 1389 to 1390 he was responsible for transferring the university register to Rome. Afterwards he took up again the study of theology. Deceased just months later, Marsilius of Inghen was buried in the Church of Peter (Heidelberger Peterskirche) at Heidelberg.   == Philosophy ==   === Overview === In logic, he was an Aristotelian nominalist; in natural philosophy, an empiricist. He applied a synthesis of the new 14th century physics of Buridan, Thomas Bradwardine and Oresme in his commentaries on Aristotle. Both his theological and philosophical works are characterized by a logico-semantical approach in which he followed Buridan, combined with an eclectic use of older theories, sometimes more Aristotelian and sometimes more Neoplatonist; this fact that renders narrow the label "Ockhamist" often applied to Marsilius.   === Nominalism === Marsilius of Inghen is most well known for his work in nominalism. Though no one called themselves nominalists in the 14th century, he is considered one of the movements “forefathers." In his nominalist philosophy he accepted the basic nominalist foundation, namely that universals are only existent within the mind, and outside the mind there are only individuals. He advocated that human knowledge can be derived from a foundation of sensory knowledge. However, to Marsilius, metaphysical knowledge was the greatest obtainable form of knowledge. This is due to its ability to grasp the most highly universal propositions.   === The Object of Scientific Knowledge === From his beliefs in nominalism in conjunction with his Aristotelian influences follows his reasoning on the object of scientific knowledge. Marsilius claims such an object must be singular and conform to Aristotle’s requirement that such an object must be a necessary universal. Therefore, given Marsilius’ acceptance of the basic nominalist foundation—that is, universals are only in the mind—objects of science are predicates which exist in the mind and describe the individuals in the world outside of the mind.   === Natural Philosophy === As already mentioned, he accepted that knowledge is made evident via sensory knowledge, i.e. he was an empiricist. However, he also accepted a priori truths to be an acceptable source of scientific knowledge. Also noteworthy is Marsilius’ theory behind impetus. Following in the footsteps of Buridan, Marsilius rejected the Aristotelian theory and claimed that such forces are the transfer of some property from that which did the affecting into the affected object. In his Questions on the Eight Books of the Physics, Marsilius cites ancient experiments with the clepsydra as proof that "nature abhors a vacuum."   == Theology == Marsilius began studies of theology at the University of Paris in 1366, though, the majority of his theological study took place during his time at the University of Heidelberg. His overall theological philosophy was influenced by Adam Wodeham, Gregory of Rimini, Thomas Aquinas, and Bonaventure. However, he does not wholly follow their thinking and holds original ideas in the subject. In considering the creation of the world by God Marsilius held that God did not create the world as eternal, and that such means of creation was not contrary to God’s perfection. Concerning Marsilius’ other specific theological thought, he believed his natural philosophy lead to both some true knowledge of God, as well as an impediment towards complete true knowledge of God. Human’s natural capacities, according to Marsilius, are sufficient to derive the truth of proposition asserting God’s existence, God having a will, and God having knowledge. Natural capacities, although achieving that much, are unable to reach the truth of propositions asserting God’s omnipotence, God’s free will, and God’s ability to create ex nihilo. Hence, Marsilius thought that using nothing but one’s natural capacities in trying to find true knowledge of God will actually lead to the negation of God’s omnipotence, free will, and ability to create ex nihilo. Not only this, but use of logic in general regarding theological study was something Marsilius didn’t wholly accept. In order for one to reach such knowledge of God one must use Christian faith. This faith is the only means to reach the knowledge of God which natural capacities cannot obtain. In this sense, Marsilius advocated that natural human knowledge is such that it is limited in its capability to comprehend the divine, but still aides the search for such knowledge. Also crucial to his theological studies are his thoughts regarding a version of divine simplicity—of which he was highly influenced by Wodeham. Even though human knowledge seems to abstract various properties or parts of God, such extrapolations are merely existent in human conceptions of God. God truly has only one essence and is one singular unity according to Marsilius.   == Influence == Following Marsilius’ death, his works became rather well known. Marsilius was revered as one of the greatest nominalists of his time, alongside Ockham and Buridan. His extensive questions and commentaries on Aristotle (including commentaries on De Generatione et Corruptione, De Anima, Metaphysics, Physics, and Ethics) became textbooks for students throughout various universities. Moreover, his theology became widely read and influential in Spanish theology. He was influential on Central European philosophy of later centuries, both through his own philosophy and by the way he stimulated reform of university programmes. In the 16th century there were still references to a "Marsilian way" in logic and physics.   == References == Bos, E.P. "Marsilius of Inghen", Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 1997. Marsilius of Inghen entry by Hoenen, M. J. F. M., in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Bos, E. P. “A note on an unknown manuscript bearing upon Marsilius of Inghen’s Philosophy of nature.” Vivarium: An International Journal for the Philosophy and Intellectual Life of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, vol. 17, pg. 61-68, 1979. Bos, E. P. “An Unedited Sophism by Marsilius of Inghen: ‘Homo est Bos.’” Vivarium: An International Journal for the Philosophy and Intellectual Life of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, vol. 15, pg. 46-56, 1977. Bos, E. P. “Mental Verbs in Terminist Logic (John Buridan, Albert of Saxony, Marsilius of Inghen). Vivarium: An International Journal for the Philosophy and Intellectual Life of the Middle Ages and Renaissance, vol. 16, pg. 56-69, 1978. Hoenen, Maarten. “Marsilius of Inghen.” Gracia, Jorge J E, A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages, (pp. 411-412), 2003. Longeway, J., "Marsilius of Inghen", Cambridge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd edition, p. 537. Overfield, J. H., Humanism and Scholasticism in Late Medieval Germany, 1984, p. 8. Pasnau, Robert. The Cambridge History of Medieval Philosophy, pg. 661-663 and 923, 2010. Sachs, Joe. Aristotle's Physics: A Guided Study, New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2005. p. 116.   == Bibliography ==   === Primary === Marsilius of Inghen, Quaestiones super quattuor libros Sententiarum, vol. 1: Super primum, quaestiones 1-7, ed. G. Wieland, M. Santos Noya, M. J. F. M. Hoenen, M. Schulze, Studies in the History of Christian Thought 87, ed. M. Santos Noya, Leiden 2000. Marsilius of Inghen, Quaestiones super quattuor libros Sententiarum, vol. 2: Super primum, quaestiones 8-21, ed. G. Wieland, M. Santos Noya, M. J. F. M. Hoenen, M. Schulze, Studies in the History of Christian Thought 88, ed. M. Santos Noya, Leiden 2000. Marsilius of Inghen, Treatises on the Properties of Terms. A First Critical Edition of the Suppositiones, Ampliationes, Appellationes, Restrictiones and Alienationes with Introduction, Translation, Notes, and Appendices, ed. E. P. Bos, Synthese Historical Library 22, Dordrecht 1983.   === Secondary === Braakhuis, H. A. G., and M. J. F. M. Hoenen (eds.), Marsilius of Inghen, Artistarium Supplementa 7, Nijmegen 1992. Hoenen, M. J. F. M., Marsilius of Inghen. Divine Knowledge in Late Medieval Thought, Studies in the History of Christian Thought 50, Leiden 1993. Marshall P., "Parisian Psychology in the Mid-Fourteenth Century," Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Age 50 (1983), 101-193.   == External links == Marsilius of Inghen entry by Maarten Hoenen in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Manfred Schulze (1999). "Marsilius von Inghen". In Bautz, Traugott. Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German) 16. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 988–1001. ISBN 3-88309-079-4.

Martin David Davis (born 1928) is an American mathematician, known for his work on Hilbert's tenth problem.   == Biography == Davis's parents were Jewish immigrants to the US from Łódź, Poland, and married after they met again in New York City. Davis grew up in the Bronx, where his parents encouraged him to obtain a full education. He received his Ph.D. from Princeton University in 1950, where his adviser was Alonzo Church. He is Professor Emeritus at New York University.   == Contributions == Davis is the co-inventor of the Davis–Putnam algorithm and the DPLL algorithms. He is also known for his model of Post–Turing machines.   == Awards and honors == In 1975, Davis won the Leroy P. Steele Prize, the Chauvenet Prize (with Reuben Hersh), and in 1974 the Lester R. Ford Award for his expository writlng related to his work on Hilbert's tenth problem. He became a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1982, and in 2012, he was selected as one of the inaugural fellows of the American Mathematical Society.   == Selected publications == Books Davis, Martin (1977). Applied nonstandard analysis. New York: Wiley. ISBN 9780471198970.  Davis, Martin; Weyuker, Elaine J.; Sigal, Ron (1994). Computability, complexity, and languages: fundamentals of theoretical computer science (2nd ed.). Boston: Academic Press, Harcourt, Brace. ISBN 9780122063824.  Davis, Martin (2000). Engines of logic: mathematicians and the origin of the computer. New York: Norton. ISBN 9780393322293.   Review of Engines of logic: Wallace, Richard S., Mathematicians who forget the mistakes of history: a review of Engines of Logic by Martin Davis, ALICE A.I. Foundation.  Hardcover edition published as : The Universal Computer   Articles Davis, Martin (1995), "Is mathematical insight algorithmic", Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 13(4), 659–60.   == See also == Criticism of non-standard analysis Halting problem Influence of non-standard analysis   == References ==   == External links == Martin Davis's website

Martin Hugo Löb (German: [løːp]; 31 March 1921 – 21 August 2006) was a German mathematician. He settled in the United Kingdom after the Second World War and specialised in mathematical logic. He moved to the Netherlands in the 1970s, where he remained in retirement. He is perhaps best known for having formulated Löb's theorem in 1955.   == Early life and education == Löb grew up in Berlin, but escaped from the Nazis, arriving in the UK just before the outbreak of the Second World War. As an enemy alien, he was deported on the Dunera to an internment camp at Hay in Australia in 1940, where the 19-year-old Löb was taught mathematics by other internees. His teacher, Felix Behrend, was later a professor at Melbourne University. Löb was allowed to return to the UK in 1943, and he studied at the University of London after the War. After graduating, he became a research student with Reuben Goodstein at the University of Leicester. He completed his PhD and became an assistant lecturer at the University of Leeds in 1951, where he was to remain for 20 years, becoming a Reader and ultimately Professor of Mathematical Logic from 1967 to 1970. He developed the mathematical logic group at Leeds, making it one of the leading centres in the UK. Löb did research on proof theory, modal logic and computability theory. He formulated Löb's theorem in 1955, as a formal version of Löb's paradox, that statements that assert their own provability must be true (similar to Gödel's incompleteness theorem). Löb's wife, Caroline, was Dutch. They had two daughters together. Löb moved to become a professor at the University of Amsterdam in the early 1970s. He remained at the University of Amsterdam until he retired. He then moved to Annen, where he later died.   == References == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Martin Löb", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Obituary, The Guardian, 3 October 2006 Obituary, Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam

Martin Stokhof (born 1950, Amsterdam) is a Dutch logician and philosopher. Stokhof wrote a joint Ph.D. dissertation with Jeroen Groenendijk on the semantics of questions, under the supervision of Renate Bartsch and Johan van Benthem. He was also an important figure in the development of dynamic semantics (together with Groenendijk, Veltman and others). He is also known for his work on Ludwig Wittgenstein. He is a former director of the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation at the University of Amsterdam and a member of the group collectively publishing under the pseudonym L. T. F. Gamut. In 2006 he was elected member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.   == References ==   == External links == Stokhof's university homepage

Matthew Dean Foreman (born March 21, 1957) is an American mathematician at University of California, Irvine. He has made notable contributions in set theory and in ergodic theory.   == Biography == Born in Los Alamos, New Mexico, Foreman earned his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in 1980 under Robert M. Solovay. His dissertation title was Large Cardinals and Strong Model Theoretic Transfer Properties. In addition to his mathematical work, Foreman is an avid sailor. He and his family sailed their sailboat Veritas (a C&C 44 C&C Yachts) from North America to Europe in 2000. From 2000–2008 they sailed Veritas to the Arctic, the Shetland Islands, Scotland, Ireland, England, France, Spain, North Africa and Italy. Notable high points were Fastnet Rock, Irish and Celtic seas and many passages including the Maelstrom, Stad, Pentland Firth, Loch Ness, the Corryveckan and the Irish Sea. Further south they sailed through the Chenal du Four and Raz de Sein, across the Bay of Biscay and around Cape Finisterre. After entering Gibraltar, Foreman and his family circumnavigated the Western Mediterranean with notable stops in Barcelona, Morocco, Tunisia, Sicily, Naples, Sardinia and Corsica. In 2009, Foreman and his son and guest crew circumnavigated Newfoundland. Foreman has been recognized for his sailing by twice winning the Ullman Trophy.   == Work == Foreman began his career in set theory. His early work with Hugh Woodin included showing that it is consistent that the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis (GCH) (see Continuum Hypothesis) fails at every infinite cardinal. In joint work with Magidor and Shelah he formulated Martin's maximum, a provably maximal form of Martin's axiom and showed its consistency.   Foreman's later work in set theory was primarily concerned with developing the consequences of generic large cardinal axioms. He also worked on classical "Hungarian" partition relations, mostly with András Hajnal. In the late 1980s Foreman became interested in measure theory and ergodic theory. With Randall Dougherty he settled the Marczewski problem (1930) by showing that there is a Banach-Tarski decomposition of the unit ball in which all pieces have the property of Baire (see Banach-Tarski paradox). A consequence is the existence of a decomposition of an open dense subset of the unit ball into disjoint open sets that can be rearranged by isometries to form two open dense subsets of the unit ball. With F. Wehrung, Foreman showed that the Hahn-Banach theorem implied the existence of a non-Lebesgue measurable set, even in the absence of any other form of the axiom of choice. This naturally led to attempts to apply the tools of descriptive set theory to classification problems in ergodic theory. His first work in this direction, with F. Beleznay, showed that classical collections were beyond the Borel hierarchy in complexity. This was followed shortly by a proof of the analogous results for measure preserving transformations with generalized discrete spectrum. In a collaboration with Benjamin Weiss  and Daniel Rudolph  Foreman showed that no residual class of measure preserving transformations can have algebraic invariants and that the isomorphism relation on ergodic measure preserving transformations in not Borel. This negative result finished a program proposed by von Neumann in the 1932. This result was extended by Foreman and Weiss to show that smooth area preserving diffeomorphisms of the 2-torus are unclassifiable. Foreman's work in set theory continued during this period. He co-edited (with Kanamori) the Handbook of Set Theory and showed that various combinatorial properties of ω2 and ω3 are equiconsistent with huge cardinals.   == References ==   == External links == Matthew Foreman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Melvin "Mel" Fitting (born January 24, 1942 in Troy, New York) is a logician with special interests in philosophical logic and tableau proof systems. From 1968 to 2013 he was a Professor at City University of New York, Lehman College and the Graduate Center. At the Graduate Center he was in the departments of Computer Science, Philosophy, and Mathematics, and at Lehman College he was in the department of Mathematics and Computer Science. He is now Professor emeritus. His undergraduate degree is from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and his doctorate is from Yeshiva University, both in mathematics. His thesis advisor was Raymond Smullyan. In June 2012 Melvin Fitting was given the Herbrand Award by CADE, for distinguished contributions to automated deduction. A loose motivation for much of Melvin Fitting's work can be formulated succinctly as follows. There are many logics. Our principles of reasoning vary with context and subject matter. Multiplicity is one of the glories of modern formal logic. The common thread tying logics together is a concern for what can be said (syntax), what that means (semantics), and relationships between the two. A philosophical position that can be embodied in a formal logic has been shown to be coherent, not correct. Logic is a tool, not a master, but it is an enjoyable tool to use.   == Selected publications == Intuitionistic Logic, Model Theory, and Forcing, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1969. Tableau methods of proof for modal logics, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 13 (2), 237-247 (1972). Model existence theorems for modal and intuitionistic logics, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 38, 613-627 (1973). Fundamentals of Generalized Recursion Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1981. Proof Methods for Modal and Intuitionistic Logics, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1983. A Kripke-Kleene Semantics for Logic Programs, Journal of Logic Programming, 2 (4), 295-312, (1985); North-Holland. First-Order Modal Tableaux, Journal of Automated Reasoning, 4 (2), 191-213 (1988) Springer. Logic Programming on a Topological Bilattice, Fundamenta Informaticae, 1988. Bilattices and the theory of truth, Journal of Philosophical Logic, 18 (3), 225-256 (1989) Springer. First-Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving, Springer-Verlag, 1990, second edition 1996. Bilattices in Logic Programming, in Proc. of the IEEE Int'l Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic, pp238–246 (1990). Bilattices and the Semantics of Logic Programming, Journal of Logic (and Algebraic) Programming, 11 (1&2), 91-116 (1991) Elsevier. Kleene's Logic, Generalized, Journal of Logic and Computation (LOGCOM), 1 (6), 797-810 (1991) Oxford University Press. Many-Valued Modal Logics (I), Fundamenta Informaticae, 15 (3-4), 235-254 (1991). Many-Valued Model Logics II, Fundamenta Informaticae, 17 (1-2), 55-73 (1992). The Family of Stable Models, Journal of Logic (and Algebraic) Programming, 17 (2/3&4), 197-225 (1993) Elsevier. Basic modal logic, in Handbook of logic in artificial intelligence and logic...(cut off?), 1993. Metric Methods: Three Examples and a Theorem, Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming, 21 (3), 113-127 (1994). Kleene's Three Valued Logics and Their Children, Fundamenta Informaticae, 20 (1/2/3), 113-131 (1994) IOS Press. Set Theory and the Continuum Problem, with Raymond M. Smullyan, 288 pages, Oxford University Press (or Clarendon Press?), 1996. Revised edition, Dover, 2010. A theory of truth that prefers falsehood, Journal of Philosophical Logic, 26 (5), 477-500 (1997). Bertrand Russell, Herbrand's Theorem, and the assignment statement, in Artificial Intelligence and Symbolic Computation, Springer Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 1476, pp 14–28, 1998. First-Order Modal Logic, with Richard L. Mendelsohn, Verlag: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998, paperback, 1999, ISBN 9780792353355. Higher-order modal logic - a sketch, in 1999 volume on First-order Theorem Proving (FTP'98), pages 22–36. First order alethic modal logic, in the Blackwell Companion to Philosophical Logic, Dale Jacquette (ed.), 2000. Databases and Higher Types, CL2000 Invited Speakers and Tutorials. Term-Modal Logics, with Lars Thalmann and Andrei Voronkov. Fixpoint semantics for logic programming, Theoretical Computer Science (journal), 278 (1-2), 25-51 (2002) Elsevier. AddOns, FLoC'02 HYLO, Invited speaker. Types, Tableaus, and Gödel's God, Kluwer, 2002; also, in the 2005-12-01 Journal Studia Logica, 81 (3), 425-427 (2005). Beyond Two: Theory and Applications of Multiple-Valued Logic, co-edited with Ewa Orlowska, Springer, 2003. First-order intensional logic, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 127 (1), 171193 (2004). The logic of proofs, semantically, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 132 (1), 1-25 (2005) Elsevier. Bilattices are nice things, in Self-Reference, Center for the Study of Language and Information, Thomas Bolander, Vincent Hendricks, Stig Andur Pedersen editors, 55-77 (2006). Incompleteness in the Land of Sets, College Publications, 2007. Modal proof theory, chapter in Handbook of Modal Logic, P. Blackburn, J. Van Benthem, F. Wolter (eds.), pp85–138 (2007) Elsevier. Explicit Logics of Knowledge and Conservativity, ISAIM 2008. Prefixed tableaus and nested sequents, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 163 (3), 291-313 (2012). ESSLLI 2012. Evening lecture. Justification Logic, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (Fall 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), co-authored with Sergei N. Artemov. Intensional Logic, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, (Winter 2012 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).   == References ==   == Notes ==   == External links == Melvin Fitting, official homepage The Graduate Center, faculty page at CUNY Mathematical Genealogy Project



Michael Paul Fourman FBCS (born 12 September 1950) is Professor of Computer Systems at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, UK, and was Head of the School of Informatics from 2001–2009. Fourman is interested in applications of logic in computer science, artificial intelligence, and cognitive science – more specifically, formal models of digital systems, system design tools, proof assistants, categorical semantics and propositional planning.   == Qualifications == Fourman received a BSc in Mathematics with other subjects (Philosophy and Computer Science) from the University of Bristol in 1971, then his MSc in Mathematical Logic from the University of Oxford in 1972. He wrote his DPhil thesis Connections between Category Theory and Logic under the supervision of Dana Scott at Oxford, defending his thesis in 1974.   == Career == He continued to work with Scott as an SRC postdoctoral Research Fellow and Junior Research Fellow of Wolfson College, in Oxford, until 1976, when he moved to the USA, first as a Visiting Assistant Professor of Mathematics at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, then, from 1977–1982, as JF Ritt Assistant Professor of Mathematics at Columbia University in New York. In 1983 he moved, with a Science and Engineering Research Council Fellowship, to the Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering at Brunel University. He was appointed to a Readership, and then to the Chair of Formal Systems, at Brunel in 1986. Fourman was co-founder and Technical Director of Abstract Hardware Limited (AHL), a company formed in 1986. He was central in the development of the LAMBDA system (Logic And Mathematics Behind Design Automation) to aid hardware design, a tool implemented in the SML programming language and marketed by AHL. He left the company in 1997. In 1988 he joined the Laboratory for Foundations of Computer Science at the University of Edinburgh, and was appointed to the Chair of Computer Systems in the Department of Computer Science. In 1998 he was founding Head of the Division of Informatics, which became the current School of Informatics, incorporating the former Department of Artificial Intelligence, the Artificial Intelligence Applications Institute, the Centre for Cognitive Science, the Human Communication Research Centre, and the Department of Computer Science. He has again been Head of the School of Informatics since August 2002. He has held visiting positions at universities in Paris (1975), Utrecht (1977, 1980), Cambridge (1979–80), Sydney (1982), Montreal (1983), and Perth (1994).   == Bibliography == Fourman, Michael P. (1977), "The logic of topoi", in Jon Barwise, Handbook of Mathematical Logic (Stud. Logic Found. Math. 90), Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., North-Holland, pp. 1053–1090, ISBN 978-0-444-86388-1, ISBN 0-444-86388-5  Fourman, Michael P.; Scott, Dana S. (1979), "Notes on sheaves and logic'", in M. P. Fourman, C. J. Mulvey, and Dana S. Scott, Applications of Sheaves: Proceedings of the Research Symposium on Applications of Sheaf Theory to Logic, Algebra, and Analysis, Durham, July 9–21, 1977 (Lecture Notes in Mathematics Vol 753), Springer-Verlag, pp. 302–401, ISBN 0387095640 ISBN 978-0-387-09564-6  Fourman, Michael P. (1982), "Notions of choice sequence", in D. van Dalen and A. Troelstra, L.E.J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium: Proceedings of the conference held in Noordwijkerhout, 8–13 June 1981 (Stud. Logic Found. Math. 110), Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., North-Holland, pp. 91–105, ISBN 0-444-86494-6  Fourman, Michael P.; Scedrov, Andre (1982), "The world's simplest axiom of choice fails" (PDF), Manuscripta Mathematica 38 (3): 325–332, doi:10.1007/bf01170929, DOI 10.1007/BF01170929  Fourman, Michael P. (1984), "Continuous truth I, non-constructive objects", in G. Lolli, G. Longo, and A. Marcja, Proc. Logic Colloquium '82, Proceedings of the Colloquium, Florence, 23–28 August 1982, (Stud. Logic Found. Math. 112), Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., North-Holland, pp. 161–180, ISBN 0-444-86876-3    == External links == Full Bibliography Official home page Personal home page Extracurricular home page Blogger user profile

Michael Oser Rabin (Hebrew: מִיכָאֵל עוזר רַבִּין‎, born September 1, 1931), is an Israeli computer scientist and a recipient of the Turing Award.   == Biography == Rabin was born in 1931 in Breslau, Germany (today Wrocław, in Poland), the son of a rabbi. In 1935, he emigrated with his family to Mandate Palestine. As a young boy, he was very interested in mathematics and his father sent him to the best high school in Haifa, where he studied under a significant practicing mathematician, Elisha Netanyahu, who was then a high school teacher. After high school, he was drafted into the army during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. The mathematician Abraham Fraenkel, who was a professor of mathematics in Jerusalem, intervened with the army command, and Rabin was discharged to study at the university in 1949. He received an M.Sc. from Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1953 and a Ph.D. from Princeton University in 1956. In the late 1950s, he was invited for a summer to do research for IBM at the Lamb Estate in Westchester County, New York with other promising mathematicians and scientists. It was there that he and Dana Scott wrote the paper "Finite Automata and Their Decision Problems". Soon, using nondeterministic automata, they were able to re-prove Kleene's result that finite state machines exactly accept regular languages. As to the origins of what was to become computational complexity theory, the next summer Rabin returned to the Lamb Estate. John McCarthy posed a puzzle to him about spies, guards, and password which Rabin studied and soon after he wrote an article, "Degree of Difficulty of Computing a Function and Hierarchy of Recursive Sets." Nondeterministic machines have become a key concept in computational complexity theory, particularly with the description of complexity classes P and NP. Rabin then returned to Jerusalem, researching logic, and working on the foundations of what would later be known as computer science. He was an associate professor and the head of the Institute of Mathematics at the Hebrew University at 29 years old, and a full professor by 33. Rabin recalls, "There was absolutely no appreciation of the work on the issues of computing. Mathematicians did not recognize the emerging new field". In 1960, he was invited by Edward F. Moore to work at Bell Labs, where Rabin introduced probabilistic automata that employ coin tosses in order to decide which state transitions to take. He showed examples of regular languages that required a very large number of states, but for which you get an exponential reduction of the number of states if you go over to probabilistic automata. In 1969, Rabin proved that the second-order theory of n successors is decidable. A key component of the proof implicitly showed determinacy of parity games, which lie in the third level of the Borel hierarchy. In 1975, Rabin finished his tenure as Rector of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and went to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the USA as a visiting professor. Gary Miller was also there and had his polynomial time test for primality based on the extended Riemann hypothesis. While there, Rabin invented the Miller-Rabin primality test, a randomized algorithm that can determine very quickly (but with a tiny probability of error) whether a number is prime. Rabin's method was based on previous work of Gary Miller that solved the problem deterministically with the assumption that the generalized Riemann hypothesis is true, but Rabin's version of the test made no such assumption. Fast primality testing is key in the successful implementation of most public-key cryptography, and in 2003 Miller, Rabin, Robert M. Solovay, and Volker Strassen were given the Paris Kanellakis Award for their work on primality testing. In 1976 he was invited by Joseph Traub to meet at Carnegie Mellon University and presented the primality test. After he gave that lecture, Traub had said, "No, no, this is revolutionary, and it's going to become very important." In 1979, Rabin invented the Rabin cryptosystem, the first asymmetric cryptosystem whose security was proved equivalent to the intractability of integer factorization. In 1981, Rabin reinvented a weak variant of the technique of oblivious transfer invented by Wiesner under the name of multiplexing, allowing a sender to transmit a message to a receiver where the receiver has some probability between 0 and 1 of learning the message, with the sender being unaware whether the receiver was able to do so. In 1987, Rabin, together with Richard Karp, created one of the most well-known efficient string search algorithms, the Rabin-Karp string search algorithm, known for its rolling hash. Rabin's more recent research has concentrated on computer security. He is currently the Thomas J. Watson Sr. Professor of Computer Science at Harvard University and Professor of Computer Science at Hebrew University. During the spring semester of 2007, he was a visiting professor at Columbia University teaching Introduction to Cryptography. Rabin is a foreign member of the United States National Academy of Sciences, a member of the French Academy of Sciences and a foreign member of the Royal Society. He was also the PhD advisor of Saharon Shelah, a researcher in mathematical logic.   == Awards == In 1976, the Turing Award was awarded jointly to Rabin and Dana Scott for a paper written in 1959, the citation for which states that the award was granted:  For their joint paper "Finite Automata and Their Decision Problems," which introduced the idea of nondeterministic machines, which has proved to be an enormously valuable concept. Their (Scott & Rabin)  [sic] classic paper has been a continuous source of inspiration for subsequent work in this field.  In 1995, Rabin was awarded the Israel Prize, in computer sciences. In 2010, Rabin was awarded the Tel Aviv University Dan David Prize ("Future" category), jointly with Leonard Kleinrock and Gordon E. Moore, for Computers and Telecommunications.   == See also == Oblivious transfer Rabin automaton Rabin fingerprint Hyper-encryption List of Israel Prize recipients   == References ==   == External links == Short Description in an Information Science Hall of Fame at University of Pittsburgh Oblivious transfer Quotes from some of Professor Rabin's classes Website for one of Rabin's courses Description of Rabin's research by Richard J. Lipton

Mojżesz Presburger (1904–1943?) was a Polish Jewish mathematician, logician, and philosopher. He was a student of Alfred Tarski and is known for, among other things, having invented Presburger arithmetic as a student in 1929. He was born in Warsaw on 27 December 1904 and died in the Holocaust, probably 1943. In 2010, the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science began conferring the annual Presburger Award (named after Mojżesz Presburger) to a young scientist (in exceptional cases to several young scientists) for outstanding contributions in theoretical computer science. Mikołaj Bojańczyk was the first recipient.   == References ==   == External links == Mojżesz Presburger's Photograph and document of death Documents about Presburger and a Flash presentation by Mikołaj Bojańczyk Presburger award, European Association for Theoretical Computer Science.

Moses Ilyich Schönfinkel, also known as Moisei Isai'evich Sheinfinkel' (Шейнфинкель) (4 September 1889 Ekaterinoslav (now Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine) – 1942, Moscow), was a Russian logician and mathematician, known for the invention of combinatory logic.   == Life ==  Schönfinkel attended the Novorossiysk University of Odessa, studying mathematics under Samuil Osipovich Shatunovskii (1859–1929), who worked in geometry and the foundations of mathematics. From 1914 to 1924, Schönfinkel was a member of David Hilbert's group at the University of Göttingen. On 7 December 1920 he delivered a talk to the group where he outlined the concept of combinatory logic. Heinrich Behmann, a member of Hilbert's group, later revised the text and published it in 1924. In 1929, Schönfinkel had one other paper published, on special cases of the decision problem ("Entscheidungsproblem"), that was prepared by Paul Bernays. After he left Göttingen, Schönfinkel returned to Moscow. By 1927 he was reported to be mentally ill and in a sanatorium. His later life was spent in poverty, and he died in Moscow some time in 1942. His papers were burned by his neighbors for heating.   == Work == Schönfinkel developed a formal system that avoided the use of bound variables. His system was essentially equivalent to a combinatory logic based upon the combinators B, C, I, K, and S. Schönfinkel was able to show that the system could be reduced to just K and S and outlined a proof that a version of this system had the same power as predicate logic. His paper also showed that functions of two or more arguments could be replaced by functions taking a single argument. This replacement mechanism simplifies work in both combinatory logic and lambda calculus and would later be called currying, after Haskell Curry. While Curry attributed the concept to Schönfinkel, it had already been used by Frege.   == Publications == 1924. "Über die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik", Mathematische Annalen 92, pp. 305–316. Translated by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg as "On the building blocks of mathematical logic" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 355–66. 1929. (with Paul Bernays) "Zum Entscheidungsproblem der mathematischen Logik," Mathematische Annalen 99: 342–72.   == See also == Bernays–Schönfinkel class   == References == ^ Cardone, Felice; Hindley, J. Roger, "History of Lambda-calculus and Combinatory Logic", in Gabbay, Dov M.; Woods, John, Handbook of the History of Logic 5, Elsevier  ^ a b c Curry, Haskell (November 1927), Notes on Schönfinkel, 271128A (T271128A), Curry archives.  ^ a b c Kline, G. L.; Anovskaa, S. A. (1951), "Review of Foundations of mathematics and mathematical logic by S. A. Yanovskaya", Journal of Symbolic Logic 16 (1): 46–48, doi:10.2307/2268665, JSTOR 2268665  ^ Quine, introduction to Bausteine der mathematischen Logik", pp. 305–316. Translated by Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg as "On the building blocks of mathematical logic" in Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 355–66.

This is a redirect from a page that has been moved (renamed). This page was kept as a redirect to avoid breaking links, both internal and external, that may have been made to the old page name. For more information follow the bold category link.

Newton Carneiro Affonso da Costa (born on 16 September in 1929 in Curitiba, Brazil) is a Brazilian mathematician, logician, and philosopher. He studied engineering and mathematics at the Federal University of Paraná in Curitiba and the title of his 1961 Ph.D. dissertation was Topological spaces and continuous functions.   == Work ==   === Paraconsistency === Da Costa's international recognition came especially through his work on paraconsistent logic and its application to various fields such as philosophy, law, computing, and artificial intelligence. He is one of the founders of this non-classical logic. In addition, he constructed the theory of quasi-truth that constitutes a generalization of Alfred Tarski's theory of truth, and applied it to the foundations of science.   === Other fields; foundations of physics === The scope of his research also includes model theory, generalized Galois theory, axiomatic foundations of quantum theory and relativity, complexity theory, and abstract logics. Da Costa has significantly contributed to the philosophy of logic, paraconsistent modal logics, ontology, and philosophy of science. He served as the President of the Brazilian Association of Logic and the Director of the Institute of Mathematics at the University of Sao Paulo. He received many awards and held numerous visiting scholarships at universities and centers of research in all continents. Da Costa and physicist Francisco Antônio Dória axiomatized large portions of classical physics with the help of Patrick Suppes' predicates. They used that technique to show that for the axiomatized version of dynamical systems theory, chaotic properties of those systems are undecidable and Gödel-incomplete, that is, a sentence like X is chaotic is undecidable within that axiomatics. They later exhibited similar results for systems in other areas, such as mathematical economics. Da Costa believes that the significant progress in the field of logic will give rise to new fundamental developments in computing and technology, especially in connection with non-classical logics and their applications.   === Variable-binding term operators === Da Costa is co-discoverer of the truth-set principle and co-creator of the classical logic of variable-binding term operators—both with John Corcoran. He is also co-author with Chris Mortensen of the definitive pre-1980 history of variable-binding term operators in classical first order logic: “Notes on the theory of variable-binding term operators”, History and Philosophy of Logic, vol.4 (1983) 63–72.   === P = NP === Together with Francisco Antônio Dória, Da Costa has published two papers with conditional relative proofs of the consistency of P = NP with the usual set-theoretic axioms ZFC. The results they obtain are similar to the results of DeMillo and Lipton (consistency of P = NP with fragments of arithmetic) and those of Sazonov and Maté (conditional proofs of the consistency of P = NP with strong systems). Basically da Costa and Doria define a formal sentence [P = NP]' which is the same as P = NP in the standard model for arithmetic; however, because [P = NP]' by its very definition includes a disjunct that is not refutable in ZFC, [P = NP]' is not refutable in ZFC, so ZFC + [P = NP]' is consistent (assuming that ZFC is). The paper then continues by an informal proof of the implication If ZFC + [P = NP]' is consistent, then so is ZFC + [P = NP]. However, a review by Ralf Schindler points out that this last step is too short and contains a gap. A recently published (2006) clarification by the authors shows that their intent was to exhibit a conditional result that was dependent on what they call a "naïvely plausible condition". The 2003 conditional result can be reformulated, according to da Costa and Doria 2006 (in press), as If ZFC + [P = NP]' is omega-consistent, then ZFC + [P = NP] is consistent. So far no formal argument has been constructed to show that ZFC + [P = NP]' is omega-consistent. In his reviews for Mathematical Reviews of the da Costa/Doria papers on P=NP, logician Andreas Blass states that "the absence of rigor led to numerous errors (and ambiguities)"; he also rejects da Costa's "naïvely plausible condition", as this assumption is "based partly on the possible non-totality of [a certain function] F and partly on an axiom equivalent to the totality of F".   == Former Students == Jean-Yves Béziau Marcelo Samuel Berman Walter Carnielli Itala Maria Loffredo D'Ottaviano   == Selected publications ==   === Articles and lectures === N.C.A. da Costa, Sistemas Formais Inconsistentes. Curitiba, Brazil: Universidade Federal do Paraná, 1963. N.C.A. da Costa, Review of the article by Corcoran, Hatcher, and Herring on variable-binding term operators, Zentralblat fur Mathematik, vol. 247, pp. 8–9, 1973. N.C.A. da Costa, On the theory of inconsistent formal systems. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 1974 ; 15: 497–510. N.C.A. da Costa (with L. Dubikajtis), On Jaskowski's Discussive Logic. Non-Classical Logics, Model Theory and Computability, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, pp. 37–56, 1977. N.C.A. da Costa (with C. Mortensen), Notes on the theory of variable-binding term operators, History and Philosophy of Logic, vol.4, pp. 63–72, 1983. N.C.A. da Costa, Pragmatic probability. Erkenntnis 1986; 25: 141–162. N.C.A. da Costa (with Walter Carnielli), Paraconsistent deontic logics. Philosophia – The Philos. Quarterly of Israel, vol.16, numbers 3 and 4, pp. 293–305, 1988. N.C.A. da Costa (with V.S. Subrahmanian), Paraconsistent logic as a formalism for reasoning about inconsistent knowledge bases. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 1989; 1: 167–174. N.C.A. da Costa (with F.A. Doria), Undecidability and incompleteness in classical mechanics, International J. Theoretical Physics, vol. 30 (1991), 1041–1073. N.C.A. da Costa, Paraconsistent logic. In Stanisław Jaškowski Memorial Symposium, pp. 29–35. Department of Logic, Nicholas Copernicus University of Toruń. 1998. N.C.A. da Costa (with O. Bueno and S. French), Is there a Zande Logic? History and Philosophy of Logic 1998; 19: 41–54. N.C.A. da Costa (with O. Bueno and A.G. Volkov), Outline of a paraconsistent category theory. In P Weingartner (ed.), Alternative Logics: Do Sciences Need them? Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp. 95–114. N.C.A. da Costa (with F. A. Doria), Consequences of an exotic definition for P = NP. Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 145 (2003), 655–665, and Addendum to `Consequences...' . Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 172 (2006), 1364–1367. N.C.A. da Costa (with F. A. Doria), Computing the future, in Computability, Complexity and Constructivity in Economic Analysis, ed. K. V. Velupillai, Blackwell, 2005. N.C.A. da Costa (with F. A. Doria), Some thoughts on hypercomputation, Applied Mathematics and Computation, in press (2006). N.C.A. da Costa (with M.S.Berman),"On the Stability of Our Universe" Journal of Modern Physics 3,1211-1215 (2012)doi :10.4236/jmp.2012.329156 (http://www.SciRP.org/journal/jmp)   === Books === N.C.A. da Costa, Lógica Indutiva e Probabilidade. Hucitec-EdUSP, 2a. ed., São Paulo, 1993. N.C.A. da Costa, Logique Classique et Non-Classique. Paris, Masson, 1997. N.C.A. da Costa, O conhecimento científico. São Paulo, Discurso Editorial, 2a. Ed., 1999. N.C.A. da Costa, J.M. Abe, J.I. da Silva Filho, A.C. Murolo and C.F.S. Leite Lógica Paraconsistente Applicada. São Paulo, Atlas, 1999. N.C.A. da Costa and S. French, Science and Partial Truth: A Unitary Approach to Models and Scientific Reasoning. (Oxford Studies in Philosophy of Science), Oxford University Press, 2003.   === Essays on N. C. A. da Costa === Nicola Grana, Sulla teoria delle valutazioni di N.C.A. da Costa. Naples: Liguori Editore, 1990. Pp. 75.   == References == ^ Schindler's review of the P = NP paper (Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, v. 10 no. 1, March 2004, p. 118f)   == External links == Biography at Unicamp (in Portuguese) Newton da Costa: Pensador da Contradição Newton da Costa, ou: a matemática com arte Talk on the foundations of Physics (videos in Portuguese)

Nicolai Alexandrovich Vasiliev (Russian: Николай Александрович Васильев), also Vasil'ev, Vassilieff, Wassilieff (11 July [O.S. 29 June] 1880 – December 31, 1940), was a Russian logician, philosopher, psychologist, poet. He was a forerunner of paraconsistent and multi-valued logics.   == Early years == Vasiliev was born on June 29 O.S., 1880 in Kazan, Russia. His father, Professor Alexander V. Vasiliev, was a fairly well known mathematician, his grandfather was the outstanding sinologist Professor Vassily P. Vasiliev, and his great grandfather was the prominent astronomer Ivan M. Simonov, who was a close colleague of Nikolai Lobachevsky. Wanting to be a psychologist, Vasiliev studied at the medical faculty and the historico-philological faculty of Kazan University (1906), where he was offered the position of privat-dozent. As a university student, Vasiliev was enthusiastic about symbolist style poetry and published some books of verses of his own (for example,"The longing for eternity") and translations of the poetry of Emile Verhaeren and Algernon Charles Swinburne.   == Work in logic == Although Vasiliev outlined an abstract to the article on the "logic of relatives" by Charles Sanders Peirce as early as in 1897, it was only in 1908 that he entirely devoted himself to logic. On May 18, 1910 Vasiliev presented a lecture (published in October that same year) "On Partial Judgements, on the Triangle of Opposites, on the Law of Excluded Third" in which he put forward for the first time ever the idea of (non-Aristotelian) logic, free of the laws of excluded middle and contradiction. Reasoning by analogy with the "imaginary" geometry of Lobachevsky, Vasiliev called his novel logic "imaginary", for he assumed it was valid for the worlds where the above-mentioned laws did not hold, worlds with beings having other types of sensations. He distinguished levels of logical reasoning, and introduced the notion of metalogic. Vasiliev spent 1912-13 in Western Europe (mostly Germany) and published his salient works "Logic and Metalogic" and "Imaginary (non-Aristotelian) logic". Vasiliev constructed non-Aristotelian logic using the concepts, and even the manner of reasoning, common to Aristotelian logic. He was aware of the achievement in mathematical logic (and even carefully studied Ernst Schröder's works) but did not make an attempt to formalise "imaginary" logic. His only work in a foreign language (English) - a concise abstract of his "imaginary logic" - was published in Naples in 1924.   == Late years == In 1914, when World War I broke out, Vasiliev was drafted into the army, where he became seriously mentally ill. Nevertheless, he returned to teaching at Kazan University, but in 1922 was forcibly retired by the new Bolshevik administration. This act aggravated his ailment: Vasiliev spent most of the following 20 years in a mental hospital, thus rescued from the Stalin regime. He died on December 31, 1940. The place where he was buried is unknown. The pioneer ideas of Vasiliev were rediscovered in the early 1960s, and formed a basis mainly for paraconsistent logic. Some well-known scholars in the 1960s considered his work to be the precursor of multi-valued logic. The informal style and conceptual riches of Vasiliev's works make them especially valuable. In 2012 an international conference on Vasiliev's work was held in Moscow where a number of important modern paraconsistent logicians contributed.   == Bibliography == Works Vasiliev, N.A., Imaginary Logic. Moscow, Nauka, 1989 (in Russian). ISBN 5-02-007946-4. Vasiliev, N.A., Logic and Metalogic translated by V.L. Vasyukov, in Axiomathes, IV (1993). n. 3, pp. 329-351. Vasiliev, N.A., Imaginary (non-Aristotelian) Logic, translated by R. Vergauwen and E. A. Zaytsev, in Logique et Analyse, 46 (2003), n. 182, pp. 127-163. Vasiliev, N.A., Logica Immaginaria. Roma: Carocci, 2012 (Italian translation of all the logical writings) ISBN 978-88-430-6666-7. Studies Arruda, A.I. The Survey of Paraconsistent Logic. In: Mathematical logic in Latin America/ Eds. Arruda A.I., Chuaqui R., Da Costa N.C.A., Amsterdam: New York: Oxford. North-Holland, 1980, pp.1-41. Bazhanov, V.A. N.A. Vasiliev (1880 – 1940). Moscow, Nauka, 1988 (in Russian). ISBN 5-02-005953-6 Bazhanov, V.A. The Fate of One Forgotten Idea: N.A.Vasiliev and His Imaginary Logic. In: Studies in Soviet Thought, 1990, vol.39, N3-4, pp.333-334 Bazhanov, V.A. Charles Peirce’s Influence on Logical Ideas of N.A. Vasiliev. In: Modern Logic, 1992, vol. 3. N 1, pp. 48-56 Bazhanov, V.A. The Origins and Emergence of Non-Classical Logic in Russia (Nineteenth Century until the Turn of the Twentieth Century). In: Zwischen traditioneller und moderner Logik. Nichtklassiche Ansatze. Mentis-Verlag, Paderborn, 2001, S.205 – 217.ISBN 3-89785-203-9 Bazhanov, V.A. History of Logic in Russia and the USSR. Moscow, Kanon+, 2007 (in Russian). ISBN 5-88373-032-9 Bazhanov, V.A. N.A. Vasiliev and His Imaginary Logic. Restoration of One Forgotten Idea. Moscow, Kanon+, 2009 (in Russian). ISBN 978-5-88373-196-8   == References ==

Nicolas Bourbaki is the collective pseudonym under which a group of (mainly French) 20th-century mathematicians, with the aim of reformulating mathematics on an extremely abstract and formal but self-contained basis, wrote a series of books beginning in 1935. With the goal of grounding all of mathematics on set theory, the group strove for rigour and generality. Their work led to the discovery of several concepts and terminologies still used, and influenced modern branches of mathematics.  While there is no Nicolas Bourbaki, the Bourbaki group, officially known as the Association des collaborateurs de Nicolas Bourbaki (Association of Collaborators of Nicolas Bourbaki), has an office at the École Normale Supérieure in Paris.   == Foundation == In 1934, young French mathematicians from various French universities felt the need to form a group to jointly produce textbooks that they could all use for teaching. André Weil organized the first meeting on 10 December 1934 in the basement of a Parisian grill room, while all participants were attending a conference in Paris.   == Books by Bourbaki ==  Bourbaki's main work is the Elements of Mathematics (Éléments de mathématique) series. This series aims to be a completely self-contained treatment of the core areas of modern mathematics. Assuming no special knowledge of mathematics, it tries to take up mathematics from the very beginning, proceed axiomatically and give complete proofs. Set theory (Théorie des ensembles) Algebra (Algèbre) Topology (Topologie générale) Functions of one real variable (Fonctions d'une variable réelle) Topological vector spaces (Espaces vectoriels topologiques) Integration (Intégration) and later Commutative algebra (Algèbre commutative) Lie theory (Groupes et algèbres de Lie) Spectral theory (Théories spectrales) The book Variétés différentielles et analytiques was a fascicule de résultats, that is, a summary of results, on the theory of manifolds, rather than a worked-out exposition. A final volume IX on spectral theory (Théories spectrales) from 1983 marked the presumed end of the publishing project; but a further commutative algebra fascicle was produced in 1998 and the eighth chapter of Algèbre was published in 2012. Besides the Éléments de mathématique series, lectures from the Séminaire Bourbaki also have been periodically published in monograph form since 1948.   == Influence on mathematics in general == Notations introduced by Bourbaki include the symbol  for the empty set and a dangerous bend symbol, and the terms injective, surjective, and bijective. The emphasis on rigour may be seen as a reaction to the work of Henri Poincaré, who stressed the importance of free-flowing mathematical intuition, at a cost of completeness in presentation. The impact of Bourbaki's work initially was great on many active research mathematicians world-wide. For example:  Our time is witnessing the creation of a monumental work: an exposition of the whole of present day mathematics. Moreover this exposition is done in such a way that the common bond between the various branches of mathematics become clearly visible, that the framework which supports the whole structure is not apt to become obsolete in a very short time, and that it can easily absorb new ideas.  It provoked some hostility, too, mostly on the side of classical analysts; they approved of rigour but not of high abstraction. Around 1950, also, some parts of geometry were still not fully axiomatic — in less prominent developments, one way or another, these were brought into line with the new foundational standards, or quietly dropped. This led to a gulf with the way theoretical physics was practiced. Bourbaki's direct influence has decreased over time. This is partly because certain concepts which are now important, such as the machinery of category theory, are not covered in the treatise. The completely uniform and essentially linear referential structure of the books became difficult to apply to areas closer to current research than the already mature ones treated in the published books, and thus publishing activity diminished significantly from the 1970s. It also mattered that, while especially algebraic structures can be naturally defined in Bourbaki's terms, there are areas where the Bourbaki approach was less straightforward to apply. On the other hand, the approach and rigour advocated by Bourbaki have permeated the current mathematical practices to such extent that the task undertaken was completed. This is particularly true for the less applied parts of mathematics. The Bourbaki seminar series founded in post-WWII Paris continues; it has been going on since 1948, and contains more than 1000 items. It is an important source of survey articles, with sketches (or sometimes improvements) of proofs. The topics range through all branches of mathematics, including sometimes theoretical physics. The idea is that the presentation should be on the level of specialists, but should be tailored to an audience which is not specialized in the particular field.   == The group ==  Accounts of the early days vary, but original documents have now come to light. The founding members were all connected to the École Normale Supérieure in Paris and included Henri Cartan, Claude Chevalley, Jean Coulomb, Jean Delsarte, Jean Dieudonné, Charles Ehresmann, René de Possel, Szolem Mandelbrojt and André Weil. There was a preliminary meeting, towards the end of 1934. Jean Leray and Paul Dubreil were present at the preliminary meeting but dropped out before the group actually formed. Other notable participants in later days were Hyman Bass, Laurent Schwartz, Jean-Pierre Serre, Alexander Grothendieck, Jean-Louis Koszul, Samuel Eilenberg, Serge Lang and Roger Godement. The original goal of the group had been to compile an improved mathematical analysis text; it was soon decided that a more comprehensive treatment of all of mathematics was necessary. There was no official status of membership, and at the time the group was quite secretive and also fond of supplying disinformation. Regular meetings were scheduled (totalling about 4 weeks a year), during which the group would discuss vigorously every proposed line of every book. Members had to resign by age 50. The atmosphere in the group can be illustrated by an anecdote told by Laurent Schwartz. Dieudonné regularly and spectacularly threatened to resign unless topics were treated in their logical order, and after a while others played on this for a joke. Godement's wife wanted to see Dieudonné announcing his resignation, and so on one occasion while she was there Schwartz deliberately brought up again the question of permuting the order in which measure theory and topological vector spaces were to be handled, to precipitate a guaranteed crisis. The name "Bourbaki" refers to a French general, Charles Denis Bourbaki; it was adopted by the group as a reference to a student anecdote about a hoax mathematical lecture, and also possibly to a statue.   == Appraisal of the Bourbaki perspective == The underlying drive, in Weil and Chevalley at least, was the perceived need for French mathematics to absorb the best ideas of the Göttingen school, particularly Hilbert and the modern algebra school of Emmy Noether, Artin and van der Waerden. It is fairly clear that the Bourbaki point of view, while encyclopedic, was never intended as neutral. Quite the opposite: it was more a question of trying to make a consistent whole out of some enthusiasms, for example for Hilbert's legacy, with emphasis on formalism and axiomatics. But always through a transforming process of reception and selection — their ability to sustain this collective, critical approach has been described as "something unusual". The following is a list of some of the criticisms commonly made of the Bourbaki approach. Pierre Cartier, a Bourbaki member 1955–1983, commented explicitly on several of these points:  essentially no analysis beyond the foundations: nothing about partial differential equations, nothing about probability. There is also nothing about combinatorics, nothing about algebraic topology, nothing about concrete geometry. And Bourbaki never seriously considered logic. Dieudonné himself was very vocal against logic. Anything connected with mathematical physics is totally absent from Bourbaki's text.  Algorithmic content is not considered on-topic and is almost completely omitted. Problem solving, in the sense of heuristics, receives less emphasis than axiomatic theory-building. Analysis is treated 'softly', without 'hard' estimates. Measure theory is developed from a functional analytic perspective. Taking the case of locally compact measure spaces as fundamental focuses the presentation on Radon measures and leads to an approach to measurable functions that is cumbersome, especially from the viewpoint of probability theory. However, the last chapter of the book addresses limitations, especially for use in probability theory, of the restriction to locally compact spaces. Combinatorics is not discussed. Logic is treated minimally. Applications are not covered. Furthermore, Bourbaki make no use of pictures in their presentation. Pierre Cartier, in the article cited above, is quoted as later saying The Bourbaki were Puritans, and Puritans are strongly opposed to pictorial representations of truths of their faith. In general, Bourbaki has been criticized for reducing geometry as a whole to abstract algebra and soft analysis.   == Dieudonné as speaker for Bourbaki == Public discussion of, and justification for, Bourbaki's thoughts has in general been through Jean Dieudonné (who initially was the 'scribe' of the group) writing under his own name. In a survey of le choix bourbachique written in 1977, he did not shy away from a hierarchical development of the 'important' mathematics of the time. He also wrote extensively under his own name: nine volumes on analysis, perhaps in belated fulfillment of the original project or pretext; and also on other topics mostly connected with algebraic geometry. While Dieudonné could reasonably speak on Bourbaki's encyclopedic tendency and tradition, it may be doubted—after innumerable frank tais-toi, Dieudonné! ("Hush, Dieudonné!") remarks at the meetings—whether all others agreed with him about mathematical writing and research. In particular Serre has often championed greater attention to problem-solving, within number theory especially, not an area treated in the main Bourbaki texts. Dieudonné stated the view that most workers in mathematics were doing ground-clearing work, in order that a future Riemann could find the way ahead intuitively open. He pointed to the way the axiomatic method can be used as a tool for problem-solving, for example by Alexander Grothendieck. Others found him too close to Grothendieck to be an unbiased observer. Comments in Pál Turán's 1970 speech on the award of a Fields Medal to Alan Baker about theory-building and problem-solving were a reply from the traditionalist camp at the next opportunity, Grothendieck having received the previous Fields Medal in absentia in 1966.   == Bourbaki's influence on mathematics education == While several of Bourbaki's books have become standard references in their fields, some have felt that the austere presentation makes them unsuitable as textbooks. The books' influence may have been at its strongest when few other graduate-level texts in current pure mathematics were available, between 1950 and 1960. In the longer term, the manifesto of Bourbaki has had a definite and deep influence. In secondary education the new math movement corresponded to teachers influenced by Bourbaki. In France the change was secured by the Lichnerowicz Commission. The influence on graduate education in pure mathematics is perhaps most noticeable in the treatment now current of Lie groups and Lie algebras. Dieudonné at one point said 'one can do nothing serious without them', for which he was reproached; but the change in Lie theory to its everyday usage owes much to the type of exposition Bourbaki championed. Beforehand Jacques Hadamard despaired of ever getting a clear idea of it.   == See also == Bourbaki–Witt theorem Jacobson–Bourbaki theorem Bourbaki dangerous bend symbol Arthur Besse G. W. Peck John Rainwater   == Notes ==   == References == Borel, Armand (1998). "Twenty-Five Years with Nicolas Bourbaki, (1949-1973)" (PDF). Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 45 (3): 373–380.  Guedj, D. (1985). "Nicholas Bourbaki, collective mathematician : An interview with Claude Chevalley". Math. Intelligencer 7 (2): 18–22. doi:10.1007/BF03024169.  Aubin, David (1997). "The Withering Immortality of Nicolas Bourbaki: A Cultural Connector at the Confluence of Mathematics" (PDF). Science in Context 10: 297–342. doi:10.1017/s0269889700002660.  Luca Vercelloni, Filosofia delle strutture, La Nuova Italia, Firenze, 1989 Maurice Mashaal (2006). Bourbaki: A Secret Society of Mathematicians. American Mathematical Society. ISBN 0-8218-3967-5. Amir Aczel (2007). The Artist and the Mathematician: The Story of Nicolas Bourbaki, the Genius Mathematician Who Never Existed. High Stakes Publishing, London. ISBN 1-84344-034-2. André Weil (1992). ``The Apprenticeship of a Mathematician``. Birkhauser. ISBN 0-8176-2650-6. pp. 100–105.   == External links == Official Website of L'Association des Collaborateurs de Nicolas Bourbaki (French) Archives of the association (French) A long article about Nicolas Bourbaki, from PlanetMath 25 Years with Bourbaki, by Armand Borel O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Nicolas Bourbaki", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Apology of Euclid, by S. Kutateladze http://mathoverflow.net/questions/131657/why-did-bourbaki-ignore-the-theory-of-categories/131776#131776

Nuel D. Belnap, Jr. (born 1930) is an American logician and philosopher who has made many important contributions to the philosophy of logic, temporal logic, and structural proof theory. He has taught at the University of Pittsburgh since 1961 until his retirement in 2011; before that he was at Yale University. His best-known work is his collaboration with Alan Ross Anderson on relevance logic. He has also published books on the logic of questions and answers, with Thomas Steel, and the logic of agency, with Michael Perloff and Ming Xu. He has contributed to the foundations of two very distinct theories of truth: he was a co-author of The Prosentential Theory of Truth with Dorothy Grover and Joseph Camp, and of The Revision Theory of Truth with Anil Gupta. He is also co-author with Ming Xu and Michel Perloff of Facing the Future. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2008.   == See also == Logical harmony Display logic Relevance logic   == References ==

The Nyāya Sūtras are an ancient Indian text of philosophy composed by Akṣapāda Gautama (also Gotama; c. 2nd century CE). The sutras contain five chapters, each with two sections. The core of the text dates to roughly 150 CE, although there are significant later interpolations. The Nyaya is sometimes called Tarka-Vidyā, the science of debate, Vāda-Vidyā, the science of discussion. Tarka is the special feature of the Nyāya. Thus some of its features and categories are better understood from that perspective. Gautama is sometimes given the honorific titles "Akṣapāda" (probably in the sense "having his eyes fixed in abstraction on his feet") and "Dīrghatapas" ("performing long penance"). He is also sometimes accorded the religious titles "Ṛṣi" or "Maharṣi". In the Nyāya Sutras Gautama developed and extended the Vaiśeṣika epistemological and metaphysical system through 528 aphorisms. Later commentaries expanded, expounded, and critically discussed Gautama's work, the first being by Vātsyāyana (c.450–500 CE), followed by the Nyāyavārttika of Uddyotakāra (c. 6th–7th century), Vācaspati Miśra's Tātparyatīkā (9th century), Udayana's Tātparyapariśuddhi (10th century), and Jayanta's Nyāyamañjarī (10th century).   == Purpose of the Nyaya Sutras == "Gautama Ṛṣi, in his Nyāya Sūtras, proposes that one can attain liberation by negating both illusion and unhappiness: duhkha-janma-pravṛtti-dosa-mithyā-jnananam uttarottarapaye tad-anantarabhavad apavargah. "By successively dispelling false conceptions, bad character, entangling action, rebirth and misery – the disappearance of one of these allowing the disappearance of the next – one can achieve final liberation." (Nyāya Sūtra 1.1.2) But since Nyaya philosophers believe that awareness is not an essential quality of the soul, they teach that a liberated soul has no consciousness. The Nyāya idea of liberation thus puts the soul in the condition of a dead stone. This attempt by the Nyāya philosophers to kill the soul's innate consciousness is here called sato mrtim by the personified Vedas. But the Vedānta-sutra (2.3.17) unequivocally states, jno 'ta eva: "The jīva soul is always a knower." In the opening sūtra of the Nyāya Sūtra, it was claimed that the ultimate purpose of it is the attainment of liberation (niḥśreyasa), attained by knowledge of the sixteen categories (padārtha), which are: means of valid knowledge (pramāṇa); objects of valid knowledge (prameya); doubt (saṃśaya); purpose (prayojana); example (dṛṣṭānta); conclusion (siddhānta); the constituents of a syllogism (avayava); argumentation (tarka); ascertainment (nirṇaya); debate (vāda); disputations (jalpa); destructive criticism (vitaṇḍa); fallacy (hetvābhāsa); quibble (chala); refutations (jāti); and points of the opponent's defeat (nigrahasthāna).   == Means of attaining valid knowledge == According to the Nyaya Sutras, there are four means of attaining valid knowledge: perception, inference, comparison, and verbal testimony. The sutra ultimates implicitly develop a theory of causation. Cause and effect should be homogeneous in nature, and yet the effect is a new beginning and was not already contained in the cause. The Buddhist thesis that all things are negative in nature (inasmuch as a thing's nature is constituted by its differences from others) is rejected, as is the view that all things are eternal or that all things are noneternal. Both these latter views are untrue to experience.   == The five part syllogism == The Nyaya Sutra supports a five-part syllogism, widely followed in the Indian tradition: This hill is fiery (pratijñā: a statement of that which is to be proved). Because it is smoky (hētu: statement of reason). Whatever is smoky is fiery, as is a kitchen (udāharaṇa: statement of a general rule supported by an example). So is this hill (upanaya: application of the rule of this case). Therefore this hill is fiery (nigamana: drawing the conclusion). The characteristic feature of the Nyaya syllogism is its insistence on the example, which suggests that the Nyaya logician wanted to be assured not only of formal validity but also of material truth.   == Types of logical error == Five kinds of fallacious "middle" (hetu) are distinguished: the inconclusive (savyabhicara), which leads to more conclusions than one; the contradictory (viruddha), which opposes that which is to be established; the controversial (prakaranasama), which provokes the very question that it is meant to settle; the counterquestioned (sadhyasama), which itself is unproved; and the mistimed (kalatita), which is adduced "when the time in which it might hold good does not apply".   == Editions == Nandalal Sinha, Mahamahopadhyaya Satisa Chandra Vidyabhusana, The Nyaya Sutras of Gotama, The sacred books of the Hindus, 1930; Motilal Banarsidass, 1990 reprint, ISBN 978-81-208-0748-8; Munshiram Manoharlal reprint, 2003, ISBN 978-81-215-1096-7. Ganganatha Jha, Nyaya- Sutras of Gautama (4 vols.), Motilal Banarsidass, 1999 reprint, ISBN 978-81-208-1264-2.   == Further reading == Sue Hamilton, Indian Philosophy: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford University Press, 2001) ISBN 0-19-285374-0 B.K. Matilal, Epistemology, Logic, and Grammar in Indian Philosophical Analysis (Oxford University Press, 2005) ISBN 0-19-566658-5 J.N. Mohanty, Classical Indian Philosophy (Rowman & Littlefield, 2000) ISBN 0-8476-8933-6   == References ==   == External links == The Nyâya Sutras of Gotama – the 1913 English edition Selected Chapters From the Nyaya Sutras



Paolo da Pergola (died 1455, in Venice) was an Italian humanist philosopher, mathematician and Occamist logician. He was a pupil of Paul of Venice. His most important work was probably De sensu composito et diviso. His logical works were printed early. He taught at the Scuola di Rialto from 1421 to 1454. He was teacher and friend of the glassmaker Antonio Barovier. Among his pupils was also Nicoletto Vernia, a well known professor of philosophy in Padua. There is a memorial to him in San Giovanni Elemosinario, Venice.   == Works == Logica; and, Tractatus de sensu composito et diviso by Paolo della Pergola, edited by Mary Anthony Brown, Saint Bonaventure, New York: Franciscan Institute, 1961.   == Notes ==

Paul Joseph Salomon Benacerraf (born 1931) is an American philosopher working in the field of the philosophy of mathematics who has been teaching at Princeton University since he joined the faculty in 1960. He was appointed Stuart Professor of Philosophy in 1974, and retired in 2007 as the James S. McDonnell Distinguished University Professor of Philosophy. He was born in Paris to parents who were Sephardic Jews from Morocco. His brother was the Venezuelan Nobel Prize-winning immunologist Baruj Benacerraf. Benacerraf is perhaps best known for his two papers "What Numbers Could Not Be" (1965) and "Mathematical Truth" (1973), and for his anthology on the philosophy of mathematics, co-edited with Hilary Putnam. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1998.   == Work == In "What Numbers Could Not Be", he argues against a Platonist view of mathematics, and for structuralism, on the ground that what is important about numbers is the abstract structures they represent rather than the objects that number words ostensibly refer to. In particular, this argument is based on the point that Zermelo and von Neumann give distinct, and completely adequate, identifications of natural numbers with sets. In "Mathematical Truth", he argues that no interpretation of mathematics offers a satisfactory package of epistemology and semantics; it is possible to explain mathematical truth in a way that is consistent with our syntactico-semantical treatment of truth in non-mathematical language, and it is possible to explain our knowledge of mathematics in terms consistent with a causal account of epistemology, but it is in general not possible to accomplish both of these objectives simultaneously. He argues for this on the grounds that an adequate account of truth in mathematics implies the existence of abstract mathematical objects, but that such objects are epistemologically inaccessible because they are causally inert and beyond the reach of sense perception. On the other hand, an adequate epistemology of mathematics, say one that ties truth-conditions to proof in some way, precludes understanding how and why the truth-conditions have any bearing on truth.   == Publications ==   === Works === Benacerraf, Paul (1960) Logicism, Some Considerations, Princeton, Ph.D. Dissertation, University Microfilms. Benacerraf, Paul (1965) What Numbers Could Not Be, The Philosophical Review, 74:47-73. Benacerraf, Paul (1967) God, the Devil, and Gödel, The Monist, 5l: 9-33. Benacerraf, Paul (1973) Mathematical Truth, The Journal of Philosophy, 70: 661-679. Benacerraf, Paul (1981) Frege: The Last Logicist, The Foundations of Analytic Philosophy, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 6: l7-35. Benacerraf, Paul (1985) Skolem and the Skeptic, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 56: 85-ll5. Benacerraf, Paul and Putnam, Hilary (eds.) (1983) Philosophy of Mathematics : Selected Readings 2nd edition, Cambridge University Press: New York. Benacerraf, Paul (1996) Recantation or Any old ω-sequence would do after all, Philosophia Mathematica, 4: 184-189. Benacerraf, Paul (1996) What Mathematical Truth Could Not Be - I, in Benacerraf and His Critics, A. Morton and S. P. Stich, eds., Blackwell's, Oxford and Cambridge, pp 9–59. Benacerraf, Paul (1999) What Mathematical Truth Could Not Be - II, in Sets and Proofs, S. B. Cooper and J. K. Truss, eds., Cambridge University Press, pp. 27–51.   === Books about Benacerraf === Zimmermann, Manfred (1995) Wahrheit und Wissen in der Mathematik. Das Benacerrafsche Dilemma, 1. Auflage, Transparent Verlag, Berlin. Gupta, Anoop K. (2002) Benacerraf's Dilemma and Natural Realism for Mathematics. Ph.D. Dissertation, Ottawa University.   === Papers about Benacerraf === Hilton, P. What 'What Numbers Could Not Be', by Paul Benacerraf', is. Ebert, Philip A. (2007) What Mathematical Knowledge Could Not Be, in St Andrews Undergraduate Philosophy Society Journal, 1 (1) pp. 46–70. Hale, Bob and Wright, Crispin (2002) Benacerraf's Dilemma Revisited European Journal of Philosophy, Issue 10:1. Lucas, J. R. (1968) Satan stultified: a rejoinder to Paul Benacerraf, The Monist, vol.52, No.1, pp. 145–158.   === Writings on Benacerraf === Benacerraf Interview by The Dualist and the Stanford Philosophy Department "Whatever I am now, it happened here" by Caroline Moseley   == See also == Benacerraf's identification problem American philosophy List of American philosophers   == References ==   == External links == Paul Benacerraf's homepage at Princeton Paul Benacerraf's lecture series at UNMSM (Lima, Peru)

Paul Isaac Bernays (17 October 1888 – 18 September 1977) was a Swiss mathematician, who made significant contributions to mathematical logic, axiomatic set theory, and the philosophy of mathematics. He was an assistant and close collaborator of David Hilbert.   == BiographyEdit == Bernays spent his childhood in Berlin, and attended the Köllner Gymnasium, 1895-1907. At the University of Berlin, he studied mathematics under Issai Schur, Edmund Landau, Ferdinand Georg Frobenius, and Friedrich Schottky; philosophy under Alois Riehl, Carl Stumpf and Ernst Cassirer; and physics under Max Planck. At the University of Göttingen, he studied mathematics under David Hilbert, Edmund Landau, Hermann Weyl, and Felix Klein; physics under Voigt and Max Born; and philosophy under Leonard Nelson. In 1912, the University of Berlin awarded him a Ph.D. in mathematics, for a thesis, supervised by Landau, on the analytic number theory of binary quadratic forms. That same year, the University of Zurich awarded him the Habilitation for a thesis on complex analysis and Picard's theorem. The examiner was Ernst Zermelo. Bernays was Privatdozent at the University of Zurich, 1912–17, where he came to know George Pólya. Starting in 1917, David Hilbert employed Bernays to assist him with his investigations of the foundations of arithmetic. Bernays also lectured on other areas of mathematics at the University of Göttingen. In 1918, that university awarded him a second Habilitation, for a thesis on the axiomatics of the propositional calculus of Principia Mathematica. In 1922, Göttingen appointed Bernays extraordinary professor without tenure. His most successful student there was Gerhard Gentzen. In 1933, he was dismissed from this post because of his Jewish ancestry. After working privately for Hilbert for six months, Bernays and his family moved to Switzerland, whose nationality he had inherited from his father, and where the ETH employed him on occasion. He also visited the University of Pennsylvania and was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1935-36 and again in 1959-60.   == Mathematical workEdit == Bernays's collaboration with Hilbert culminated in the two volume work Grundlagen der Mathematik by Hilbert and Bernays (1934, 1939), discussed in Sieg and Ravaglia (2005). In seven papers, published between 1937 and 1954 in the Journal of Symbolic Logic, republished in (Müller 1976), Bernays set out an axiomatic set theory whose starting point was a related theory John von Neumann had set out in the 1920s. Von Neumann's theory took the notion of function as primitive; Bernays recast Von Neumann's theory so that sets and proper classes were primitive. Bernays's theory, with some modifications by Kurt Gödel, is now known as the Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory. A proof from the Grundlagen der Mathematik that a sufficiently strong consistent theory cannot contain its own reference functor is now known as the Hilbert–Bernays paradox.   == PublicationsEdit == Hilbert, David; Bernays, Paul (1934), Grundlagen der Mathematik. I, Die Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 40, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-04134-4, JFM 60.0017.02, MR 0237246  Hilbert, David; Bernays, Paul (1939), Grundlagen der Mathematik. II, Die Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften 50, Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-540-05110-7, JFM 65.0021.02, MR 0272596  Bernays, Paul (1958), Axiomatic set theory, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Amsterdam: North-Holland, ISBN 978-0-486-66637-2, MR 0106178  Bernays, Paul (1976), Abhandlungen zur Philosophie der Mathematik (in German), Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, ISBN 978-3-534-06706-0, MR 0444417    == ReferencesEdit ==  Kneebone, Geoffrey, 1963. Mathematical Logic and the Foundation of Mathematics. Van Nostrand. Dover reprint, 2001. A gentle introduction to some of the ideas in the Grundlagen der Mathematic. Müller, Gert H., ed. (1976), Sets and classes. On the work by Paul Bernays, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 84, Amsterdam: North-Holland, ISBN 978-0-444-10907-1, MR 0414355  Lauener, Henri (1978), "Paul Bernays (1888--1977)", Zeitschrift für Allgemeine Wissenschaftstheorie 9 (1): 13–20, doi:10.1007/BF01801939, ISSN 0044-2216, MR 546580  Sieg, Wilfried; Ravaglia, Mark (2005), "Chapter 77. David Hilbert and Paul Bernays, Grundlagen der Mathematik", in Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, Landmark writings in western mathematics 1640--1940, Elsevier B. V., Amsterdam, pp. 981–99, doi:10.1016/B978-044450871-3/50158-3, ISBN 978-0-444-50871-3, MR 2169816  Bernays and Set Theory, Akihiro Kanamori, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 15, No. 1 (Mar., 2009), pp. 43–69.   == External linksEdit == Hilbert Bernays Project O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Paul Bernays", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Paul Bernays, Paul Bernays: A Short Biography (1976) Paul Bernays at the Mathematics Genealogy Project


Paul Lorenzen (March 24, 1915 – October 1, 1994) was a German philosopher and mathematician, founder of the Erlangen School (with Wilhelm Kamlah) and inventor of game semantics (with Kuno Lorenz).   == Biography == Lorenzen studied with David Hilbert as a schoolboy and he was one of Hasse's students at the University of Göttingen until his promotion in 1938. He became pupil of Krull in University of Bonn. His main work was on the foundations of mathematics, in proof theory. He created and modified constructive mathematics. Lorenzen taught at Stanford, the University of Texas, and Boston University in the USA. He was John Locke Lecturer in 1967/1968.   == Theory == Lorenzen came in 1962 to University of Erlangen (South Germany) and founded the Erlangen School of epistemological constructivism there. He wrote with Kamlah the famous book Logical Propaedeutic ("Logische Propädeutik") and worked on game semantics (Dialogische Logik) with Kuno Lorenz. With Peter Janich he invented protophysics of time and space. He developed constructive logic, constructive type theory and constructive analysis. Lorenzen's work on calculus Differential and Integral was dedicated to Hermann Weyl. Lorenzen used Weyl's technique to develop a predicative analysis, which can reconstruct classical analysis, without the principle of excluded middle or the Axiom of Choice. He worked also on Gerhard Gentzen's cut elimination to find a way to continue Hilbert's program after the results of Gödel. In the theory of geometry and physics, Lorenzen was influenced by Hugo Dingler. He followed Dingler in building up geometry and physics out of primitive operations. Lorenzen took an early interpretation of Steven Weinberg (Gravitation and Cosmology, 1972) for his doubts about geometrical elements of general relativity, believing that Maxwell's equations are to be modified by general relativity instate. Lorenzen was also influenced by Wilhelm Dilthey's hermeneutics, and liked to quote Dilthey's saying that knowledge cannot go behind life. Dilthey's Lebensphilosophie was the description of the setting in ordinary experience in which we construct the abstractions of mathematics and physics. As John Locke Lecturer he invented normative Logic as a base on ethics and political argumentation.   == Major works == Paul Lorenzen, Frederick J. Crosson (Translator), Formal Logic, Springer, New York, July 1964. Paul Lorenzen, Normative Logic and Ethics, Mannheim/Zürich, 1969. Paul Lorenzen, John Bacon (Translator), Differential and Integral: A constructive introduction to classical analysis, The University of Texas Press, Austin, 1971. Paul Lorenzen, Lehrbuch der konstruktiven Wissenschaftstheorie, Mannheim/Zürich, 1984. Paul Lorenzen, Karl Richard Pavlovic (Trans.), Constructive Philosophy, The University of Massachusetts Press, Amherst, 1987.   == See also == Wilhelm Kamlah, Paul Lorenzen: Logical Propaedeutic: Pre-School of Reasonable Discourse. Diane Loring Souvaine, Paul Lorenzen and Constructive Mathematics.   == External links == Paul Lorenzen at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Books from and about Lorenzen at Deutsche National Bibliothek (German)

Paul of Venice (or Paulus Venetus) (1369–1429) was a Roman Catholic Scholastic philosopher, theologian, and realist logician and metaphysician of the Hermits of the Order of Saint Augustine. He was teacher to Paolo da Pergola.   == Life == He was born, according to the chroniclers of his order, at Udine, about 1369 and died at Venice on June 15, 1429, as Paolo Nicoletti. He joined the Augustinian Order at around 1383, at the convent of Santo Stefano in Venice. In 1390 he is said to have been sent to Oxford for his studies in theology, but returned to Italy, and finished his course at Padua. He lectured in the University at Padua during the first quarter of the fifteenth century. Paul was one of the theologians called to Rome in 1427 by Pope Martin V, to take cognizance of the charges brought against St. Bernardino of Siena, occasioned by Bernardino's use of inscriptions of the name of Jesus in worship.   == Realism == With regard to the problem of universals he adhered to realism, since he maintained that universal essences are real entities.   == Works == His writings show a wide knowledge and interest in the scientific problems of his time. Commentaries on the works of Aristotle: Expositio in libros Posteriorum Aristotelis. Expositio super VIII libros Physicorum necnon super Commento Averrois (1409). Expositio super libros De generatione et corruptione. Lectura super librum De Anima. Conclusiones Ethicorum. Conclusiones Politicorum. Expositio super Praedicabilia et Praedicamenta (1428).  Logical works: Logica Parva or Tractatus Summularum (1395-96). Logica Magna (1397-98). Quadratura. Sophismata Aurea.  Other works: Super Primum Sententiarum Johannis de Ripa Lecturae Abbreviatio (1401). Summa philosophiae naturalis (1408). De compositione mundi. Quaestiones adversus Judaeos. Sermones.   == English translations == Logica Parva. München: Philosophia Verlag 1984. Translation of the 1472 Edition with introduction and notes by Alan R. Perreiah. Logica Magna. Tractatus de suppositionibus. St. Bonaventure, NY: Franciscan Institute 1971. Edited and translated by Alan R. Perreiah Logica Magna. Part I Fascicule 1: Tractatus de terminis. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1979. Edited with an English translation and notes by Norman Kretzmann. Logica Magna. Part I Fascicule 7: Tractatus De scire et dubitare. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1981. Edited with an English translation and notes by Patricia Clarke. Logica Magna. Part I Fascicule 8: Tractatus De necessitate et contingentia futurorum. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1991. Edited with an English translation and notes by C. J. F. Williams. Logica Magna. Part II Fascicule 3: Tractatus De hypotheticis. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1990. Edited with an English translation and notes by Alexander Broadie. Logica Magna. Part II Fascicule 4: Capitula De conditionali et de rationali. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1990. Edited with an English translation and notes by George Edward Hughes. Logica Magna. Part II Fascicule 6: Tractatus de veritate et falsitate propositionis et Tractatus de significato propositionis. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1978. Edited with notes on the sources by Francesco del Punta; translated into English with explanatory notes by Marilyn McCord Adams. Logica Magna. Part II Fascicule 8: Tractatus De obligationibus. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1988. Edited with an English translation and notes by E. Jennifer Ashworth.   == See also == Problem of universals Realism (philosophy) Giovanni Girolamo Saccheri William of Ockham   == Bibliography == Alan R. Perreiah, "A Biographical Introduction to Paul of Venice". In: Augustiniana 17 (1967), pp. 450-461. Alan R. Perreiah, Paul of Venice: A Bibliographical Guide, Bowling Green, Ohio: Philosophy Documentation Center, Bowling Green State University, 1986.   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Paulus_Venetus". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company.    == External links == Paul of Venice entry by Alessandro Conti in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Pavel Tichý (Czech pronunciation: [ˈpavɛl ˈcɪxiː]; 18 February 1936 Brno, Czechoslovakia – 26 October 1994 Dunedin, New Zealand) was a Czech logician, philosopher and mathematician. He worked in the field of intensional logic and founded Transparent Intensional Logic, an original theory of the logical analysis of natural languages – the theory is devoted to the problem of saying exactly what it is that we learn, know and can communicate when we come to understand what a sentence means. He spent roughly 25 years working on it. His main work is a book The Foundations of Frege's Logic, published by Walter de Gruyter in 1988.   == Early life and education == Tichý was born in Brno in 1936. His father was an insurance clerk. His family lived in Zlín until 1948 when they moved to Vsetín. At school he was already a brilliant student. He also liked playing music of Jaroslav Ježek on the piano. After finishing studies in Vsetin he moved to Prague followed by his parents. Tichý graduated in 1959 at Charles University in Prague. He stayed there tutoring as an assistant from 1961 to 1968 at the department of Logic at Faculty of Philosophy. One of his other hobbies was carpentry. He was said to be perfectionist in everything he did, whether he was learning a foreign language or making a table. In 1968 he received an invitation from Exeter University in the United Kingdom. He was permitted to leave the country even though it was shortly after Soviet troops invaded Czechoslovakia in the Prague Spring. He decided not to return. In 1970 he emigrated with his family to New Zealand, by ship. He started teaching at the University of Otago in Dunedin, New Zealand where he became Professor of Philosophy at Otago in 1981. Tichý stayed teaching there until his death. He is remembered as ferocious debater who liked to express his views directly regardless of any bad implications it could have. This made him a lot of friends but also a lot of enemies. Four years after the Velvet revolution, in 1993, Tichý was offered the position of Head of the Department of Logic at the Faculty of Philosophy and Arts of Charles University in Prague. He planned to move to Prague in 1995 but committed suicide before taking up this position.   === Degrees and academic appointment === PhDr. (Charles University, 1959), thesis: Výklad Gödelovy věty o neúplnosti v prosté teorii typů [An Exposition of Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem in the Simple Theory of Types] Candidate of Sciences (Charles University, 1964), thesis: Vyčíslitelnost ve vztahu k teoriím [On Computability w.r.t. Theories] Docent (Charles University, 1969), thesis: Intensions in Terms of Turing Machines and On the Vicious Circle in Definitions: Two Studies in Logical Semantics PhD (Exeter University, 1971), thesis: Contributions to the Theory of Postulate Systems Associate Professor, University of Otago, 1978 Professor, University of Otago, 1981   == Books == P. Tichý (1988): The Foundations of Frege's Logic. De Gruyter, Berlin and New York 1988, 333 pp., ISBN 3-11-011668-5 V. Svoboda, B. Jespersen, C. Cheyne (Eds.) (2004): Pavel Tichý's Collected Papers in Logic and Philosophy. Filosofia, Prague and Otago University Press, Dunedin, 901 pp., ISBN 1-877276-98-7   == External links == Tichy's biography and bibliography – Transparent Intensional Logic website, Masaryk University, Brno Tichy's biography – Mac Tutor Biographies, University of St Andrews, Scotland Tichy's biography – University of Otago

Penelope Maddy (born 4 July 1950 in Tulsa, Oklahoma) is a UCI Distinguished Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science and of Mathematics at the University of California, Irvine. She is well known for her influential work in the philosophy of mathematics, where she has worked on realism and naturalism. Maddy received her Ph.D. from Princeton University in 1979. Her early work, culminating in Realism in Mathematics, defended Kurt Gödel's position that mathematics is a true description of a mind-independent realm that we can access through our intuition. However, she suggested that some mathematical entities are in fact concrete, unlike, notably, Gödel, who assumed all mathematical objects are abstract. She suggested that sets can be causally efficacious, and in fact share all the causal and spatiotemporal properties of their elements. Thus, when I see the three cups on the table in front of me, I also see the set as well. She used contemporary work in cognitive science and psychology to support this position, pointing out that just as at a certain age we begin to see objects rather than mere sense perceptions, there is also a certain age at which we begin to see sets rather than just objects. In the 1990s, she moved away from this position, towards a position described in Naturalism in Mathematics. Her "naturalist" position, like Quine's, suggests that since science is our most successful project so far for knowing about the world, philosophers should adopt the methods of science in their own discipline, and especially when discussing science. As Maddy stated in an interview, "If you’re a ‘naturalist’, you think that science shouldn’t be held to extra-scientific standards, that it doesn’t require extra-scientific ratification." However, rather than a unified picture of the sciences like Quine's, she has a picture on which mathematics is separate. This way, mathematics is neither supported nor undermined by the needs and goals of science, but is allowed to obey its own criteria. This means that traditional metaphysical and epistemological concerns of the philosophy of mathematics are misplaced. Like Wittgenstein, she suggests that many of these puzzles arise merely because of the application of language outside its proper domain of significance. She has been dedicated to understanding and explaining the methods that set theorists use in agreeing on axioms, especially those that go beyond ZFC.   == Awards == The German Mathematical Society awarded her a Gauss Lectureship in 2006.   == Selected publications == Defending the Axioms, Oxford University Press, 2011. ISBN 0-19-959618-2 Second Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2007. ISBN 0-19-927366-9 Naturalism in Mathematics, Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-825075-4 Realism in Mathematics, Oxford University Press, 1990. ISBN 0-19-824035-X Maddy, Penelope (Jun 1988). "Believing the Axioms, I". Journal of Symbolic Logic 53 (2): 481–511. doi:10.2307/2274520.  (a copy with corrections is available at the authors web page) Maddy, Penelope (Sep 1988). "Believing the Axioms, II". Journal of Symbolic Logic 53 (3): 736–764. doi:10.2307/2274569.    == References ==   == External links == Penelope Maddy's faculty page Penelope Maddy: a philosopher you can count on – Portrait in Scientific American by Laura Vanderkam, 13 January 2009 Interview at 3AM Magazine

Per Erik Rutger Martin-Löf (born 1942) is a Swedish logician, philosopher, and mathematical statistician. He is internationally renowned for his work on the foundations of probability, statistics, mathematical logic, and computer science. Since the late 1970s, Martin-Löf's publications have been mainly in logic. In philosophical logic, Martin-Löf has wrestled with the philosophy of logical consequence and judgment, partly inspired by the work of Brentano, Frege, and Husserl. In mathematical logic, Martin-Löf has been active in developing intuitionistic type theory as a constructive foundation of mathematics; Martin-Löf's work on type theory has influenced computer science. Until his retirement in 2009, Per Martin-Löf held a joint chair for Mathematics and Philosophy at Stockholm University. His brother Anders Martin-Löf is now emeritus professor of mathematical statistics at Stockholm University; the two brothers have collaborated in research in probability and statistics. The research of Anders and Per Martin-Löf has influenced statistical theory, especially concerning exponential families, the expectation-maximization method for missing data, and model selection. Per Martin-Löf is an enthusiastic bird-watcher, whose first scientific publication was on the mortality rates of ringed birds.   == Randomness and Kolmogorov complexity ==  In 1964 and 1965, Martin-Löf studied in Moscow under the supervision of Andrei N. Kolmogorov. He wrote a 1966 article On the definition of random sequences that gave the first suitable definition of a random sequence. Earlier researchers such as Richard von Mises had attempted to formalize the notion of a test for randomness in order to define a random sequence as one that passed all tests for randomness; however, the precise notion of a randomness test was left vague. Martin-Löf's key insight was to use the theory of computation to define formally the notion of a test for randomness. This contrasts with the idea of randomness in probability; in that theory, no particular element of a sample space can be said to be random. Martin-Löf randomness has since been shown to admit many equivalent characterizations — in terms of compression, randomness tests, and gambling — that bear little outward resemblance to the original definition, but each of which satisfies our intuitive notion of properties that random sequences ought to have: random sequences should be incompressible, they should pass statistical tests for randomness, and it should be impossible to make money betting on them. The existence of these multiple definitions of Martin-Löf randomness, and the stability of these definitions under different models of computation, give evidence that Martin-Löf randomness is a fundamental property of mathematics and not an accident of Martin-Löf's particular model. The thesis that the definition of Martin-Löf randomness "correctly" captures the intuitive notion of randomness has been called the "Martin-Löf-Chaitin Thesis"; it is somewhat similar to the Church–Turing thesis. Following Martin-Löf's work, algorithmic information theory defines a random string as one that cannot be produced from any computer program that is shorter than the string (Chaitin–Kolmogorov randomness); i.e. a string whose Kolmogorov complexity is at least the length of the string. This is a different meaning from the usage of the term in statistics. Whereas statistical randomness refers to the process that produces the string (e.g. flipping a coin to produce each bit will randomly produce a string), algorithmic randomness refers to the string itself. Algorithmic information theory separates random from nonrandom strings in a way that is relatively invariant to the model of computation being used. An algorithmically random sequence is an infinite sequence of characters, all of whose prefixes (except possibly a finite number of exceptions) are strings that are "close to" algorithmically random (their length is within a constant of their Kolmogorov complexity).   == Mathematical statistics == Per Martin-Löf has done important research in mathematical statistics, which (in the Swedish tradition) includes probability theory and statistics.   === Bird-watching and sex determination ===  Per Martin-Löf began bird watching in his youth and remains an enthusiastic bird-watcher. As a teenager, he published an article on estimating the mortality rates of birds, using data from bird ringing, in a Swedish zoological journal: This paper was soon cited in leading international journals, and this paper continues to be cited. In the biology and statistics of birds, there are several problems of missing data. Martin-Löf's first paper discussed the problem of estimating the mortality rates of the Dunlin species, using capture-recapture methods. A second problem of missing data arises with studying the sex of birds. The problem of determining the biological sex of a bird, which is extremely difficult for humans, is one of the first examples in Martin-Löf's lectures on statistical models.   === Probability on algebraic structures ===  Martin-Löf wrote a licenciate thesis on probability on algebraic structures, particularly semigroups, a research program led by Ulf Grenander at Stockholm University.   === Statistical models ===  Martin-Löf developed innovative approaches to statistical theory. In his paper "On Tables of Random Numbers", Kolmogorov observed that the frequency probability notion of the limiting properties of infinite sequences failed to provide a foundation for statistics, which considers only finite samples. Much of Martin-Löf's work in statistics was to provide a finite-sample foundation for statistics.   ==== Model selection and hypothesis testing ====  In the 1970s, Per Martin-Löf made important contributions to statistical theory and inspired further research, especially by Scandinavian statisticians including Rolf Sundberg, Thomas Höglund, and Steffan Lauritzen. In this work, Martin-Löf's previous research on probability measures on semigroups led to a notion of "repetitive structure" and a novel treatment of sufficient statistics, in which one-parameter exponential families were characterized. He provided a category-theoretic approach to nested statistical models, using finite-sample principles. Before (and after) Martin-Löf, such nested models have often been tested using chi-square hypothesis tests, whose justifications are only asymptotic (and so irrelevant to real problems, which always have finite samples).   ==== Expectation maximization method for exponential families ====  Martin-Löf's student, Rolf Sundberg, developed a detailed analysis of the expectation-maximization (EM) method for estimation using data from exponential families, especially with missing data. Sundberg credits a formula, later known as the Sundberg formula, to previous manuscripts of the Martin-Löf brothers, Per and Anders. Many of these results reached the international scientific community through the 1976 paper on the expectation maximization (EM) method by Arthur P. Dempster, Nan Laird, and Donald Rubin, which was published in a leading international journal, sponsored by the Royal Statistical Society.   == Logic ==   === Philosophical logic ===  In philosophical logic, Per Martin-Löf has published papers on the theory of logical consequence, on judgments, etc. He has been interested in Central-European philosophical traditions, especially of the German-language writings of Franz Brentano, Gottlob Frege, and of Edmund Husserl.   === Type theory ===  Martin-Löf has worked in mathematical logic for many decades. From 1968 to '69 he worked as an Assistant Professor at the University of Chicago where he met William Alvin Howard with whom he discussed issues related to the Curry–Howard correspondence. Martin-Löf's first draft article on type theory dates back to 1971. This impredicative theory generalized Girard's System F. However, this system turned out to be inconsistent due to Girard's paradox which was discovered by Girard when studying System U, an inconsistent extension of System F. This experience led Per Martin-Löf to develop the philosophical foundations of type theory, his meaning explanation, a form of proof-theoretic semantics, which justifies predicative type theory as presented in his 1984 Bibliopolis book, and extended in a number of increasingly philosophical texts, such as his influential On the Meanings of the Logical Constants and the Justifications of the Logical Laws. The 1984 type theory was extensional while the type theory presented in the book by Nordström et al. in 1990, which was heavily influenced by his later ideas, intensional, and more amenable to being implemented on a computer. Martin-Löf's intuitionistic type theory developed the notion of dependent types and directly influenced the development of the calculus of constructions and the logical framework LF. A number of popular computer-based proof systems are based on type theory, for example NuPRL, LEGO, Coq, ALF, Agda, Twelf and Epigram.   == Awards == Martin-Löf is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and of the Academia Europaea.   == See also == Franz Brentano Rudolf Carnap Michael Dummett Gottlob Frege Jaakko Hintikka Edmund Husserl Andrei N. Kolmogorov Anders Martin-Löf John von Neumann Peter Pagin Dag Prawitz Charles Sanders Peirce Frank P. Ramsey Bertrand Russell Dana Scott Alfred Tarski Alan Turing   == Notes ==   == References ==   === Bird watching and missing data === Martin-Löf, P. (1961). "Mortality rate calculations on ringed birds with special reference to the Dunlin Calidris alpina". Arkiv för Zoologi (Zoology files), Kungliga Svenska Vetenskapsakademien (The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences) Serie 2. Band 13 (21).  George A. Barnard, "Gone Birdwatching", New Scientist, 4 December 1999, magazine issue 2215. Seber, G.A.F. The Estimation of Animal Abundance and Related Parameters. Caldwel, New Jersey: Blackburn Press. ISBN 1-930665-55-5.  Royle, J. A.; R. M. Dorazio (2008). Hierarchical Modeling and Inference in Ecology. Elsevier. ISBN 1-930665-55-5.    === Probability foundations === Per Martin-Löf. "The Definition of Random Sequences." Information and Control, 9(6): 602–619, 1966. Li, Ming and Vitányi, Paul, An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applications, Springer, 1997. Introduction chapter full-text.   === Probability on algebraic structures, following Ulf Grenander === Grenander, Ulf. Probability on Algebraic Structures. (Dover reprint) Martin-Löf, P. The continuity theorem on a locally compact group. Teor. Verojatnost. i Primenen. 10 1965 367—371. Martin-Löf, Per. Probability theory on discrete semigroups. Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verw. Gebiete 4 1965 78—102 Nitis Mukhopadhyay. "A Conversation with Ulf Grenander". Statist. Sci. Volume 21, Number 3 (2006), 404–426.   === Statistics foundations === Anders Martin-Löf. 1963. "Utvärdering av livslängder i subnanosekundsområdet" ("Evaluation of lifetimes in time-lengths below one nanosecond"). ("Sundberg formula", according to Sundberg 1971) Per Martin-Löf. 1966. Statistics from the point of view of statistical mechanics. Lecture notes, Mathematical Institute, Aarhus University. ("Sundberg formula" credited to Anders Martin-Löf, according to Sundberg 1971) Per Martin-Löf. 1970. Statistika Modeller (Statistical Models): Anteckningar fran seminarier läsåret 1969–1970 (Notes from seminars in the academic year 1969–1970), with the assistance of Rolf Sundberg. Stockholm University. Martin-Löf, P. "Exact tests, confidence regions and estimates", with a discussion by A. W. F. Edwards, G. A. Barnard, D. A. Sprott, O. Barndorff-Nielsen, D. Basu and G. Rasch. Proceedings of Conference on Foundational Questions in Statistical Inference (Aarhus, 1973), pp. 121–138. Memoirs, No. 1, Dept. Theoret. Statist., Inst. Math., Univ. Aarhus, Aarhus, 1974. Martin-Löf, P. Repetitive structures and the relation between canonical and microcanonical distributions in statistics and statistical mechanics. With a discussion by D. R. Cox and G. Rasch and a reply by the author. Proceedings of Conference on Foundational Questions in Statistical Inference (Aarhus, 1973), pp. 271–294. Memoirs, No. 1, Dept. Theoret. Statist., Inst. Math., Univ. Aarhus, Aarhus, 1974. Martin-Löf, P. The notion of redundancy and its use as a quantitative measure of the deviation between a statistical hypothesis and a set of observational data. With a discussion by F. Abildgård, A. P. Dempster, D. Basu, D. R. Cox, A. W. F. Edwards, D. A. Sprott, G. A. Barnard, O. Barndorff-Nielsen, J. D. Kalbfleisch and G. Rasch and a reply by the author. Proceedings of Conference on Foundational Questions in Statistical Inference (Aarhus, 1973), pp. 1–42. Memoirs, No. 1, Dept. Theoret. Statist., Inst. Math., Univ. Aarhus, Aarhus, 1974. Martin-Löf, Per The notion of redundancy and its use as a quantitative measure of the discrepancy between a statistical hypothesis and a set of observational data. Scand. J. Statist. 1 (1974), no. 1, 3—18. Sverdrup, Erling. "Tests without power." Scand. J. Statist. 2 (1975), no. 3, 158—160. Martin-Löf, Per Reply to Erling Sverdrup's polemical article: ``Tests without power (Scand. J. Statist. 2 (1975), no. 3, 158–160). Scand. J. Statist. 2 (1975), no. 3, 161–165. Sverdrup, Erling. A rejoinder to: ``Tests without power (Scand. J. Statist. 2 (1975), 161—165) by P. Martin-Löf. Scand. J. Statist. 4 (1977), no. 3, 136—138. Martin-Löf, P. Exact tests, confidence regions and estimates. Foundations of probability and statistics. II. Synthese 36 (1977), no. 2, 195—206. Rolf Sundberg. 1971. Maximum likelihood theory and applications for distributions generated when observing a function of an exponential family variable. Dissertation, Institute for Mathematical Statistics, Stockholm University. Sundberg, Rolf. Maximum likelihood theory for incomplete data from an exponential family. Scand. J. Statist. 1 (1974), no. 2, 49—58. Sundberg, Rolf An iterative method for solution of the likelihood equations for incomplete data from exponential families. Comm. Statist.—Simulation Comput. B5 (1976), no. 1, 55—64. Sundberg, Rolf Some results about decomposable (or Markov-type) models for multidimensional contingency tables: distribution of marginals and partitioning of tests. Scand. J. Statist. 2 (1975), no. 2, 71—79. Höglund, Thomas. The exact estimate — a method of statistical estimation. Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verw. Gebiete 29 (1974), 257—271. Lauritzen, Steffen L. Extremal families and systems of sufficient statistics. Lecture Notes in Statistics, 49. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988. xvi+268 pp. ISBN 0-387-96872-5   === Foundations of mathematics, logic, and computer science === Per Martin-Löf. A theory of types. Preprint, Stockholm University, 1971. Per Martin-Löf. An intuitionistic theory of types. In G. Sambin and J. Smith, editors, Twenty-Five Years of Constructive Type Theory. Oxford University Press, 1998. Reprinted version of an unpublished report from 1972. Per Martin-Löf. An intuitionistic theory of types: Predicative part. In H. E. Rose and J. C. Shepherdson, editors, Logic Colloquium ‘73, pages 73–118. North Holland, 1975. Per Martin-Löf. Constructive mathematics and computer programming. In Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science VI, 1979. Eds. Cohen, et al. North-Holland, Amsterdam. pp. 153–175, 1982. Per Martin-Löf. Intuitionistic type theory. (Notes by Giovanni Sambin of a series of lectures given in Padua, June 1980). Napoli, Bibliopolis, 1984. Per Martin-Löf. Philosophical implications of type theory, Unpublished notes, 1987? Per Martin-Löf. Substitution calculus, 1992. Notes from a lecture given in Göteborg. Bengt Nordström, Kent Petersson, and Jan M. Smith. Programming in Martin-Löf's Type Theory. Oxford University Press, 1990. (The book is out of print, but a free version has been made available.) Per Martin-Löf. On the Meanings of the Logical Constants and the Justifications of the Logical Laws. Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic, 1(1): 11–60, 1996.   == External links == Per Martin-Löf at the Mathematics Genealogy Project


Peter Thomas Geach, MA, FBA (/ˈɡiːtʃ/; 29 March 1916 – 21 December 2013) was a British philosopher and Emeritus Professor of Logic at the University of Leeds. His areas of interest were the history of philosophy, philosophical logic, metaethics, and the theory of identity.   == Early life == Peter Geach was born in London in 1916 to George Hender Geach, a professor of philosophy in Lahore and Cambridge, and Eleonora Adolfina Sgonina, a poet, and spent his earliest years in Cardiff. He attended Llandaff Cathedral School and Clifton College. He received instruction in logic and philosophy from his father who, as a member of the Indian Educational Service, had been Professor of Philosophy at Lahore and later Principal of a teacher training college in Peshawar. His parents' marriage was unhappy and quickly broke up. Until around the age of eight, Peter lived with his maternal grandparents in Cardiff, after which time he was sent off to school by his father and raised by a guardian. Geach never saw his mother again after childhood. In 1934 Geach won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford, graduating in 1938 with a First in Literae Humaniores.   == Academic career == Geach spent a year (1938-39) as a Gladstone Research Student, based at St Deiniol’s Library, Hawarden. Following the end of World War II in 1945, he undertook further research at Cambridge. In 1951, Geach was appointed to his first substantive academic post, as Assistant Lecturer at the University of Birmingham, going on to become Reader in Logic. In 1966 he was appointed Professor of Logic in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Leeds. Geach retired from his chair in 1981 with the title Emeritus Professor of Logic. He also held Visiting Professorships at the universities of Cornell, Chicago, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Warsaw. Geach was elected a Fellow of the British Academy (FBA) in 1965. He was elected an Honorary Fellow of Balliol College in 1979. He was awarded the papal cross "Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice" by the Holy See for his philosophical work.   == Thought == His early work includes the classic texts Mental Acts and Reference and Generality, the latter defending an essentially modern conception of reference against medieval theories of supposition. His Catholic perspective was integral to his philosophy. He was perhaps the founder of Analytical Thomism (though the current of thought running through his and Elizabeth Anscombe's work to the present day was only ostensibly so named forty years later by John Haldane), the aim of which is to synthesise Thomistic and Analytic approaches. Geach was a student and an early follower of Ludwig Wittgenstein whilst at Cambridge University. Geach defends the Thomistic position that human beings are essentially rational animals, each one miraculously created. He dismissed Darwinistic attempts to regard reason as inessential to humanity, as "mere sophistry, laughable, or pitiable." He repudiated any capacity for language in animals as mere "association of manual signs with things or performances." Geach dismissed both pragmatic and epistemic conceptions of truth, commending a version of the correspondence theory proposed by Aquinas. He argues that there is one reality rooted in God himself, who is the ultimate truthmaker. God, according to Geach, is truth. While they lived, he saw W.V. Quine and Arthur Prior as his allies, in that they held three truths: that there are no non-existent beings; that a proposition can occur in discourse without being there asserted; and that the sense of a term does not depend on the truth of the proposition in which it occurs. He invented the famous ethical example of the stuck potholer, when arguing against the idea that it might be right to kill a child to save its mother. Jenny Teichman, fellow of New Hall, Cambridge, has characterised Geach's philosophical style as "deliberately outrageous".   == Personal life == His wife and occasional collaborator was the philosopher and Wittgenstein scholar Professor Elizabeth Anscombe. Both converts to Roman Catholicism, they married in 1941 and had seven children. They co-authored the 1961 book Three Philosophers, with Anscombe contributing a section on Aristotle and Geach one each on Aquinas and Gottlob Frege. For a quarter century they were leading figures in the Philosophical Enquiry Group, an annual confluence of Catholic philosophers held at Spode House in Staffordshire that was established by Father Columba Ryan in 1954. Peter Geach died early in the morning on 21 December 2013 at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge and is buried in what is now the Ascension Parish burial ground.   == Selected publications == (edited, with Max Black) Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, 1952/1960/1966 "Good and Evil," Analysis (1956) Mental Acts: Their Content and Their Objects, 1957/1997 Three Philosophers: Aristotle; Aquinas; Frege (with G.E.M. Anscombe), 1961 Reference and Generality: An Examination of Some Medieval and Modern Theories, 1962 History of the corruptions of logic, inaugural lecture, University of Leeds, 1968 God and the Soul, 1969/2001 Logic Matters, 1972 Reason and Argument, 1976 "Saying and Showing in Frege and Wittgenstein," Acta Philosophica Fennica 28 (1976): 54–70 Truth, Love, and Immortality: An Introduction to McTaggart's Philosophy, 1979 (edited) Wittgenstein's Lectures on Philosophical Psychology, 1946–47: Notes by P.T. Geach, K.J. Shah, and A.C. Jackson, 1989 Logic and Ethics (edited by Jacek Holowka), 1990 Truth and Hope: The Furst Franz Josef und Furstin Gina Lectures Delivered at the International Academy of Philosophy in the Principality of Liechtenstein, 1998 (ISBN 0-268-04215-2)   == See also == Omnipotence levels   == Notes ==   == References == Alasdair MacIntyre, "Virtues in Foot and Geach", Philosophical Quarterly (2002).   == External links == Obituary of Peter Geach in The Telegraph * Peter Geach at Find a Grave

Peter of Spain (Latin: Petrus Hispanus; Portuguese & Spanish: Pedro Hispano; fl. 13th century) was the author of the Tractatus, later known as the Summulae Logicales, an important medieval university textbook on Aristotelian logic. As the Latin Hispania was considered to include the entire Iberian peninsula, he is traditionally and usually identified with the Portuguese scholar and ecclesiastic Peter Juliani, who was elected Pope John XXI in 1276. The identification is sometimes disputed, usually by Spanish authors, who claim the author of the Tractatus was a Castilian Blackfriar. He is also sometimes identified as Petrus Ferrandi Hispanus (d. 1254 x 1259).   == Life ==  The author of the Tractatus is assumed to have studied under John Pagus.   == Philosophical works == There are a large volume of manuscripts and printed editions of the Summulae Logicales, indicative of its great success throughout European universities well into the seventeenth century. Peter of Spain supported an investigation of teaching at the University of Paris which resulted in the Parisian bishop's Condemnation of 1277, which denounced Aristotelian propositions which conflicted with church doctrine. Dialectica est ars artium, scientia scientiarum, ad omnium methodorum principia viam habens; sola enim dialectica probabiliter disputat de principiis omnium aliarum scientiarum, et ideo in acquisitione omnium aliarum scientiarum dialectica debet esse prior. "Dialectic [that is, logic, in Peter's terminology] is the art of arts, science of sciences, having the way to the principles of all methods; for in fact dialectic alone credibly argues about the principles of all other sciences, and therefore in [one's] acquisition (learning) of all other sciences dialectic must be prior." — Peter of Spain.   == Medical works ==  A Petrus Hispanus, usually identified as the same scholar, was also credited as the author of a Commentary on Isaac, one of the foundational texts of clinical pharmacology. A Pedro Hispano was also credited with the Treasury of the Poor (Thesaurus Pauperum), a comprehensive recipe book for contraception and inducement of menstruation. Many of Peter’s recipes have been found to be surprisingly effective by contemporary research, and it is believed that women in antiquity had more control over their reproduction than previously believed.   == English translation == Peter of Spain Summaries of Logic, Text, Translation, Introduction, and Notes by Brian P. Copenhaver, Calvin G. Normore, Terence Parsons, New York, Oxford University Press, 2014.   == References ==   == External links == Peter of Spain entry by Joke Spruyt in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Petr Hájek (born 6 February 1940 in Prague; Czech pronunciation: [ˈpɛtr̩ ˈɦaːjɛk]) is a Czech scientist in the area of mathematical logic and a professor of mathematics. He worked at the Institute of Computer Science at the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic and as a lecturer at the Faculty of Mathematics and Physics at the Charles University in Prague and at the Faculty of Nuclear Sciences and Physical Engineering of the Czech Technical University in Prague.   == Academics == Petr Hájek studied at the Faculty of Mathematics and Physics of the Charles University in Prague Influenced by Petr Vopěnka, he specialized in set theory, arithmetic, later also in logic and artificial intelligence. He contributed to establishing the mathematical fundamentals of fuzzy logic. Following the Velvet Revolution he was appointed a senior lecturer (1993), and a professor (1997). From 1992 to 2000 he held the position of chairman of the Institute of Computer Science at the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic. From 1996 to 2003 he was also president of the Kurt Gödel Society. Later he graduated from Academy of Performing Arts in Prague, where he studied Pipe organ under Jiří Reinberger to become an organ player in a church.   == Awards == 2002, Medal of the Minister of Education of the Czech Republic 2006, Medal of Merit, third grade, in the area of sciences by President of the Czech Republic Václav Klaus 2008, doctor honoris causa from Silesian University in Opava   == Papers == Hájek, Petr; Kalášek, Pavel; Kůrka, Petr (1960). O dynamické logice. Praha: Academia.  Vopěnka, Petr; Hájek, Petr (1972). The Theory of Semisets. Trans. Jech, T. and Rousseau, G. Praha: Academia.  Hájek, Petr; Havránek, Tomáš; Chytil, Metoděj K. (1983). Metoda GUHA: automatická tvorba hypotéz. Praha: Academia.  Hájek, Petr; Pudlák, Pavel (1993). Metamatemathics of First-Order Arithmetic. Berlin: Springer.    == See also == Semiset   == References ==   == External links == Petr Hájek's former webpage Databases of the National Library of the Czech Republic

Petrus Ramus (French: Pierre de la Ramée; Anglicized to Peter Ramus /ˈreɪməs/; 1515 – 26 August 1572) was an influential French humanist, logician, and educational reformer. A Protestant convert, he was killed during the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre.   == Early lifeEdit == He was born at the village of Cuts in Picardy; his father was a farmer. He gained admission at age twelve, to the Collège de Navarre, working as a servant. A reaction against scholasticism was in full tide, at a transitional time for Aristotelianism. On the occasion of taking his degree (1536) Ramus allegedly took as his thesis Quaecumque ab Aristotele dicta essent, commentitia esse, which Walter J. Ong paraphrases as follows: "All the things that Aristotle has said are inconsistent because they are poorly systematized and can be called to mind only by the use of arbitrary mnemonic devices." According to Ong this kind of spectacular thesis was in fact routine at the time. Even so, Ong raises questions as to whether Ramus actually ever delivered this thesis.   == Early academic careerEdit == Ramus, as graduate of the university, started courses of lectures. At this period he was engaged in numerous separate controversies. One opponent in 1543 was the Benedictine Joachim Périon. He was accused, by Jacques Charpentier, professor of medicine, of undermining the foundations of philosophy and religion. Arnaud d'Ossat, a pupil and friend of Ramus, defended him against Charpentier. Ramus was made to debate Goveanus (Antonio de Gouveia), over two days. The matter was brought before the parlement of Paris, and finally before Francis I. By him it was referred to a commission of five, who found Ramus guilty of having "acted rashly, arrogantly and impudently," and interdicted his lectures (1544).   == Royal supportEdit == He withdrew from Paris, but soon afterwards returned, the decree against him being canceled by Henry II, who came to the throne in 1547, through the influence of Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine. He obtained a position at the Collège de Navarre. In 1551 Henry II appointed him a regius professor at the university but he preferred to call himself a professor of philosophy and eloquence at the Collège de France, where for a considerable time he lectured before audiences numbering as many as 2,000. Pierre Galland, another professor there, published Contra novam academiam Petri Rami oratio (1551), and called him a "parricide" for his attitude to Aristotle. The more serious charge was that he was a nouveau academicien, in other words a sceptic. Audomarus Talaeus (Omer Talon c.1510–1581), a close ally of Ramus, had indeed published a work in 1548 derived from Cicero's description of Academic scepticism, the school of Arcesilaus and Carneades.   == After conversionEdit == In 1561 he faced significant enmity following his adoption of Protestantism. He had to flee from Paris; and, though he found an asylum in the palace of Fontainebleau, his house was pillaged and his library burned in his absence. He resumed his chair after this for a time, but in 1568 the position of affairs was again so threatening that he found it advisable to ask permission to travel. He spent around two years, in Germany and Switzerland. The Second Helvetic Confession earned his disapproval, in 1571, rupturing his relationship with Theodore Beza and leading Ramus to write angrily to Heinrich Bullinger. Returning to France, he fell a victim in the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre (1572). Hiding for a while in a bookshop off the Rue St Jacques, he returned to his lodgings, on 26 August, the third day of the violence. There he was stabbed while at prayer. Suspicions against Charpentier have been voiced ever since.   == PedagogueEdit == A central issue is that Ramus's anti-Aristotelianism arose out of a concern for pedagogy. Aristotelian philosophy, in its Early Modern form as scholasticism showing its age, was in a confused and disordered state. Ramus sought to infuse order and simplicity into philosophical and scholastic education by reinvigorating a sense of dialectic as the overriding logical and methodological basis for the various disciplines. He published in 1543 the Aristotelicae Animadversiones and Dialecticae Partitiones, the former a criticism on the old logic and the latter a new textbook of the science. What are substantially fresh editions of the Partitiones appeared in 1547 as Institutiones Dialecticae, and in 1548 as Scholae Dialecticae; his Dialectique (1555), a French version of his system, is the earliest work on the subject in the French language. In the "Dialecticae partitiones," Ramus recommends the use of summaries, headings, citations and examples. Ong calls Ramus's use of outlines, "a reorganization of the whole of knowledge and indeed of the whole human lifeworld." After studying Ramus's work, Ong concluded that the results of his "methodizing" of the arts "are the amateurish works of a desperate man who is not a thinker but merely an erudite pedagogue". On the other hand, his work had an immediate impact on the issue of disciplinary boundaries, where educators largely accepted his arguments, by the end of the century.   == LogicianEdit == The logic of Ramus enjoyed a great celebrity for a time, and there existed a school of Ramists boasting numerous adherents in France, Germany, Switzerland, and the Netherlands. It cannot be said, however, that Ramus's innovations mark any epoch in the history of logic, and there is little ground for his claim to supersede Aristotle by an independent system of logic. The distinction between natural and artificial logic, i.e., between the implicit logic of daily speech and the same logic made explicit in a system, passed over into the logical handbooks. He amends the syllogism. He admits only the first three figures, as in the original Aristotelian scheme, and in his later works he also attacks the validity of the third figure, following in this the precedent of Laurentius Valla. Ramus also set the modern fashion of deducing the figures from the position of the middle term in the premises, instead of basing them, as Aristotle does, upon the different relation of the middle to the major term and minor term.   == RhetoricianEdit == As James Jasinski explains, "the range of rhetoric began to be narrowed during the 16th century, thanks in part to the works of Peter Ramus."  In using the word "narrowed," Jasinski is referring to Ramus argument for divorcing rhetoric from dialectic (logic), a move that had far reaching implications for rhetorical studies and for popular conceptions of public persuasion. Contemporary rhetoricians have tended to reject Ramus's view in favor of a more wide ranging (and in many respects, Aristotelian) understanding of the rhetorical arts as encompassing "a [broad] range of ordinary language practices."  Rhetoric, traditionally, had had five parts, of which inventio (invention) was the first. Ramus insisted on rhetoric to be studied alongside dialectic through two main manuals: invention and judgement under the dialectic manual, and style and delivery in the rhetoric manual. Memory, one of the five skills of traditional rhetoric, was regarded by Ramus as being part of psychology, as opposed to being part of rhetoric, and thus dispensed form his idea of rhetoric and dialectic. Brian Vickers said that the Ramist influence here did add to rhetoric: it concentrated more on the remaining aspect of elocutio or effective use of language, and emphasised the role of vernacular European languages (rather than Latin). Ramist reforms strengthened the rhetoricians' tendency to focus on style. The effect was that rhetoric was applied in literature. Invention involves fourteen topics, including definition, cause, effect, subject, adjunct, difference, contrary, comparison, similarity, and testimony. Style encompasses four tropes: metaphor, synecdoche, metonymy, and irony. It also includes rules for poetic meter and rhythmical prose, figures corresponding to attitudes a speaker may take, and of repetition. Delivery covers the use of voice and gestures. His rhetorical leaning is seen in the definition of logic as the ars disserendi; he maintains that the rules of logic may be better learned from observation of the way in which Cicero persuaded his hearers than from a study of Aristotle's works on logic (the Organon). Logic falls, according to Ramus, into two parts: invention (treating of the notion and definition) and judgment (comprising the judgment proper, syllogism and method). Here he was influenced by Rodolphus Agricola. This division gave rise to the jocular designation of judgment or mother-wit as the "secunda Petri". But what Ramus does here in fact redefines rhetoric. There is a new configuration, with logic and rhetoric each having two parts: rhetoric was to cover elocutio and pronuntiatio. In general, Ramism liked to deal with binary trees as method for organising knowledge.   == MathematicianEdit == He was also known as a mathematician, a student of Johannes Sturm. It has been suggested that Sturm was an influence in another way, by his lectures given in 1529 on Hermogenes of Tarsus: the Ramist method of dichotomy is to be found in Hermogenes. He had students of his own. He corresponded with John Dee on mathematics, and at one point recommended to Elizabeth I that she appoint him to a university chair. The views of Ramus on mathematics implied a limitation to the practical: he considered Euclid's theory on irrational numbers to be useless. The emphasis on technological applications and engineering mathematics was coupled to an appeal to nationalism (France was well behind Italy, and needed to catch up with Germany).   == RamismEdit ==  The teachings of Ramus had a broadly based reception well into the seventeenth century. Later movements, such as Baconianism, pansophism, and Cartesianism, in different ways built on Ramism, and took advantage of the space cleared by some of the simplifications (and oversimplifications) it had effected. The longest-lasting strand of Ramism was in systematic Calvinist theology, where textbook treatments with a Ramist framework were still used into the eighteenth century, particularly in New England. The first writings on Ramism, after the death of Ramus, included biographies, and were by disciples of sorts: Freigius (1574 or 1575), Banosius (1576), Nancelius (1599), of whom only Nancelius was closely acquainted with the man. Followers of Ramus in different fields included Caspar Olevianus, Johannes Piscator, Hieronymus Treutler, Johannes Althusius, the statesman Emdens, and John Milton.   == WorksEdit == He published fifty works in his lifetime and nine appeared after his death. Ong undertook the complex bibliographical task of tracing his books through their editions. Aristotelicae Animadversiones (1543) Brutinae questiones (1547) Rhetoricae distinctiones in Quintilianum (1549) Dialectique (1555) Arithmétique (1555) De moribus veterum Gallorum (Paris, 1559; second edition, Basel, 1572) Liber de Cæsaris Militia Paris, 1584 Advertissement sur la réformation de l'université de Paris, au Roy, Paris, (1562) Three grammars: Grammatica latina (1548), Grammatica Graeca (1560), Grammaire Française (1562) Scolae physicae, metaphysicae, mathematicae (1565, 1566, 1578) Prooemium mathematicum (Paris, 1567) Scholarum mathematicarum libri unus et triginta (Basel, 1569) (his most famous work) Commentariorum de religione christiana (Frankfurt, 1576)   == BibliographyEdit == Nelly Bruyère, Méthode et dialectique dans l'oeuvre de La Ramée: Renaissance et Age classique, Paris, Vrin 1984 Desmaze, Charles. Petrus Ramus, professeur au Collège de France, sa vie, ses ecrits, sa mort (Paris, 1864). Freedman, Joseph S. Philosophy and the Arts in Central Europe, 1500-1700: Teaching and Texts at Schools and Universities (Ashgate, 1999). Graves, Frank Pierrepont. Peter Ramus and the Educational Reformation of the Sixteenth Century (Macmillan, 1912). Høffding, Harald. History of Modern Philosophy (English translation, 1900), vol. i.185. Howard Hotson, Commonplace Learning: Ramism and Its German Ramifications, 1543–1630 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007). Lobstein, Paul. Petrus Ramus als Theolog (Strassburg, 1878). Miller, Perry. The New England Mind (Harvard University Press, 1939). Milton, John. A Fuller Course in the Art of Logic Conformed to the Method of Peter Ramus (London, 1672). Ed. and trans. Walter J. Ong and Charles J. Ermatinger. Complete Prose Works of John Milton: Volume 8. Ed. Maurice Kelley. New Haven: Yale UP, 1982. p. 206-407. Ong, Walter J. (1982). Orality and literacy: The technologizing of the word. New York: Methuen.(p. viii). ---.Ramus, Method, and the Decay of Dialogue: From the Art of Discourse to the Art of Reason (Harvard University Press, 1958; reissued with a new foreword by Adrian Johns, University of Chicago Press, 2004.[3] ISBN 0-226-62976-7). ---. Ramus and Talon Inventory (Harvard University Press, 1958).  Owen, John. The Skeptics of the French Renaissance (London, 1893). Pranti, K. "Uber P. Ramus" in Munchener Sitzungs berichte (1878). Saisset, Émile. Les précurseurs de Descartes (Paris, 1862). Sharratt, Peter. "The Present State of Studies on Ramus," Studi francesi 47-48 (1972) 201-13. —. "Recent Work on Peter Ramus (1970–1986)," Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric 5 (1987): 7-58. —. "Ramus 2000," Rhetorica: A Journal of the History of Rhetoric 18 (2000): 399-455.  Voigt. Uber den Ramismus der Universität Leipzig (Leipzig, 1888). Waddington, Charles De Petri Rami vita, scriptis, philosophia (Paris, 1848).   == See alsoEdit == Mnemonics Ramism   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External linksEdit == Works by Petrus Ramus at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Petrus Ramus at Internet Archive 'Ramism' entry in The Dictionary of the History of Ideas Petrus Ramus entry by Erland Sellberg in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Catholic Encyclopedia entry Charles Waddington, Ramus (Pierre de la Ramée) sa vie, ses écrits et ses opinions (1855)

Philip Edward Bertrand Jourdain (16 October 1879 – 1 October 1919) was a British logician and follower of Bertrand Russell. He was born in Ashbourne in Derbyshire one of a large family belonging to Emily Clay and his father Francis Jourdain (who was the vicar at Ashbourne). He was partly disabled by Friedreich's ataxia. He corresponded with Georg Cantor and Gottlob Frege, and took a close interest in the paradoxes related to Russell's paradox, formulating the card paradox version of the liar paradox. He corresponded with Ludwig Wittgenstein, meeting with him in Cambridge to discuss Frege's book Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, of parts of which Jourdain had prepared a translation. He also worked on algebraic logic, and the history of science with Isaac Newton as a particular study. He was London editor for The Monist. Near the end of his life he became increasingly obsessed by trying to prove the axiom of choice, and published several incorrect proofs of it. His sister Eleanor Jourdain was an English academic and author.   == Works == The following works of Philip Jourdain are available from Internet Archive: 1908: Some Points in the Foundation of Mathematical Physics in The Monist v 18 1911: Some Modern Advances in Logic in The Monist v 21 1913: The Nature of Mathematics 1913: The Nature and Validity of the Principle of Least Action in The Monist v 23 1914: The Economy of Thought in The Monist v 24 1918: The Philosophy of B*rtr*nd R*ss*ll with an appendix of leading passages from certain other works 1919: Indefinables and Indemonstrables in Mathematics and Theology in The Monist v 29 Jordain acted as editor for 1914: Augustus De Morgan: Essays on the Life and Work of Newton Jourdain made the following translations: 1911: Ernst Mach History and Root of the Principle of Conservation of Energy 1915: Ernst Mach The Science of Mechanics 1915: Georg Cantor Contributions to the Foundation of the Theory of Transfinite Numbers   == References ==  Ivor Grattan-Guinness (1977) Dear Russell—Dear Jourdain: a Commentary on Russell's Logic, Based on His Correspondence with Philip Jourdain. Duckworth. Sainsbury, R. M. (Oct 1979). "Review: Dear Russell—Dear Jourdain, by I. Grattan-Guinness". Mind. New Series 88 (352): 604–607.  .  Archibald Edward Heath (1920) "Philip Edward Bertrand Jourdain", The Monist 30:161–182.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Philip Jourdain", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Works by or about Philip Jourdain at Internet Archive

Philo the Dialectician (fl. 300 BC) was a dialectic philosopher of the Megarian school. He is often called Philo of Megara although the city of his birth is unknown. He is most famous for the disputes he had with his teacher Diodorus Cronus concerning the idea of the possible and the criteria of the truth of conditional statements.   == Life == Philo was a disciple of Diodorus Cronus, and a friend of Zeno, though older than the latter. In his Menexenus he mentioned the five daughters of his teacher. Jerome incorrectly refers to Philo as the teacher of Carneades. Diogenes Laërtius mentions a (presumably different) Philo who was a disciple of Pyrrho.   == Philosophy == Philo disputed with Diodorus respecting the idea of the possible and the criteria of the truth of conditional statements. In regards to things possible, Philo was similar to Aristotle, as he recognized that not only what is, or will be, is possible (as Diodorus maintained), but also what is in itself conformable to the particular purpose of the object in question, as of straw to burn. Both Philo and Diodorus sought for criteria for the correct form of conditional propositions, and each of them did so in a manner corresponding to what he maintained respecting the idea of the possible. Philo regarded a conditional as true unless it has both a true antecedent and a false consequent. Precisely, let T0 and T1 be true statements, and let F0 and F1 be false statements; then, according to Philo, each of the following conditionals is a true statement, because it is not the case that the consequent is false while the antecedent is true (it is not the case that a false statement is asserted to follow from a true statement): If T0, then T1 If F0, then T0 If F0, then F1 The following conditional does not meet this requirement, and is therefore a false statement according to Philo: If T0, then F0 Indeed, Sextus says "According to [Philo], there are three ways in which a conditional may be true, and one in which it may be false." Philo's criterion of truth is what would now be called a truth-functional definition of "if ... then"; it is the definition used in modern logic. In contrast, Diodorus allowed the validity of conditionals only when the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion. A century later, the Stoic philosopher Chrysippus attacked the assumptions of both Philo and Diodorus.   == References ==   == External links == Dialectical School entry by Susanne Bobzien in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Selected Bibliography on the "Master Argument" in Diodorus Cronus and Philo the Dialectician with a bibliography on Diodorus and the problem of future contingents  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Philon the Megarian or Dialectician". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology III. p. 312-313.

Piergiorgio Odifreddi (born July 13, 1950 in Cuneo), is an Italian mathematician, logician and aficionado of the history of science, who is also extremely active as a popular science writer and essayist, especially in a perspective of philosophical atheism as a member of the Italian Union of Rationalist Atheists and Agnostics. He's philosophically and politically near to Bertrand Russell and Noam Chomsky. Born in Cuneo (Piedmont), he received his Laurea in mathematics in Turin in 1973. From 1983 to 2002, he taught in both Italy (Turin, Alessandria, Siena, Milan) and in the United States (Cornell University). Since 2001, he has been a professor of mathematical logic in the Department of Mathematics at the University of Turin. He has written editorials and books reviews for La rivista dei libri (the Italian edition of the New York Review of Books), is a regular contributor to Le Scienze (the Italian edition of Scientific American), and has also written for several newspapers such as La Repubblica, La Stampa and the weekly L'Espresso. The television stations Radio Tre, RAI Due and RAI Tre have hosted many of his discussions on various scientific topics. Piergiorgio Odifreddi participated in the Stock Exchange of Visions project in 2007.   == Honors == 1998 – Galileo Prize of the Italian Mathematical Union. 2002 – Peano Prize of Mathesis 2005 – Commander OMRI   == Works ==   === Academic writings === Classical recursion Theory, North Holland – Elsevier, 1988, ISBN 9780080886596; 2nd edn. 1992, ISBN 0-444-89483-7 Classical recursion Theory. Volume II, North Holland – Elsevier, 1999   === Popular writings === Il Vangelo secondo la Scienza, Einaudi, 1999, ISBN 88-06-14930-X (The Gospel According to Science) La matematica del Novecento, prefazione di Gian-Carlo Rota, Einaudi, 2000, ISBN 88-06-15153-3 (The Mathematics of the 20th Century) The Mathematical Century: The 30 greatest problems of the last 100 years, translated by Arturo Sangalli, forward by Freeman Dyson, 2004, Princeton University Press ISBN 0-691-09294-X  Il computer di Dio, Cortina, 2000, ISBN 88-7078-663-3 (God's Computer) C'era una volta un paradosso, Einaudi, 2001, ISBN 88-06-15090-1 (Once upon a time there was a paradox) La repubblica dei numeri, Cortina, 2002, ISBN 88-7078-776-1 (The Republic of Numbers) Zichicche, Dedalo, 2003, ISBN 88-220-6260-4 Il diavolo in cattedra. La logica matematica da Aristotele a Kurt Gödel, Einaudi, 2003, ISBN 88-06-16721-9 (The Devil in the Professor's Chair: Mathematical Logic from Aristotle to Kurt Goedel) Divertimento geometrico – Da Euclide ad David Hilbert, Bollati Boringhieri, 2003, ISBN 88-339-5714-4 (Geometric Diversions – From Euclid to Hilbert) Le menzogne di Ulisse. L'avventura della logica da Parmenide ad Amartya Sen, Longanesi, 2004, ISBN 88-304-2044-1 (Ulysses' Lies. The Adventure of Logic from Parmenides to Amartya Sen) Il matematico impertinente, Longanesi, 2005, ISBN 88-304-2222-3 (The Impertinent Mathematician) Penna, pennello, bacchetta: le tre invidie del matematico, Laterza, 2005, ISBN 88-420-7643-0 (Pen, brush, baton: the three envies of the mathematician) Idee per diventare matematico, Zanichelli, 2005, ISBN 88-08-07063-8 (Ideas for becoming a mathematician) Incontri con menti straordinarie, Longanesi, 2006, ISBN 88-304-2346-7 (Meetings with extraordinary minds) Che cos'è la logica?, Luca Sossella editore, 2006, ISBN 88-89829-19-2 (What is logic?) La scienza espresso: Note brevi, semibrevi e minime per una biblioteca scientifica universale, Einaudi, 2006, ISBN 978-88-06-18258-8 (Science express) Perché non-possiamo essere cristiani (e meno che mai cattolici), Longanesi, 2007, ISBN 978-88-304-2427-2 (Why we cannot be Christians (much less Catholics))   == References ==   == External links == Piergiorgio Odifreddi's Official Site (IT) Article by Odifreddi on Recursive Functions in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy



Pope John XXI (Latin: Ioannes XXI; c. 1215 – 20 May 1277), born Peter Juliani (Latin: Petrus Iulianus; Portuguese: Pedro Julião), was Pope from 8 September 1276 to his death in 1277. Apart from Damasus I (from Roman Lusitania), he has been the only Portuguese pope. He is usually identified with the logician and herbalist Peter of Spain (Latin: Petrus Hispanus; Portuguese: Pedro Hispano), which would make him the only pope to have been a physician. "Pope John XXI" was actually the 20th pope named John, but decided to skip the number XX.   == Life ==   === Early life === Pedro Julião was probably born in Lisbon between 1210 and 1220. He started his studies at the episcopal school of Lisbon Cathedral and later joined the University of Paris, although some historians claim that he was educated at Montpellier. Wherever he studied, he concentrated on medicine, theology, logic, physics, metaphysics, and Aristotle's dialectic. He is traditionally and usually identified with the medical author Peter of Spain, an important figure in the development of logic and pharmacology. Peter of Spain taught at the University of Siena in the 1240s and his Summulae Logcales was used as a university textbook on Aristotelian logic for the next three centuries. At the court in Lisbon, he was the councilor and spokesman for King Afonso III in church matters. Later, he became prior of Guimarães. He tried to become bishop of Lisbon but was defeated. Instead, he became the master of the school of Lisbon. Peter became the physician of Pope Gregory X (1271–76) early in his reign. In March 1273 he was elected Archbishop of Braga, but did not assume that post because on 3 June 1273 Gregory X created him Cardinal-Bishop of Frascati.   === Papacy ===  After the death of Pope Adrian V on 18 August 1276, Peter was elected Pope on 8 September. He was crowned a week later on 20 September. One of John XXI's few acts during his brief reign was the reversal of a decree recently passed at the Second Council of Lyon (1274); the decree had not only confined cardinals in solitude until they elected a successor Pope, but also progressively restricted their supplies of food and wine if their deliberations took too long. Though much of John XXI's brief papacy was dominated by the powerful Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini, who succeeded him as Pope Nicholas III. John attempted to launch a crusade for the Holy Land, pushed for a union with the Eastern church, and did what he could to maintain peace between the Christian nations. He also launched a mission to convert the Tatars, but he died before it could start. To secure the necessary quiet for his medical studies, he had an apartment added to the papal palace at Viterbo, to which he could retire when he wished to work undisturbed. On 14 May 1277, while the pope was alone in this apartment, it collapsed; John was buried under the ruins and died on 20 May in consequence of the serious injuries he had received. He was buried in the Duomo di Viterbo, where his tomb can still be seen.   == Legacy == After his death, it was rumored that John XXI had actually been a necromancer, a suspicion frequently directed towards the few scholars among medieval popes (see, e.g., Sylvester II). It was also said that his death had been an act of God, stopping him from completing a heretical treatise. As the works of "Peter of Spain" continued to be studied and appreciated, however: Dante Alighieri placed "Pietro Spano" in his Paradiso's Heaven of the Sun with the spirits of other great religious scholars.   == Notes ==   == References ==  Maxwell-Stuart, P. G. Chronicle of the Popes: The Reign-by-Reign Record of the Papacy from St. Peter to the Present, Thames & Hudson, 2002, p. 119. ISBN 0-500-01798-0.

Porphyry (/ˈpɔrfɪri/; Greek: Πορφύριος, Porphyrios "purple-clad") may refer to: Porphyry (geology), an igneous rock with large crystals in a fine-grained matrix, or associated mineral deposit Porphyry copper deposit, a primary (low grade) ore deposit of copper, consisting of porphyry rocks Porphyritic, the general igneous texture of a rock with two distinct crystal (phenocryst) sizes  Porphyry (philosopher) (234 – c. 305), a Neoplatonic philosopher Porphyry of Gaza (or "St. Porphyry of Gaza"), Bishop of Gaza c. 347–420 Porphyry, a vineyard near Seaham, New South Wales Porphyry, a system of astrological house division Porphyry Island   == See also == Porphyria, a disease Porfiry, a Russian given name Porfirio (disambiguation), various uses, including a Spanish surname Tyrian purple or Porphyra, a purple-red natural dye Porphyra, a foliose red algal genus of laver Porphyrins, a group of organic compounds Porphyrion, a giant in Greek mythology Porphyrio, also known as Pomponius Porphyrion, a Latin grammarian, fl. 2nd or 3rd century Porphyrius the Charioteer (Byzantine chariot racer) "Porphyria's Lover", originally published as "Porphyria", a poem by Robert Browning Article titles containing the text "Porphyr" "Porphyria", a song by AFI from Black Sails in the Sunset

Pyotr Sergeyevich Novikov (Russian: Пётр Серге́евич Но́виков; 15 August 1901, Moscow, Russian Empire – 9 January 1975, Moscow, Soviet Union) was a Soviet mathematician. Novikov is known for his work on combinatorial problems in group theory: the word problem for groups, and Burnside's problem. For proving the undecidability of the word problem in groups he was awarded the Lenin Prize in 1957. In 1953 he became a corresponding member of the USSR Academy of Sciences and in 1960 he was elected a full member. He was married to the mathematician Lyudmila Keldysh (1904–1976). The mathematician Sergei Novikov is his son. Sergei Adian and Albert Muchnik were among his students.   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Pyotr Novikov", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Pyotr Novikov at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Raghunatha Shiromani (Bengali: রঘুনাথ শিরোমণি, IAST: Raghunātha Śiromaṇi) (c. 1477–1547) was an Indian philosopher and logician. He was born at Nabadwip in present-day Nadia district of West Bengal state. He was the grandson of Śulapāṇi (c. 14th century CE), a noted writer on Smṛti from his mother's side. He was a pupil of Vāsudeva Sārvabhauma. He brought the new school of Nyaya, Navya Nyāya, representing the final development of Indian formal logic, to its zenith of analytic power. Raghunatha's analysis of relations revealed the true nature of number, inseparable from the abstraction of natural phenomena, and his studies of metaphysics dealt with the negation or nonexistence of a complex reality. His most famous work in logic was the Tattvacintāmaṇidīdhiti, a commentary on the Tattvacintāmaṇi of Gangeśa Upādhyāya, founder of the Navya Nyāya school. A descriptive information of Raghunatha with some controversial issues (his connection with Mahaprabhu Shri Chaitanya) and bibliography are to be found at Raghunatha: A Name of Negatives. The contemporary deployment of a new category, svatva ( endowment, possessed-ness, entitlement, my-ness), introduced by Raghunatha, is discussed in Language: From I-dentity to My-dentity   == Notes ==

Ralph Strode (fl. 1350 – 1400), English schoolman, was probably a native of the West Midlands. He was a fellow of Merton College, Oxford, before 1360, and famous as a teacher of logic and philosophy and a writer on educational subjects. He belonged, like Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure, to that "School of the Middle" which mediated between realists and nominalists. Besides his Logica, he wrote Consequentiae, a treatise on the syllogism, and Obligationes or Scholastica militia, a series of "formal exercises in scholastic dialectics." He had some not unfriendly controversy with his colleague John Wyclif, against whom he defended the possession of wealth by the clergy, and held that in the Church abuses were better than disturbance. He also attacked Wyclif's doctrine of predestination. His positions are gathered from Wyclif's Responsiones ad Rodolphum Strodum (MS. 3926, Vienna Imperial Library). Chaucer dedicates his poem Troilus and Criseyde to the contemporary poet John Gower and to Strode:  Modern English translation: "O moral Gower, I permit this book to you, and to you, philosophical Strode, to correct, away from your benevolence and zealous goodness." It is quite possible that Troilus and Criseyde was dedicated to "philosophical" (in one of the manuscripts: "logical") Strode because the philosopher introduced Chaucer to some of the basic philosophical distinctions between late medieval nominalism and realism. Thus, Chaucer's literary nominalism in his longest complete poem may well be due to his acquaintance with Strode. According to the 15th-century Vetus catalogus of fellows of Merton, Strode himself was a "poeta nobilis." John Leland and John Bale confirm this, but none of Strode's poems have survived. However, Professor Gollancz suggested that the Phantasma Radulphi attributed to Strode in the Vetus Catalogus could be the 14th-century elegiac poem The Pearl, but this has found no support from later scholars and, on the basis of the poem's dialect, seems very unlikely. From 1375 to 1385 this Strode or another of the same name was Common Serjeant of London; he died in 1387.   == Works == Logica, (unedited apart from Consequentie and Obligationes; the manuscript can be found in Bodl. MS canon. misc. 219, fols 13r-52v). Consequentie Strodi cum commento Alexandri Sermonete, Declarationes Gaetani in easdem consequentias, Dubia magistri Pauli Pergulensis, Obligationes eiusdem Strodi, Venice 1493. Wallace Knight Seaton, An Edition and Translation of the "Tractatus de consequentiis" by Ralph Strode, fourteenth century logician and friend of Geoffrey Chaucer, (unpublished Doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 1973).   == Notes == ^ Known also as Ralphus Strodus, Radulphus or Rodolphus. ^ Richard Utz, Literarischer Nominalismus im Spätmittelalter (Frankfurt: Lang, 1990), esp. pp. 53-58; Rodney Delasanta "Chaucer and Strode," Chaucer Review 26.2 (1991), 205-218.   == References == Ashworth, E. J. and P. V. Spade, "Logic in Late Medieval Oxford," in J. I. Catto (ed.), History of the University of Oxford, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993, vol 2, pp. 56-7. Karl Prantl, Geschichte der Logik For an attempt to distinguish between Strode the schoolman and Strode the poet, see JTT Brown, in The Scottish Antiquary (1897), vol. xii.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Ramon Llull, T.O.S.F. (Catalan: [rəˈmon ˈʎuʎ]; c. 1232 – c. 1315; Anglicised Raymond Lully, Raymond Lull; in Latin Raimundus or Raymundus Lullus or Lullius) was a philosopher, logician, Franciscan tertiary and Majorcan writer. He is credited with writing the first major work of Catalan literature. Recently surfaced manuscripts show him to have anticipated by several centuries prominent work on elections theory. He is also considered a pioneer of computation theory, especially given his influence on Gottfried Leibniz. Within the Franciscan Order he is honored as a martyr. He was beatified in 1857 by Pope Pius IX. His feast day was assigned to 30 June and is celebrated by the Third Order of St. Francis.   == Early life and familyEdit ==  Llull was born into a wealthy family in Palma, the capital of the newly formed Kingdom of Majorca. James I of Aragon founded Majorca to integrate the recently conquered territories of the Balearic Islands (now part of Spain) into the Crown of Aragon. Llull's parents had come from Catalonia as part of the colonizing efforts for the formerly Almohad island. As the island had been conquered militarily, all the Muslim population who had not been able to flee the conquering Europeans had been enslaved, even though they still constituted a significant portion of the island's population. In 1257 he had married Blanca Picany, with whom he would have two children, Domènec and Magdalena. Although he formed a family, he lived what he would later call a licentious and wasteful life of a troubadour. Llull served as tutor to James II of Aragon and later became Seneschal (the administrative head of the royal household) to the future King James II of Majorca, a relative of his wife.   == ConversionEdit == In 1263 Llull experienced a religious epiphany in the form of a series of visions. He narrates the event in his autobiography Vita coaetanea ("Daily Life"):  Ramon, while still a young man and Seneschal to the King of Majorca, was very given to composing worthless songs and poems and to doing other licentious things. One night he was sitting beside his bed, about to compose and write in his vulgar tongue a song to a lady whom he loved with a foolish love; and as he began to write this song, he looked to his right and saw our Lord Jesus Christ on the Cross, as if suspended in mid-air.  The vision came to him six times in all, leading him to leave his family, position, and belongings in order to pursue a life in the service of God. Specifically, he realized three intentions: to die in the service of God while converting Muslims to Christianity, to see to the founding of religious institutions that would teach foreign languages, and to write a book capable of overcoming any objection when using it to convert someone.   == Nine years of solitude and early workEdit == Following his epiphany Llull became a Franciscan tertiary (a member of the Third Order of Saint Francis), taking inspiration from Saint Francis of Assisi, and, after a short pilgrimage, returned to Majorca where he purchased a Muslim slave from whom to learn Arabic. For the next nine years, until 1274, he engaged in study and contemplation in relative solitude. He read extensively in both Latin and Arabic, learning both Christian and Muslim theological and philosophical thought. Between 1271 and 1274 he wrote his first works, a compendium of the Muslim thinker Al-Ghazali's logic and the Llibre de contemplació en Déu (Book on the Contemplation of God), a lengthy guide to finding truth through contemplation. In 1274, while staying at a hermitage on Puig de Randa, the form of the great book he was to write was finally given to him through divine revelation: a complex system that he named his Art, which would become the motivation of most of his life's efforts.   == Llull's ArtEdit == His first elucidation of the Art was in Art Abreujada d'Atrobar Veritat (The Abbreviated Art of Finding Truth), in 1290. After spending some time teaching in France and being disappointed by the poor reception of his Art among students, he decided to reform it. It is this version that he became known for, most clearly presented in his Ars generalis ultima or Ars magna ("The Ultimate General Art", published in 1305). The Art operated by combining religious and philosophical attributes selected from a number of lists. It is believed that Llull's inspiration for the Ars magna came from observing Arab astrologers use a device called a zairja. The Art was intended as a debating tool for winning Muslims to the Christian faith through logic and reason. Through his detailed analytical efforts, Llull built an in-depth theosophic reference by which a reader could enter any argument or question (necessarily reduced to Christian beliefs which Llull identified as held in common with other monotheistic religions). The reader would then use visual aids and a book of charts to combine various ideas, generating statements which come together to form an answer. In 1297 Llull met Duns Scotus, after which he was given the nickname Doctor Illuminatus. This is possibly in reference to the manner of his conversion.   === Mechanical aspectEdit === One of the most significant changes from the original to the second version of the Art was in the visuals used. The early version used 16 figures presented as complex, complementary trees while the system of the Ars Magna featured only 4, including one which combined the other three. This figure, a "Lullian Circle," took the form of a paper machine operated by rotating concentrically arranged circles to combine his symbolic alphabet which was repeated on each level. These combinations were said to show all possible truth about the subject of inquiry. Llull based this on the notion that there were a limited number of basic, undeniable truths in all fields of knowledge, and that we could understand everything about these fields of knowledge by studying combinations of these elemental truths. The method was an early attempt to use logical means to produce knowledge. Llull hoped to show that Christian doctrines could be obtained artificially from a fixed set of preliminary ideas. For example, the most essential table listed the attributes of God: goodness, greatness, eternity, power, wisdom, will, virtue, truth and glory. Llull knew that all believers in the monotheistic religions — whether Jews, Muslims or Christians — would agree with these attributes, giving him a firm platform from which to argue. The idea was developed further for more Esoteric purposes by Giordano Bruno in the 16th century, and in the 17th century by the "Great Rationalist" Gottfried Leibniz, who wrote his dissertation about Llull's Art and integrated it into his metaphysics and philosophy of science. Leibniz gave Llull's idea the name "ars combinatoria", by which it is now often known. Some computer scientists have adopted Llull as a sort of founding father, claiming that his system of logic was the beginning of information science.   == Literature and other worksEdit == Llull was extremely prolific, writing a total of more than 250 works in his lifetime, written in Catalan, Latin, and Arabic, and often translated from one to others. While almost all of his writings after the revelation on Mt. Randa connect to his Art in some way, he wrote on diverse subjects in diverse styles and genres. The romantic novel Blanquerna is widely considered the first major work of literature written in Catalan, and possibly the first European novel.   == Missionary work and missionary educationEdit == Llull pressed for the study of Arabic and other then-insufficiently studied languages in Europe for the purpose of converting Muslims to Christianity. He traveled through Europe to meet with popes, kings, and princes, trying to establish special colleges to prepare future missionaries. In 1285, he embarked on his first mission to North Africa but was expelled from Tunis Llull travelled to Tunis a second time in about 1304, and wrote numerous letters to the king of Tunis, but little else is known about this part of his life.   === Later North African missions, Council of Vienne, and deathEdit === In the early 14th century, Llull again visited North Africa. He returned in 1308, reporting that the conversion of Muslims should be achieved through prayer, not through military force. He finally achieved his goal of linguistic education at major universities in 1311 when the Council of Vienne ordered the creation of chairs of Hebrew, Arabic and Chaldean (Aramaic) at the universities of Bologna, Oxford, Paris, and Salamanca as well as at the Papal Court. At the age of 82, in 1314, Llull traveled again to North Africa and an angry crowd of Muslims stoned him in the city of Bougie. Genoese merchants took him back to Mallorca, where he died at home in Palma the next year. Though the traditional date of his death has been 29 June 1315, documents have been found from him which date from December 1315. It can be documented that Llull was buried at the Church of Saint Francis in Mallorca by March 1316. Riber states that the circumstances of his death remain a mystery. Zwemer, a Protestant missionary and academic, accepted the story of martyrdom, as did the article in the Catholic Encyclopedia published in 1911 (see links in the References section). Bonner gives as a reason for Llull's journey to Tunis being the information that its ruler was interested in Christianity—falsely given to the Kings of Sicily and Aragon.   == Reputation and posthumous receptionEdit == The Roman Catholic inquisitor Nicholas Eymerich condemned 100 theories or ideas of Llull as errors in 1376. Pope Gregory XI also formally condemned 20 of his books in 1376 and the condemnation was renewed by Pope Paul IV, although Pope Martin V reversed the condemnation of Pope Gregory XI in 1416. Despite these condemnations, Llull himself remained in good standing with the Church. Chairs for the propagation of the theories of Llull were established at the University of Barcelona and the University of Valencia. He is regarded as one of the most influential authors in Catalan; the language is sometimes referred to as la llengua de Llull, as other languages might be referred to as "Shakespeare's language" (English), la langue de Molière (French), la lengua de Cervantes (Spanish) or die Sprache Goethes (German). The logo of the Spanish Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas ("Higher Council of Scientific Research") is Llull's Tree of Science. Ramon Llull University, a private university established in Barcelona in 1990, is named after the philosopher.   === Mathematics, statistics, and classificationEdit === With the discovery in 2001 of his lost manuscripts, Ars notandi, Ars eleccionis, and Alia ars eleccionis, Llull is given credit for discovering the Borda count and Condorcet criterion, which Jean-Charles de Borda and Nicolas de Condorcet independently discovered centuries later. The terms Llull winner and Llull loser are ideas in contemporary voting systems studies that are named in honor of Llull. Also, Llull is recognized as pioneer of computation theory, especially due to his great influence on Gottfried Leibniz. Llull's systems of organizing concepts using devices such as trees, ladders, and wheels, have been analyzed as classification systems.   === Art and architectureEdit === The inspiration of Llull's mnemonic graphic cartwheels, reaching into contemporary art and culture, is demonstrated by Daniel Libeskind's architectural construction of the 2003 completed Studio Weil in Port d'Andratx, Majorca. „Studio Weil, a development of the virtuality of these mnemonic wheels which ever center and de-center the universal and the personal, is built to open these circular islands which float like all artwork in the oceans of memory."   === Modern fictionEdit === Paul Auster refers to Llull (as Raymond Lull) in his memoir The Invention of Solitude in the second part, The Book of Memory. Llull, now going under the name 'Cole Hawlings' and revealed to be immortal, is a major character in The Box of Delights, the celebrated children's novel by poet John Masefield. He is also a major influence on the fictional character Zermano in Thomas Salazar's The Day of the Bees, and his name, philosophies, and quotes from his writings appear throughout the novel. In Roberto Bolaño's novel 2666, Amalfitano, a Chilean professor, thinks about "Ramon Llull and his fantastic machine. Fantastic in its uselessness." Adán, Leopoldo Marechal's protagonist of the novel Adán Buenosayres (1948), mentions Ramon Lulio when he walks by the "curtiembre" (leather-tanning shop): He says: "Ramon Lulio, que aconsejaba no rehuir del olor de las letrinas a fin de recordar a menudo lo que da el cuerpo de si mismo en su tan frecuentemente olvidada miseria" (Edición Crítica, Colección Archivos, 1997. Page 312) ("Ramon Llull advised not to shy away from the smell of outhouses, in order not to forget that which the body gives out in its often forgotten misery.") In William Gaddis' first novel, The Recognitions, the final paragraph of Chapter II alludes to "Raymond Lully", as a "scholar, a poet, a missionary, a mystic, and one of the foremost figures in the history of alchemy." Llull is also mentioned in passing in Neil Gaiman's comic-book Calliope, an issue of the DC/Vertigo series The Sandman. In The Commodore, the 17th book in Patrick O'Brian's Aubrey-Maturin series, Stephen Maturin remarks that his daughter "...will learn Spanish, too, Castellano. I am sorry it will not be Catalan, a much finer, older, purer, more mellifluous language, with far greater writers — think of En Ramon Llull — but as Captain Aubrey often says, 'You cannot both have a stitch in time and eat it.'" Harry Harrison, in Deathworld 2, has his protagonist, Jason Din Alt, use the Book of the Order of Chivalry, along with others, to disable the engines of the spaceship on which he is being held. As the ship starts to blow up, he remarks "I should not have thrown in the Lull book, it is more than even the ship could stomach." This comes at the end of an argument with his kidnapper, in which Din Alt attacks the idea that there are universal laws which apply to all humans for all time. W. B. Yeats refers to Llull twice in Rosa Alchemica, first published in 1897 ("I turned to my last purchase, a set of alchemical apparatus which, the dealer in the Rue le Peletier had assured me, once belonged to Raymond Lully"; and "There were the works [...] of Lully, who transformed himself into the likeness of a red cock"). It is also interesting to note that his "first eight poems in The Green Helmet and Other Poems were published under the general title 'Raymond Lully and his wife Pernella'; an erratum-slip corrected this: 'AN ERROR By a slip of the pen when I was writing out the heading for the first group of poems, I put Raymond Lully's name in the room of the later Alchemist, Nicolas Flamel'". Gordon R. Dickson has the protagonist, Hal Mayne, in the book The Final Encyclopedia, (1984) refer to Lull and his combination-of-wheels device, which Hal states is ″nothing less than a sort of primitive computer.″   === Disposition toward JudaismEdit === His mission to convert the Jews of Europe was zealous, his goal to utterly relieve Christendom of any Jews or Jewish religious influence. Some scholars regard Llull's as the first comprehensive articulation, in the Christian West, of an expulsionist policy regarding Jews who refused conversion. To acquire converts, he worked for amicable public debate to foster an intellectual appreciation of a rational Christianity among the Jews of his time. His rabbinic opponents included Rabbi Shlomo ben Aderet of Barcelona and Moshe ben Shlomo of Salerno.   == WorksEdit ==   === MisattributionsEdit === A considerable body of work on esoteric subjects was misattributed to Llull in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. The oeuvre of the pseudo-Llull and then, by extension, his true works, were influential among Hermeticists, Gnostics, and other Esoterics. Llull himself explicitly condemned many of the subjects, such as alchemy, that he is purported to have written about.   === Notable worksEdit ===  Llull is known to have written at least 265 works, including: The Book of the Lover and the Beloved Blanquerna (a novel; 1283) Desconhort (on the superiority of reason) L'arbre de ciència, Arbor scientiae ("Tree of Science") (1295) Tractatus novus de astronomia Ars Magna (The Great Art) (1305) or Ars Generalis Ultima (The Ultimate General Art) Ars Brevis (The Short Art; an abbreviated version of the Ars Magna) Llibre de meravelles Practica compendiosa Liber de Lumine (The Book of Light) Ars Infusa (The Inspired Art) Book of Propositions Liber Chaos (The Book of Chaos) Book of the Seven Planets Liber Proverbiorum (Book of Proverbs) Book on the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit Ars electionis (on voting) Artifitium electionis personarum (on voting) Ars notatoria Introductoria Artis demonstrativae Book of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men Llibre qui es de l'ordre de cavalleria (The Book of the Order of Chivalry written between 1279 and 1283) Translations Le Livre des mille proverbes (2008), ISBN 9782953191707, Éditions de la Merci, editions@orange.fr Ramon Llull's New Rhetoric, text and translation of Llull's 'Rethorica Nova', edited and translated by Mark D. Johnston, Davis, California: Hermagoras Press, 1994 Selected Works of Ramon Llull (1232‑1316), edited and translated by Anthony Bonner, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press 1985, two volumes XXXI + 1330 pp. (contains: vol. 1: The Book of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men, pp. 93–305; Ars Demonstrativa, pp. 317–567; Ars Brevis, pp. 579–646; vol. 2: Felix: or the Book of Wonders, pp. 659–1107; Principles of Medicine pp. 1119–1215; Flowers of Love and Flowers of Intelligence, pp. 1223–1256)   == See alsoEdit == Apologetics Catalan literature Volvelle   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == William Theodore Aquila Barber, Raymond Lull, the illuminated doctor : a study in mediaeval missions, London: C.H. Kelly, 1903. Anthony Bonner (ed.), Doctor Illuminatus. A Ramon Llull Reader (Princeton University 1985), includes The Book of the Gentile and the Three Wise Men, The Book of the Lover and the Beloved, The Book of the Beasts, and Ars brevis; as well as Bonner's "Historical Background and Life" at 1-44, "Llull's Thought" at 45-56, "Llull's Influence: The History of Lullism" at 57-71. Anthony Bonner, The Art and Logic of Ramon Llull: A User's Guide, Leiden: Brill, 2007. Alexander Fidora and Josep E. Rubio, Raimundus Lullus, An Introduction to His Life, Works and Thought, Turnhout: Brepols, 2008. Martin Gardner has written extensively about Llull. His analyses can be found in Logic Machines and Diagrams and Science - Good, Bad and Bogus. J. N. Hillgarth, Ramon Lull and Lullism in Fourteenth-Century France (Oxford University 1971). Mark D. Johnston, The Spiritual Logic of Ramón Llull, Oxford: Clarenden Press, 1987. Antonio Monserat Quintana, La Visión Lulliana del Mundo Derecho (Palma de Mallorca: Institut d'Estudis Baleàrics 1987). Pereira Michela, The Alchemical Corpus attributed to Raymond Lull, London: The Warburg Institute, 1989. Lorenzo Riber, Raimundo Lulio (Barcelona: Editorial Labor 1935, 1949). William Thomas Walsh, Characters of the Inquisition, Tan Books and Publishers, Inc (1940). ISBN 0-89555-326-0 Frances Yates includes a brief chapter on Lull in "The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age" (London, Ark Paperbacks 1979). Frances Yates, "Lull and Bruno" (1982), in Collected Essays: Lull & Bruno, vol. I, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. Samuel Marinus Zwemer, Raymund Lull, first missionary to the Moslems, New York and London : Funk & Wagnalls Co., 1902; reprinted by Diggory Press, 2006, ISBN 978-1-84685-301-2   == External linksEdit == Works by Ramon Llull at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Ramon Llull at Internet Archive Who was Ramon Llull? Centre de Documentació Ramon Llull, Universitat de Barcelona Raymund Lull: First Missionary to the Muslims by Samuel M. Zwemer Ramon Llull at the AELC (Association of Writers in Catalan Language). Webpage in Catalan, English and Spanish. Ramon Llull in LletrA, Catalan Literature Online (Open University of Catalonia) (English) (Spanish) (Catalan) Site with fulltexts of Raymond Lull's books. Also music based on Lullian arts. Ramon Llull Database, University of Barcelona Catholic Encyclopedia article of 1911 Blessed Raymond Lull The Ultimate General Art Esteve Jaulent:The Theory of Knowledge and the Unity of Man according to Ramon Llull Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution portrait of Ramon Llull in .jpg and .tiff format. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Ramon Llull", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Selected images from Practica compendiosa From The College of Physicians of Philadelphia Digital Library

Raphael Mitchel Robinson (November 2, 1911 – January 27, 1995) was an American mathematician. Born in National City, California, Robinson was the youngest of four children of a lawyer and a teacher. He was awarded from the University of California, Berkeley in mathematics: the BA (1932), MA (1933), and Ph.D. (1935). His Ph.D. thesis, on complex analysis, was titled Some results in the theory of Schlicht functions. In 1941, Robinson married his former student Julia Bowman. She became his Berkeley colleague and the first woman president of the American Mathematical Society. Robinson worked on mathematical logic, set theory, geometry, number theory, and combinatorics. In 1937 he set out a simpler and more conventional version of the John von Neumann 1923 axiomatic set theory. Soon after Alfred Tarski joined Berkeley's mathematics department in 1942, Robinson began to do major work on the foundations of mathematics, building on Tarski's concept of "essential undecidability," by proving a number of mathematical theories undecidable. In 1950 Robinson proved that an essentially undecidable theory need not have an infinite number of axioms by coming up with a counterexample: Robinson arithmetic Q. Q is finitely axiomatizable because it lacks Peano arithmetic's axiom schema of induction; nevertheless Q, like Peano arithmetic, is incomplete and undecidable in the sense of Gödel. Robinson's work on undecidability culminated in his coauthoring Tarski et al. (1953), which established, among other things, the undecidability of group theory, lattice theory, abstract projective geometry, and closure algebras. Robinson worked in number theory, even employing very early computers to obtain results. For example, he coded the Lucas-Lehmer primality test to determine whether 2n − 1 was prime for all prime n < 2304 on a SWAC. In 1952, he showed that these Mersenne numbers were all composite except for 17 values of n = 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31, 61, 89, 107, 127, 521, 607, 1279, 2203, 2281. He discovered the last five of these Mersenne primes, the largest ones known at the time. Robinson wrote several papers on tilings of the plane, in particular a clear and remarkable 1971 paper "Undecidability and nonperiodicity for tilings of the plane" simplifying what had been a tangled theory. Robinson became a full professor at Berkeley in 1949, retired in 1973, and remained active in his educational interests for the duration of his life having published late in his life: (age 80 years) "Minsky's small universal Turing machine," describing a universal Turing machine with four symbols and seven states; (age 83 years) "Two figures in the hyperbolic plane."   == See also == Robinson arithmetic   == References == Robinson, R. M. (1937), "The theory of classes: A modification of Von Neumann's system", Journal of Symbolic Logic 2 (1): 29–36, doi:10.2307/2268798, JSTOR 2268798 . ——— (1950), "An Essentially Undecidable Axiom System", Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematics: 729–730 . Alfred Tarski, A. Mostowski, and R. M. Robinson, 1953. Undecidable theories. North Holland. Leon Henkin, 1995, "In memoriam : Raphael Mitchell Robinson," Bull. Symbolic Logic 1: 340–43. "In memoriam : Raphael Mitchell Robinson (1911–1995)," Modern Logic 5: 329.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Raphael M. Robinson", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .. The source for much of this entry. Raphael M. Robinson at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Raymond Merrill Smullyan (/ˈsmʌli.ən/; born May 25, 1919) is an American mathematician, concert pianist, logician, Taoist philosopher, and magician. Born in Far Rockaway, New York, his first career was stage magic. He then earned a BSc from the University of Chicago in 1955 and his Ph.D. from Princeton University in 1959. He is one of many logicians to have studied under Alonzo Church.   == Life == Born in Far Rockaway, New York, he showed musical talent, winning a gold medal in a piano competition when he was aged 12. The following year, his family moved to Manhattan and he attended Theodore Roosevelt High School in The Bronx as this school offered courses suited to his musical talents, but he left to study on his own as the school did not offer similar courses in mathematics. He attended several colleges, studying mathematics and music. While a Ph.D. student, Smullyan published a paper in the 1957 Journal of Symbolic Logic showing that Gödelian incompleteness held for formal systems considerably more elementary than that of Gödel's 1931 landmark paper. The contemporary understanding of Gödel's theorem dates from this paper. Smullyan later made a compelling case that much of the fascination with Gödel's theorem should be directed at Tarski's theorem, which is much easier to prove and equally disturbing philosophically. Smullyan is the author of many books on recreational mathematics and recreational logic. Most notably, one is titled What Is the Name of This Book? ISBN 0139550623. He was a professor of philosophy at Lehman College and the Graduate Center, City University of New York, and at Indiana University. He is also an amateur astronomer, using a six inch reflecting telescope for which he ground the mirror.   == Logic problems == Many of his logic problems are extensions of classic puzzles. Knights and Knaves involves knights (who always tell the truth) and knaves (who always lie). This is based on a story of two doors and two guards, one who lies and one who tells the truth. One door leads to heaven and one to hell, and the puzzle is to find out which door leads to heaven by asking one of the guards a question. One way to do this is to ask "Which door would the other guard say leads to hell?". This idea was famously used in the 1986 film Labyrinth. In more complex puzzles, he introduces characters who may lie or tell the truth (referred to as "normals"), and furthermore instead of answering "yes" or "no", use words which mean "yes" or "no", but the reader does not know which word means which. The puzzle known as "the hardest logic puzzle ever" is based on these characters and themes. In his Transylvania puzzles, half of the inhabitants are insane, and believe only false things, whereas the other half are sane and believe only true things. In addition, humans always tell the truth, and vampires always lie. For example, an insane vampire will believe a false thing (2 + 2 is not 4) but will then lie about it, and say that it is true. A sane vampire knows 2 + 2 is 4, but will lie and say it is not. And mutatis mutandis for humans. Thus everything said by a sane human or an insane vampire is true, while everything said by an insane human or a sane vampire is false. His book Forever Undecided popularizes Gödel's incompleteness theorems by phrasing them in terms of reasoners and their beliefs, rather than formal systems and what can be proved in them. For example, if a native of a knight/knave island says to a sufficiently self-aware reasoner, "You will never believe that I am a knight", the reasoner cannot believe either that the native is a knight or that he is a knave without becoming inconsistent (i.e., holding two contradictory beliefs). The equivalent theorem is that for any formal system S, there exists a mathematical statement that can be interpreted as "This statement is not provable in formal system S". If the system S is consistent, neither the statement nor its opposite will be provable in it. See also Doxastic logic. Inspector Craig is a frequent character in Smullyan's "puzzle-novellas." He is generally called into a scene of a crime that has a solution that is mathematical in nature. Then, through a series of increasingly harder challenges, he (and the reader) begin to understand the principles in question. Finally the novella culminates in Inspector Craig (and the reader) solving the crime, utilizing the mathematical and logical principles learned. Inspector Craig generally does not learn the formal theory in question, and Smullyan usually reserves a few chapters after the Inspector Craig adventure to illuminate the analogy for the reader. Inspector Craig gets his name from William Craig. His book To Mock a Mockingbird (1985) is a recreational introduction to the subject of combinatory logic. Apart from writing about and teaching logic, Smullyan has recently released a recording of his favorite classical piano pieces by composers such as Bach, Scarlatti, and Schubert. Some recordings are available on the Piano Society website, along with the video "Rambles, Reflections, Music and Readings". He has also written an autobiography titled Some Interesting Memories: A Paradoxical Life (ISBN 1-888710-10-1). In 2001, documentary filmmaker Tao Ruspoli made a film about Smullyan called This Film Needs No Title: A Portrait of Raymond Smullyan.   == Philosophy == Smullyan has written several books about Taoist philosophy, which he believes neatly solves most or all traditional philosophical problems as well as integrating mathematics, logic, and philosophy into a cohesive whole.   == Selected publications ==   === Logic puzzles === (1978) What Is the Name of This Book? The Riddle of Dracula and Other Logical Puzzles ISBN 0139550623 - knights, knaves, and other logic puzzles (1979) The Chess Mysteries of Sherlock Holmes ISBN 0394737571 - introducing retrograde analysis in the game of chess. (1981) The Chess Mysteries of the Arabian Knights ISBN 0192861247 - second book on retrograde analysis chess problems. (1982) The Lady or the Tiger? ISBN 0812921178 - ladies, tigers, and more logic puzzles (1982) Alice in Puzzle-Land ISBN 0688007481 (1985) To Mock a Mockingbird ISBN 0192801422 - puzzles based on combinatory logic (1987) Forever Undecided ISBN 0192801414 - puzzles based on undecidability in formal systems (1992) Satan, Cantor and Infinity ISBN 0679406883 (1997) The Riddle of Scheherazade ISBN 0156006065 (2007) The Magic Garden of George B. And Other Logic Puzzles ISBN 9788876990663, Polimetrica (Monza/Italy) (2009) Logical Labyrinths ISBN 9781568814438, A K Peters (2010) King Arthur in Search of his Dog ISBN 0486474356 (2013) The Godelian Puzzle Book: Puzzles, Paradoxes and Proofs ISBN 0486497054 (2015) The Magic Garden of George B and Other Logic Puzzles ISBN 978-981-4675-05-5   === Philosophy/memoir === (1977) The Tao is Silent ISBN 0060674695 (1980) This Book Needs No Title ISBN 0671628313 (1983) 5000 B.C. and other philosophical fantasies ISBN 0312295162 (2002) Some Interesting Memories: A Paradoxical Life ISBN 1888710101 (2003) Who Knows?: A Study of Religious Consciousness ISBN 0253215749 (2009) Rambles Through My Library ISBN 9780963923165, Praxis International (2015) Reflections: The Magic, Music and Mathematics of Raymond Smullyan ISBN 978-981-4644-58-7   === Academic === (1961) Theory of Formal Systems ISBN 069108047X (1968) First-Order Logic ISBN 0486683702 (1992) Gödel's Incompleteness Theorems ISBN 0195046722 (1993) Recursion Theory for Metamathematics ISBN 019508232X (1994) Diagonalization and Self-Reference ISBN 0198534507 (1996) Set Theory and the Continuum Problem ISBN 0198523955 (2014) A Beginner's Guide to Mathematical Logic ISBN 0486492370   == Bibliography == Is God a Taoist? by Raymond Smullyan, 1977. Planet Without Laughter by Raymond Smullyan, 1980. An Epistemological Nightmare by Raymond Smullyan, 1982.   == See also == To Mock a Mockingbird Logic Paradox The Lady, or the Tiger Alice's Adventures in Wonderland   == References ==   == External links == Raymond Smullyan's website at Indiana University. Raymond Smullyan at the MacTutor History of Mathematics archive. Raymond Smullyan at the Mathematics Genealogy Project. Raymond Smullyan at Piano Society

This is a redirect from a title that is a complete or more complete name of a person, organization, legislative act, etc. It leads to the title in accordance with the naming conventions for common names and can help writing and searches. However, do not replace these redirected links with a piped link unless the page is updated for another reason. For more information follow the bold category link.

Richard Brinkley (died c.1379) was an English Franciscan scholastic philosopher and theologian. He was at the University of Oxford in the mid-fourteenth century; he produced a Summa Logicae in a nominalist vein in the 1360s or early 1370s, and other works.   == References == Michael J. Fitzgerald, Richard Brinkley's Theory of Sentential Reference: "De Significato Propositionis" from Part V of His "Summa Nova de Logica", Leiden: Brill, 1987. Paul Vincent Spade and Gordon Anthony Wilson (editors) (1995), Richard Brinkley's Obligationes: A Late Fourteenth Century Treatise on the Logic of Disputation, Münster: Aschendorff, 1995.   == Notes ==   == External links == Richardus Brinkley (Richard Brinkel, fourteenth century, d. ca. 1379) [Last modified: 14 February 2010]

Richard Ferrybridge was an English Scholastic logician of the fourteenth century. His works include a Tractatus de veritate sive logica, and the Consequentiae. He is alluded to in The Anatomy of Melancholy.   == References == Ashworth, E. J. "Feribrigge, Richard". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/53184.  (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)   == Notes ==

Richard C. Jeffrey (August 5, 1926 – November 9, 2002) was an American philosopher, logician, and probability theorist. He was a native of Boston, Massachusetts. Jeffrey served in the U.S. Navy during World War II. As a graduate student he studied under Rudolf Carnap, and Carl Hempel. He received his M.A. from the University of Chicago in 1952 and his Ph.D. from Princeton in 1957. After holding academic positions at MIT, City College of New York, Stanford University, and the University of Pennsylvania, he joined the faculty of Princeton University in 1974 and became a professor emeritus there in 1999. He was also a visiting professor at the University of California, Irvine. As a philosopher, Jeffrey specialized in epistemology and decision theory. He is perhaps best known for defending and developing the Bayesian approach to probability—specifically, for inventing "Jeffrey conditioning" (which he referred to as "probability kinematics"), a way of modeling the change in the probability of a proposition in light of new evidence. Jeffrey also wrote or co-wrote two widely used and influential logic textbooks: Formal Logic: Its Scope and Limits, a basic introduction to logic, and Computability and Logic, a more advanced text dealing with, among other things, the famous negative results of twentieth century logic such as Gödel's incompleteness theorems and Tarski's indefinability theorem. Jeffrey, who died of lung cancer at the age of 76, was known for his sense of humor, which often came through in his breezy writing style. In the preface of his posthumously published Subjective Probability, he refers to himself as "a fond foolish old fart dying of a surfeit of Pall Malls" (p. xii).   == Selected bibliography == Formal Logic: Its Scope and Limits. 3rd ed. McGraw Hill, 1990. ISBN 0-07-032357-7 Formal Logic: Its Scope and Limits. 4th ed., John P. Burgess (editor), Hackett Publishing, 2006, ISBN 0-87220-813-3; ISBN 978-0-87220-813-1 The Logic of Decision. 2nd ed. University of Chicago Press, 1990. ISBN 0-226-39582-0 Probability and the Art of Judgment. Cambridge University Press, 1992. ISBN 0-521-39770-7 Computability and Logic (with George Boolos and John P. Burgess). 4th ed. Cambridge University Press, 2002. ISBN 0-521-00758-5 Subjective Probability: The Real Thing. Cambridge University Press, 2004. ISBN 0-521-53668-5   == References ==   == External links == His website at Princeton; includes several manuscripts, including Subjective Probability Bibliography Curriculum Vitae Page devoted to the memory of Richard Jeffrey Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Bayes' Theorem (discusses Jeffrey conditioning) Tribute, by Brian Skyrms,vishal yadav[1] Richard C. Jeffrey Papers [1](Richard C. Jeffrey Papers, 1934-2002, ASP.2003.02, Archives of Scientific Philosophy, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh) ^ vishal yadav

Richard Kilvington (c. 1302-1361) was an English scholastic philosopher at the University of Oxford. His surviving works are lecture notes from the 1320s and 1330s. He was a Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. He was involved in a controversy over the nature of the infinite, with Richard FitzRalph, of Balliol College. In the 1340s he worked for Richard of Bury, bishop of Durham.   == References == Barbara Ensign Kretzmann, Norman Kretzmann (eds), The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, critical edition of the Latin text, New York: Oxford University Press, 1990. Barbara Ensign Kretzmann, Norman Kretzmann (eds), The Sophismata of Richard Kilvington, introduction, translation, and commentary, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.   == Notes == ^ Jan A. Aertsen, Andreas Speer (editors), Raum und Raumvorstellungen im Mittelalter (1998), p. 179. ^ John David North, Stars, Minds, and Fate: Essays in Ancient and Medieval Cosmology (1989), p. 242. ^ Jorge J. E. Gracia, Timothy B. Noone, A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages (2003), p. 571.   == External links == Richard Kilvington entry by Elzbieta Jung in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Richard Milton Martin (1916, Cleveland, Ohio – 22 November 1985, Milton, Massachusetts) was an American logician and analytic philosopher. In his Ph.D. thesis written under Frederic Fitch, Martin discovered virtual sets a bit before Quine, and was possibly the first non-Pole other than Joseph Henry Woodger to employ a mereological system. Building on these and other devices, Martin forged a first-order theory capable of expressing its own syntax as well as some semantics and pragmatics (via an event logic), all while abstaining from set and model theory (consistent with his nominalist principles), and from intensional notions such as modality.   == Career == Martin was educated as follows: B.A. Harvard, philosophy, 1941; M.A. Columbia, 1941; Ph.D. Yale, philosophy, 1952. Martin studied under Alfred North Whitehead, then in his last year at Harvard, and may have studied under Ernest Nagel at Columbia. During WWII, Martin taught mathematics at Princeton University, then at the University of Chicago. After the war, he taught philosophy at Bryn Mawr College 1946–48, the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) 1948–59, the University of Texas 1959–63, New York University 1963–73, Northwestern 1973–76 (full-time) and 1976–85 (one course per year). Martin also held visiting appointments at Bonn, Yale, Hamburg, the New School, and Temple. In 1976, Martin largely retired from teaching, becoming a research associate with Boston University’s Center for the History and Philosophy of Science. He made excellent use of the resulting leisure, so that his final decade of life was by far his most productive, publishing over 100 book chapters and journal articles. In 1979, he published the definitive treatment of his logic / first-order theory, Part A of Semiotics, and edited a volume of Carolyn Eisele’s writings on Charles Sanders Peirce. He helped edit the Festschrift books for Fitch and J. N. Findlay, respectively, published in 1975 and 1985. At the time of his death, Martin served on the editorial board of eight journals and on the advisory board of the Peirce Edition Project. In 1981, he became president of the Charles S. Peirce Society. In 1984, he was elected president of the Metaphysical Society of America. Despite having held tenure track appointments from 1948 until his death, the only Ph.D. thesis known to have been completed under Martin’s supervision is that of James Scoggin. Otherwise, Martin’s legacy is coextensive with his published writings.   == Ideas == "…one of the most many-sided, prolific, and scholarly of analytic philosophers." —Hans Burkhardt, Foreword to Metaphysical. Martin was part of the first wave of American analytic philosophers; arguably, only Quine (1908–2000), Fitch (1909–1987), and Henry Leonard (1905–67) preceded him. His chronological elders Nelson Goodman (1906–1998) and Wilfrid Sellars (1912–89) were arguably his contemporaries, as they all began their careers in earnest at about the same time, namely right after WWII. Martin's formal treatment of syntax followed Alfred Tarski; of semantics, Rudolf Carnap. Martin was generally well-disposed towards Carnap's work, contributed a long paper to the Schilpp volume on Carnap, and was seen as a disciple. Paradoxically, Martin was a positivist and radical nominalist who also sympathized with process theology and orthodox Christianity. Between 1943 and 1992, Martin published 16 books and about 240 papers (of which 179 were included in his books) on an extraordinary range of subjects, including aesthetics, logic, the foundation of mathematics, metaphysics, syntax/semantics/pragmatics, the philosophy of science, phenomenology, process philosophy, theology, Frege, and Charles Sanders Peirce. Martin preached and practiced that philosophy should be done formally, by employing first-order logic, the theory of virtual sets and relations, and a multiplicity of predicates, all culminating in an event logic. Starting with the papers reprinted in his 1969 Belief, Martin argued that the Frege's Art des Gegebensein was crucial to his thinking. Just what this Art entailed remains to be elucidated. Martin was especially fond of applying his first-order theory to the analysis of ordinary language, a method he termed logico-linguistics. He often referenced the work of the linguists Zellig Harris (admiringly) and Henry Hiz (more critically); Martin, Harris, and Hiz all taught at Penn in the 1950s. Yet Martin was dismissive of the related theoretical work by Noam Chomsky and his MIT colleagues and students. Ironically, Martin appears to have been Chomsky's main teacher of logic; while a student at Penn, Chomsky took every course Martin taught. Quine's Word and Object cites Martin with approval, but Martin's wider impact has not been commensurate with the breadth and depth of his writings; the secondary literature on Martin consists of little more than reviews of his books. This silence, as puzzling as it is broad-based, begs elucidation.   == Quotations == “Over the portals of the entrance to contemporary philosophy is writ: Enter here fully equipped with the tools of the new logic.” Intension, p. 153. “God made first-order logic and all the rest is the handiwork of man.” Semiotics, p. xv.   == Bibliography == The first four titles below and Part A of Semiotics are monographs. The other titles are fairly loose collections of papers, most first published in journals. 1958. Truth and Denotation: A Study in Semantical Theory. University of Chicago Press. 1974 (1959). Toward a Systematic Pragmatics (Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics). Greenwood Press. 1959. The Notion of Analytic Truth. University of Pennsylvania Press. 1963. Intension and Decision. Prentice-Hall. 1969. Belief, Existence, and Meaning. New York University (NYU) Press. 1971. Logic, Language, and Metaphysics. NYU Press. 1974. Whitehead's Categorial Scheme and Other Papers. Martinus Neijhoff. 1978. Events, Reference, and Logical Form. Catholic University of America Press. 1978. Semiotics and Linguistic Structure. State University of New York (SUNY) Press. 1979. Pragmatics, Truth, and Language. Reidel. 1979. Peirce's Logic of Relations and Other Studies. Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. John Benjamins. 1980. Primordiality, Science, and Value. SUNY Press. 1981. Logico-Linguistic Papers. Foris (Netherlands). 1983. Mind, Modality, Meaning, and Method. SUNY Press. 1988. Metaphysical Foundations: Mereology and Metalogic. Philosophia Verlag. 1992. Logical Semiotics and Mereology. John Benjamins.   == See also == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == References == ^ Meguire, Philip (September 2004 – February 2005). "Richard Milton Martin: American Logician". The Review of Modern Logic 10 (31): 7–65. Retrieved 24 April 2014.  Meguire, Philip, 2005, "Richard Milton Martin: American Logician," Review of Modern Logic 10: 7–65. Contains a: Bibliography of Martin's articles published in journals, conference proceedings, and in books edited by others; Combined topic index for the papers appearing in Martin's books.

Richard Merritt Montague (September 20, 1930 – March 7, 1971) was an American mathematician and philosopher.   == CareerEdit == At the University of California, Berkeley, Montague earned a B.A. in Philosophy in 1950, an M.A. in Mathematics in 1953, and a Ph.D. in Philosophy 1957, the latter under the direction of the mathematician and logician Alfred Tarski. Montague, one of Tarski's most accomplished American students, spent his entire career teaching in the UCLA Department of Philosophy, where he supervised the dissertations of Nino Cocchiarella and Hans Kamp. Montague wrote on the foundations of logic and set theory, as would befit a student of Tarski. His Ph.D. dissertation, titled Contributions to the Axiomatic Foundations of Set Theory, contained the first proof that all possible axiomatizations of the standard axiomatic set theory ZFC must contain infinitely many axioms. In other words, ZFC cannot be finitely axiomatized. He pioneered a logical approach to natural language semantics which became known as Montague grammar. This approach to language has been especially influential among certain computational linguists—perhaps more so than among more traditional philosophers of language. In particular, Montague's influence lives on in grammar approaches like categorial grammar (such as Unification Categorial Grammar, Left-Associate Grammar, or Combinatory Categorial Grammar), which attempt a derivation of syntactic and semantic representation in tandem and the semantics of quantifiers, scope and discourse (Hans Kamp, a student of Montague, co-developed Discourse Representation Theory). Montague was an accomplished organist and a successful real estate investor. He died violently in his own home; the crime is unsolved to this day. Anita Feferman and Solomon Feferman argue that he usually went to bars "cruising" and bringing people home with him. On the day that he was murdered, he brought home several people "for some kind of soirée", but they instead robbed his house and strangled him.   == See alsoEdit == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == Feferman, Anita, and Solomon Feferman, 2004. Alfred Tarski: A Life. Cambridge Univ. Press. Donald Kalish, and Montague, Richard, 1964. Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning. Harcourt, Brace, and Jovanovich. Donald Kalish, and Montague, Richard, and Mar, Gary, 1980. Logic: Techniques of Formal Reasoning (second edition). Oxford University Press. Montague, Richard, 1974. Formal philosophy : selected papers of Richard Montague / ed. and with an introd. by Richmond H. Thomason. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press. (1979 printing: ISBN 0-300-01527-5) Partee, Barbara H., 2006, "Richard Montague (1930 - 1971)" in Brown, Keith, ed., Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, Vol. 8, 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier: 255-57. Includes a bibliography of the secondary literature on Montague and his eponymous grammar.   == External linksEdit == Richard Montague at the Mathematics Genealogy Project That’s Just Semantics! (or, the Proper Treatment of Richard Montague in Literary Fiction)



Richard Swineshead (a.k.a. Suisset, Suiseth, etc.) (fl. c. 1340 – 1354) was an English mathematician, logician, and natural philosopher. He was perhaps the greatest of the Oxford Calculators of Merton College, where he was a fellow certainly by 1344 and possibly by 1340. His magnum opus was a series of treatises known as the Liber calculationum ("Book of Calculations"), written c. 1350, which earned him the nickname of The Calculator. Robert Burton (d. 1640) wrote in The Anatomy of Melancholy that "Scaliger and Cardan admire Suisset the calculator, qui pene modum excessit humani ingenii [whose talents were almost superhuman]". Gottfried Leibniz wrote in a letter of 1714: "Il y a eu autrefois un Suisse, qui avoit mathématisé dans la Scholastique: ses Ouvrages sont peu connus; mais ce que j'en ai vu m'a paru profond et considérable." ("There was once a Suisse, who did mathematics belonging to scholasticism; his works are little known, but what I have seen of them seemed to me profound and relevant.") Leibniz even had a copy of one of Swineshead's treatises made from an edition in the Bibliothèque du Roi in Paris. Girolamo Cardano included Swineshead (as John Suisset surnamed the Calculator) on his famous list of 12 Greatest Minds. [1]   == Notes ==   == References == Boyer, Carl Benjamin (1959). A History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual Development. Dover. ISBN 0-486-60509-4.  Molland, George (2004) "Swineshead, Richard", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography

Richard Sylvan (13 December 1935 – 16 June 1996) was a philosopher, logician, and environmentalist.   == Biography == Sylvan was born Francis Richard Routley in Levin, New Zealand, and his early work is cited with this surname. He studied at Victoria University College of the University of New Zealand (now Victoria University of Wellington), and then Princeton University, before taking positions successively at several Australian institutions, including the University of Sydney. From 1971 until his death in Bali, Indonesia, he was a fellow at the Research School of Social Sciences at the Australian National University in Canberra. Sylvan was married to the philosopher/environmentalist Val Routley (later, Val Plumwood), with whom he worked closely for twenty years before their separation in 1982. After his divorce from Plumwood, he married Louise Sylvan (née Merlin) in 1983 and adopted the last name Sylvan (an English word meaning "of the forest") to reflect his love of the forest and commitment to environmentalism.   == Work in logic and metaphysics == Sylvan was instrumental in the development and study of relevance logic. In 1972, Sylvan (in a paper co-authored with Plumwood) proposed a semantics for certain relevant logics that had been developed by American philosophers Nuel Belnap and Alan Ross Anderson. Together with Robert K. Meyer, Routley turned this into a semantics for a large number of logical systems. Their work in logic work helped make ANU a center for the study of non-classical logic in general. Routley's work had particular influence for Graham Priest, a well-known proponent of non-classical logic; Sylvan and Priest edited a well-regarded volume on the topic. Priest in turn influenced Sylvan; they met in 1976 at the Australasian Association of Logic conference in Canberra at a time when Sylvan was doing novel work on dialetheism — the view that some contradictions are true. Not long after meeting Priest, then investigating a logic capable of handling such true contradictions, Sylvan also endorsed the view. Sylvan's studies ranged over a variety of topics in logic and the philosophy of logic. He wrote important papers on free logic, general modal logic, and natural deduction systems. However, much of his most important work in logic was dedicated to relevant logic, for which he authored numerous papers (both technical and expository). From early in his career (and for many years after), Sylvan defended a sophisticated Meinong-inspired ontology (which he called "noneism"), first presented in his 1966 paper, "Some Things Do Not Exist." After several more papers in the 1970s, the theory was given a book-length treatment in 1980, Exploring Meinong's Jungle and Beyond. The view—also defended in recent years by Priest—utilizes a modal theory including "impossible worlds" to deal with supposed objects, like the "round square." Sylvan's formulation is logically consistent, and avoids certain paradoxes associated with Meinong's original ontology; although, like many Meinongian views, it faces criticism due to its presumed ontological implausibility.   == Environmental ethics and politics == Outside of logic and metaphysics, Sylvan was a proponent of so-called deep environmental ethics in the study of environmental ethics (following shallow/deep distinction formulated by Arne Næss). In his important 1973 paper "Is There a Need for a New, an Environmental, Ethic?", he defended a then-unorthodox account of the intrinsic value of the non-human, natural world. For this he was sometimes considered a defender of deep ecology, but he was in fact very critical of much of the domain. Beginning in the 1970s, Sylvan published several other notable articles and books on environmental ethics and issues, and he co-authored the 1994 book The Greening of Ethics with David Bennett. From his work in environmental ethics, Sylvan took an interest in anarchism, contributing an often-cited entry on the subject to A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy.   == References ==   == External links == Richard Sylvan on nonexistent objects



Richard Whately (1 February 1787 – 8 October 1863) was an English rhetorician, logician, economist, and theologian who also served as the Church of Ireland Archbishop of Dublin.   == Life and times == He was born in London, the son of the Rev. Dr. Joseph Whately (17 March 1730 – 13 March 1797). He was educated at a private school near Bristol, and at Oriel College, Oxford. Richard Whately obtained double second-class honours and the prize for the English essay; in 1811 he was elected Fellow of Oriel, and in 1814 took holy orders. After his marriage in 1821 he settled in Oxford. In August 1823 he moved to Halesworth in Suffolk, but in 1825, having been appointed principal of St. Alban Hall, he returned to Oxford. He found much to reform there, and left it a different place. He was initially on friendly terms with John Henry Newman, but they fell out as the divergence in their views became apparent; Newman later spoke of his Catholic University as continuing in Dublin the struggle against Whately which he had commenced at Oxford. In 1829 Whately was elected to the professorship of political economy at Oxford in succession to Nassau William Senior. His tenure of office was cut short by his appointment to the archbishopric of Dublin in 1831. He published only one course of Introductory Lectures (1832), but one of his first acts on going to Dublin was to endow a chair of political economy in Trinity College.   === Archbishop of Dublin === Whately's appointment by Lord Grey to the see of Dublin came as a political surprise. The aged Henry Bathurst had turned the post down. The new Whig administration found Whately, well known at Holland House and effective in a parliamentary committee appearance speaking on tithes, an acceptable option. Behind the scenes Thomas Hyde Villiers had lobbied Denis Le Marchant on his behalf, with the Brougham Whigs. The appointment was challenged in the House of Lords, but without success. In Ireland, Whately's bluntness and his lack of a conciliatory manner caused opposition from his clergy. He attempted to establish a national and non-sectarian system of education. He enforced strict discipline in his diocese; and he published a statement of his views on Sabbath (Thoughts on the Sabbath, 1832). He lived in Redesdale House in Kilmacud, just outside Dublin, where he could garden. Questions of tithes, reform of the Irish church and of the Irish Poor Laws, and, in particular, the organisation of national education occupied much of his time. He discussed other public questions, for example, the subject of transportation and the general question of secondary punishments. His scheme of religious instruction for Protestants and Catholics alike was carried out for a number of years, but in 1852 it broke down owing to the opposition of the new Catholic archbishop of Dublin, Paul Cullen, and Whately felt himself constrained to withdraw from the Education Board. From the beginning Whately gave offence by supporting state endowment of the Catholic clergy. During the famine years of 1846 and 1847 the archbishop and his family tried to alleviate the miseries of the people. He was the first president of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland between 1847 and 1863. On 27 March 1848, Whately became a member of the Canterbury Association.   === Death ===  From 1856 onwards symptoms of decline began to manifest themselves in a paralytic affection of the left side. Still he continued the active discharge of his public duties till the summer of 1863, when he was prostrated by an ulcer in the leg, and after several months of acute suffering he died on 8 October 1863.   == Works == During his residence at Oxford Whately wrote his tract, Historic Doubts relative to Napoleon Bonaparte, a jeu d'ésprit directed against excessive scepticism as applied to the Gospel history. In 1822 he was appointed Bampton lecturer. The lectures, On the Use and Abuse of Party Spirit in Matters of Religion, were published in the same year. In 1825 he published a series of Essays on Some of the Peculiarities of the Christian Religion, followed in 1828 by a second series On some of the Difficulties in the Writings of St Paul, and in 1830 by a third On the Errors of Romanism traced to their Origin in Human Nature. While he was at St Alban Hall (1826) the work appeared which is perhaps most closely associated with his name—a treatise on logic entitled Elements of Logic. In the preface to the Elements of Logic, Whately wrote that the substance of the treatise was drawn from an article written by himself, entitled Logic, which had already been published in the Encyclopædia Metropolitana. The Elements of Logic gave a great impetus to the study of logic throughout Britain and the United States of America. Indeed, the highly original and influential American logician, Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914), wrote that his lifelong fascination with logic began when he read Whately's Elements of Logic as a 12-year-old boy. Whately also contributed an article to the Encyclopædia Metropolitana entitled Rhetoric. This article was also adapted into a book, called Elements of Rhetoric, which was published in 1828. In 1837 Whately wrote his handbook of Christian Evidences, which was translated during his lifetime into more than a dozen languages. At a later period he also wrote, in a similar form, Easy Lessons on Reasoning, on Morals, on Mind and on the British Constitution. Among his other works may be mentioned Charges and Tracts (1836), Essays on Some of the Dangers to Christian Faith (1839), The Kingdom of Christ (1841). He also edited Bacon's Essays, Paley's Evidences and Paley's Moral Philosophy. 1822 "On the Use and Abuse of Party Spirit in Matters of Religion" (Bampton Lectures) 1825 "Essays on Some of the Peculiarities of the Christian Religion" 1826 "Elements of Logic" 1828 "Elements of Rhetoric" 1828 "On some of the Difficulties in the Writings of St Paul" 1830 "On the Errors of Romanism traced to their Origin in Human Nature" 1832 "Introductory Lectures" 1832 A view of the Scripture revelations concerning a future state: lectures advancing belief in Christian mortalism. 1832 "Thoughts on the Sabbath" 1836 "Charges and Tracts" 1837 "Christian Evidences" 1839 "Essays on Some of the Dangers to Christian Faith" 1841 "The Kingdom of Christ" 1845 onwards "Easy Lessons": on Reasoning, On Morals, On Mind, and on the British Constitution 1849 "Historic Doubts relative to Napoleon Bonaparte"   == Legacy == Whately was a great talker, much addicted in early life to argument, in which he used others as instruments on which to hammer out his own views, and as he advanced in life much given to didactic monologue. He had a keen wit, whose sharp edge often inflicted wounds never deliberately intended by the speaker, a healthy appetite and a wholly uncontrollable love of punning. Whately often offended people by the extreme unconventionality of his manners. When at Oxford his white hat, rough white coat, and huge white dog earned for him the sobriquet of the White Bear, and he outraged the conventions of the place by exhibiting the exploits of his climbing dog in Christchurch Meadow. Whately was a devout Christian, but opposed to mere outward displays of faith. While sharing the Evangelical belief in Scripture as the sole instrument of salvation, and also like the Evangelicals being a Biblical literalist, he disagreed with the Evangelical party on the applicability of the Mosaic laws to Christians and generally favoured a more intellectual approach to religion than most of the Evangelicals of his period. He also disagreed with the Tractarian emphasis on ritual and church authority. Instead, he emphasised careful reading and understanding of the Bible and a sincere attempt to follow the precepts and example of Jesus in one's personal life. He offended Tractarian and Evangelical parties equally in his insistence that imposing civil penalties for religious beliefs led to a mere nominal Christianity. He fully supported complete religious liberty, civil rights, and freedom of speech for dissenters, Roman Catholics, Jews, and even atheists, a position that outraged many of his compatriots. He took a practical, almost business-like view of Christianity, which seemed to High Churchmen and Evangelicals alike little better than Rationalism. In this they did Whately less than justice, for his religion was very real and genuine. But he may be said to have continued the typical Christianity of the 18th century—that of the theologians who went out to fight the Rationalists with their own weapons. It was to Whately essentially a belief in certain matters of fact, to be accepted or rejected after an examination of "evidences." Hence his endeavour always is to convince the logical faculty, and his Christianity inevitably appears as a thing of the intellect rather than of the heart. Whately's qualities are exhibited at their best in his Logic. He wrote nothing better than the luminous Appendix to this work on Ambiguous Terms. In 1864 his daughter published Miscellaneous Remains from his commonplace book and in 1866 his Life and Correspondence in two volumes. The Anecdotal Memoirs of Archbishop Whately, by William John Fitzpatrick (1864), enliven the picture. Whately was perhaps the single most important figure in the revival of Aristotelian logic in the early nineteenth century. He was also important in the history of political economy, founding what is now known as the Whately Chair of political economy at Trinity College, Dublin. His Elements of Rhetoric remains widely read by rhetorical scholars in English and Communication Departments, especially in North America, and he continues to have a significant influence on rhetorical theory, especially in thought about presumption, burden of proof, and testimony. A programme in the BBC television series Who Do You Think You Are?, broadcast on 2 March 2009, uncovered that Richard Whately was an ancestor of British actor Kevin Whately.   == Notes ==   == References == Webb, Alfred (1878). " Whately, Richard". A Compendium of Irish Biography. Dublin: M. H. Gill & son. Wikisource    == Further reading == A modern biography is Richard Whately: A Man for All Seasons by Craig Parton ISBN 1-896363-07-5. See also Donald Harman Akenson A Protestant in Purgatory: Richard Whately, Archbishop of Dublin (South Bend, Indiana 1981) Einhorn, Lois J. "Consistency in Richard Whately: The Scope of His Rhetoric." Philosophy & Rhetoric 14 (Spring 1981): 89–99. Einhorn, Lois J. "Richard Whately's Public Persuasion: The Relationship between His Rhetorical Theory and His Rhetorical Practice." Rhetorica 4 (Winter 1986): 47–65. Einhorn, Lois J. "Did Napoleon Live? Presumption and Burden of Proof in Richard Whately's Historic Doubts Relative to Napoleon Boneparte." Rhetoric Society Quarterly 16 (1986): 285–97. Giustino, David de. "Finding an archbishop: the Whigs and Richard Whately in 1831." Church History 64 (1995): 218–36. McKerrow, Ray E. "Richard Whately: Religious Controversialist of the Nineteenth Century." Prose Studies: 1800–1900 2 (1979): 160–87. McKerrow, Ray E. "Archbishop Whately: Human Nature and Christian Assistance." Church History 50.2 (1981): 166–189. McKerrow, Ray E. "Richard Whately on the Nature of Human Knowledge in Relation to the Ideas of his Contemporaries." Journal of the History of Ideas 42.3 (1981): 439–455. McKerrow, Ray E. "Richard Whately's Theory of Rhetoric." In Explorations in Rhetoric. ed. R. McKerrow. Glenview IL: Scott, Firesman, & Co., 1982. McKerrow, Ray E. "Richard Whately and the Revival of Logic in Nineteenth-Century England." Rhetorica 5 (Spring 1987): 163–85. McKerrow, Ray E. "Whately's Philosophy of Language." The Southern Speech Communication Journal 53 (1988): 211–226. Poster, Carol. "Richard Whately and the Didactic Sermon." The History of the Sermon: The Nineteenth Century. Ed. Robert Ellison. Leiden: Brill, 2010: 59–113. Poster, Carol. "An Organon for Theology: Whately's Rhetoric and Logic in Religious Context". Rhetorica 24:1 (2006): 37–77. Sweet, William. "Paley, Whately, and 'enlightenment evidentialism'". International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 45 (1999):143-166. Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == External links == Works by Richard Whately at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Richard Whately at Internet Archive Works by Richard Whately at Google Books Introductory Lectures on Political Economy New School: Richard Whately

Robert Kilwardby OP (c. 1215 – 11 September 1279) was an Archbishop of Canterbury in England and as well as a cardinal. Kilwardby was the first member of a mendicant order to attain a high ecclesisatical office in the English Church.   == Life == Kilwardby studied at the University of Paris, then was a teacher of grammar and logic there. He then joined the Dominican Order and studied theology, and became regent at Oxford University before 1261, probably by 1245. He was named provincial prior of the Dominicans for England in 1261, and in October 1272 Pope Gregory X appointed him as Archbishop of Canterbury to end a dispute over the election. Kilwardby was provided to the archbishopric on 11 October 1272, given the temporalities on 12 December 1272, and consecrated on 26 February 1273. Kilwardby crowned Edward I and his wife Eleanor as king and queen of England in August 1274, but otherwise took little part in politics. He instead concentrated on his ecclesiastical duties, including charity to the poor and donating to the Dominicans. In 1278 Pope Nicholas III named Kilwardby Cardinal Bishop of Porto and Santa Rufina. He then resigned Canterbury and left England, taking with him papers, registers and documents belonging to the see. He also left the see deep in debt again, after his predecessor had cleared the debt. He died in Italy in 1279 and was buried in the Dominican convent in Viterbo, Italy. While in theory this was a promotion, probably it was not, as the pope was unhappy with Kilwardby's support of efforts to resist the payment of papal revenues and with the lack of effort towards the reforms demanded at the Second Council of Lyon in 1274. Kilwardby's theological and philosophical views were summed up by David Knowles who said that he was a "conservative eclectic, holding the doctrine of seminal tendencies and opposing...the Aristotelian doctrine of the unity of form in beings, including man." Some sources state that he was the author of Summa Philosophiae, a history and description of the schools of philosophical thought then current, but the writing style is not similar to his other works, and Knowles, for one, does not believe it was authored by Kilwardby. It has been alleged that Kilwardby was an opponent of Thomas Aquinas. In 1277 he prohibited the teaching of thirty theses, some of which have been thought to touch upon Thomas Aquinas' teaching. Recent scholars, however, such as Roland Hissette, have challenged this interpretation.   == Works == Writings on Grammar Commentaria Priscianus minor (A Commentary on the books 17 and 18 of Priscian's Institutiones grammaticae) Wrings on Logic Notulae super librum Praedicamentorum Notulae super librum Perihermeneias Notule libri Priorum Notule libri Posteriorum Comentum super librum Topicorum Notulae super librum Porphyrii De natura relationis Priorum Analyticorum expositio Notuale super librum Sex Principiorum Writings on Natural Philosophy De spiritu fantastico sive de recptione specierum De tempore +Writings on Ethics Quaestiones supra libros Ethicorum Quaestiones in librum primun Sententiarum Quaestiones in librum secundum Sententiarum Quaestiones in librum tertium Sententiarum Quaestiones in librum quartum Sententiarum De ortu scientiarum De tempore has been translated and edited by Alexander Broadie, and published as On Time and Imagination, Part 2: Introduction and Translation. A critical edition of De orto scientiarum was published by Albert G. Judy, for The Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies in 1976. Kilwardby was also the author of a summary of the writings of the Church Fathers, arranged alphabetically, Tabulae super Originalia Patrum, edited by Daniel A. Callus (Bruges: De Tempel, 1948).   == Notes ==   == References ==   == Further reading ==   == External links == Robert Kilwardby entry by José Filipe Silva in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy History of Medieval Philosophy by Jacques Maritain Kilwardby, Robert: Tabula in librum sancti Augustini De civitate Dei (1464), digitized codex at Somni

Robert Anthony "Bob" Kowalski (born 15 May 1941) is a logician and computer scientist, who has spent most of his career in the United Kingdom.   == Early life and educationEdit == He was educated at the University of Chicago, University of Bridgeport (BA in mathematics, 1963), Stanford University (MSc in mathematics, 1966), University of Warsaw and the University of Edinburgh (PhD in computer science, 1970).   == CareerEdit == He was a research fellow at the University of Edinburgh (1970–75) and has been at Imperial College London since 1975, attaining a chair in Computational logic in 1982 and becoming Emeritus Professor in 1999. He was inducted as a Fellow of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence in 1991, of the European Co-ordinating Committee for Artificial Intelligence in 1999, and the Association for Computing Machinery in 2001. He began his research in the field of automated theorem proving, developing both SL-resolution with Donald Kuehner and the connection graph proof procedure. However, he is best known for his contributions to the development of logic programming, starting with the procedural interpretation of Horn clauses. He also developed the minimal model and the fixpoint semantics of Horn clauses with Maarten van Emden. With Marek Sergot, he developed both the event calculus and the application of logic programming to legal reasoning. With Fariba Sadri, he developed an agent model in which beliefs are represented by logic programs and goals are represented by integrity constraints. Kowalski was one of the early developers of Abductive Logic Programming, in which logic programs are augmented with integrity constraints and with undefined, abducible predicates. This work led to the demonstration with Phan Minh Dung and Francesca Toni that most logics for default reasoning can be regarded as special cases of assumption-based argumentation.   == BooksEdit == "Logic for Problem Solving", North Holland, Elsevier, 1979. "Computational Logic and Human Thinking: How to be Artificially Intelligent", Cambridge University Press, 2011.   == See alsoEdit == Prolog   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Robert Kowalski's home page Biography Biography (PDF) Biographical Essay

Robert Lawson Vaught (April 4, 1926 – April 2, 2002) was a mathematical logician, and one of the founders of model theory.   == Life == Vaught was a musical prodigy in his youth, in his case the piano. He began his university studies at Pomona College, at age 16. When World War II broke out, he enlisted US Navy which assigned him to the University of California's V-12 program. He graduated in 1945 with an AB in physics. In 1946, he began a Ph.D. in mathematics at Berkeley. He initially worked under the topologist John L. Kelley, writing on C* algebras. In 1950, in response to McCarthyite pressures, Berkeley required all staff to sign a loyalty oath. Kelley declined and moved his career to Tulane University for three years. Vaught then began afresh under Alfred Tarski, completing in 1954 a thesis on mathematical logic, titled Topics in the Theory of Arithmetical Classes and Boolean Algebras. After a four years at the University of Washington, Vaught returned to Berkeley in 1958, where he remained until his 1991 retirement. In 1957, Vaught married Marilyn Maca; they had two children.   == Work == Vaught's work is primarily focused around the field of model theory. In 1957, he and Tarski introduced elementary submodels and the Tarski–Vaught test characterizing them. In 1962, he and Morley pioneered the concept of a saturated structure. His investigation of countable models of first order theories led him to the Vaught conjecture that the number of countable models of a complete first order theory (in a countable language) is always either finite, or countably infinite, or equinumerous with the real numbers. Vaught's "Never 2" theorem states that a complete first order theory cannot have exactly 2 nonisomorphic countable models. He considered his best work was his paper "Invariant sets in topology and logic", introducing the Vaught transform. He is known for the Tarski–Vaught criterion for elementary extensionality, the Feferman–Vaught theorem, the Łoś–Vaught test for completeness and decidability, the Vaught two-cardinal theorem, and his conjecture on the nonfinite axiomatizability of totally categorical theories (this work eventually led to geometric stability theory). Vaught was a capable teacher of undergraduates, and his writing was reputed for elegance and clarity. His Set Theory: An Introduction (2001, 2nd ed.) attests to his abilities in this regard.   == Notes ==   == References == Feferman, Anita Burdman, and Solomon Feferman, 2004. Alfred Tarski: Life and Logic. Cambridge Univ. Press. 24 index entries for Vaught, especially pp. 185–88.   == External links == Robert Lawson Vaught at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Addison, J. W. (Fall 2002). "In Memoriam: Robert Lawson Vaught" (PDF). Berkeley Mathematics Newsletter. p. 13.

Robert Martin Solovay (born December 15, 1938) is an American mathematician specializing in set theory. Solovay earned his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1964 under the direction of Saunders Mac Lane, with a dissertation on A Functorial Form of the Differentiable Riemann–Roch theorem. Solovay has spent his career at the University of California at Berkeley, where his Ph.D. students include W. Hugh Woodin and Matthew Foreman. Solovay's theorems include: Solovay's theorem showing that, if one assumes the existence of an inaccessible cardinal, then the statement "every set of real numbers is Lebesgue measurable" is consistent with ZF without the axiom of choice; Isolating the notion of 0#; Proving that the existence of a real valued measurable cardinal is equiconsistent with the existence of a measurable cardinal; Proving that if  is a strong limit singular cardinal, greater than a strongly compact cardinal then  holds; Proving that if  is an uncountable regular cardinal, and  is a stationary set, then  can be decomposed into the union of  disjoint stationary sets; With Stanley Tennenbaum, developing the method of iterated forcing and showing the consistency of Suslin's hypothesis. Outside of set theory, developing (with Volker Strassen) the Solovay–Strassen primality test, used to identify large natural numbers that are prime with high probability. This method has had implications for cryptography. Proving that GL (the normal modal logic which has the instances of the schema  as additional axioms) completely axiomatizes the logic of the provability predicate of Peano Arithmetic.   == Selected publicationsEdit == Solovay, Robert M. (1970). "A model of set-theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable". Annals of Mathematics. Second Series 92 (1): 1–56. doi:10.2307/1970696.  Solovay, Robert M. (1967). "A nonconstructible Δ13 set of integers". Transactions of the American Mathematical Society (American Mathematical Society) 127 (1): 50–75. doi:10.2307/1994631. JSTOR 1994631.  Solovay, Robert M. and Volker Strassen (1977). "A fast Monte-Carlo test for primality". SIAM Journal on Computing 6 (1): 84–85. doi:10.1137/0206006.    == See alsoEdit == Provability logic   == External linksEdit == Robert M. Solovay at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Robert M. Solovay's publications indexed by the DBLP Bibliography Server at the University of Trier

Robert Schirokauer Hartman (January 27, 1910 – September 20, 1973) was a logician and philosopher. His primary field of study was scientific axiology (the science of value) and he is known as its original theorist. His axiology is the basis of the Hartman Value Inventory which is used in psychology to measure the character of an individual.   == Biography == Hartman was born in Berlin, Germany on January 27, 1910. He studied at the German College of Political Science, and also at the University of Paris, the London School of Economics, and at the University of Berlin, from which he received an LL.B. degree. He started working as instructor in administrative law and the philosophy of law at the University of Berlin, and he also served as Assistant Judge of the District court, Berlin-Charlottenburg. In 1932 he left Germany for Britain and "started working for Walt Disney Productions as a copyright representative in Britain and later opened offices for Disney in Denmark, Norway, Finland and Sweden where he met and married his wife. The Hartmans moved to Mexico City where he represented Disney Productions in Central America and the Antilles." In 1941 he migrated to the United States, became a citizen, and did his doctoral work in philosophy at Northwestern University in 1946. He taught at the University of Berlin, at Lake Forest Academy near Chicago, at the College of Wooster, Ohio State University, and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, before assuming duties in Mexico. In 1955-1956 he was Visiting Professor at Yale University. Robert S. Hartman spent his later days as simultaneously a Research Professor of Philosophy at the University of Tennessee as well as at the National University of Mexico. In the late 1950s he was among the first members of the Society for General Systems Research. From 1950-1957 he was Chairman of the Commission on Peace, International Council of Community Churches. He served as Executive Director of the Council of Profit-Sharing Industries, and wrote its first manual. He was a founder of the Deutsche Institute fur Social-Wirtschaftliche Betriebsgestaltung (industrial organization). He was a founding sponsor of the American Association for Humanistic Psychology. He has been credited with being the founding spirit behind the prevailing business-retirement plan in the United States today, the 401K Plan.[1] He was the first President of the American Society for Value Inquiry, founded in 1971 by James Wilbur. He served as consultant for the practical application of Value Theory with AT&T, General Foods, General Electric, and IBM. Hartman was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973. Hartman died in Mexico City on September 20, 1973. He had one child, a son, Jan. Jan Hartman was an Emmy-winning screenwriter, author, and playwright. He died of heart failure in October 2006. For the previous 10 years, Jan lived in Hertfordshire, England, with his wife, Stacey McNutt, a book editor. An Institute has been set up in honor of Robert S. Hartman to explore the implications of his work in formal axiology and value science.   == Work == He was the subject of doctoral dissertations, including that of a former Chairman of the Philosophy Department at the University of Tennessee, Professor John Davis, as well as of Marvin Charles Katz, whose thesis was later published as a book entitled Trends Towards Synthesis. He has published papers on the phenomenology of group measurement, on universal constants in Physics (in his role as a philosopher of science), on the logic of description and valuation, on the contribution of St. Anselm, and on the Concept of Self in Søren Kierkegaard.   === Value theory === The reference book Who Knows What listed Hartman as one of the two living authorities on value theory (the other was Charles W. Morris (1903-1979)). Among Hartman's publications are the report on Value Theory for the Institut International de Philosophis 1949-1955, published by UNESCO; his magnum opus The Structure of Value (1967 Southern Illinois University Press); and at the time of his death in 1973 he was working on a manuscript entitled The Measurement of Value. Another critical work is his Knowledge of Good (Robert S. HARTMAN, Arthur ELLIS and Rem B. EDWARDS, 2002 Rodopi Press) a thorough study of all the philosophical discussions of goodness and what gaps exist in a complete philosophy of value. Hartman shows how his Formal Value Theory fills these gaps. For a relevant bibliography of books by and about Robert S. Hartman, Formal Axiology, and its applications, go to: http://www.hartmaninstitute.org/resources/books-publications/   == See also == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == Notes ==   == References == Robert S. Hartman, Freedom to Live: The Robert Hartman Story. edited by Arthur R. Ellis. Rodolpi Press. ISBN 90-5183-610-4 Further details about his life and work can be found at http://www.hartmaninstitute.org/RobertSHartman.aspx   == External links == The Robert S. Hartman Institute for Formal and Applied Axiology The Robert S. Hartman Collection, 1910-1973 at the University of Tennessee A current bibliography of books by and about Hartman, Formal Axiology, and its applications.

Robin Oliver Gandy (22 September 1919 – 20 November 1995) was a British mathematician and logician. He was a friend, student, and associate of Alan Turing, having been supervised by Turing during his PhD at the University of Cambridge (graduated 1953), where they worked together. Robin Gandy was born in the village of Peppard, Oxfordshire, England. Educated at Abbotsholme, Gandy took two years of the Mathematical Tripos, at King's College, Cambridge, before enlisting for military service in 1940. During World War II he worked on radio intercept equipment at Hanslope Park, where Alan Turing was working on a speech encipherment project, and he became one of Turing's lifelong friends and associates. In 1946, he completed Part III of the Mathematical Tripos, then began studying for a PhD under Turing's supervision. He completed his thesis, On axiomatic systems in mathematics and theories in Physics, in 1952. He was a member of the Apostles. Gandy held positions at the Universities of Leicester, Leeds, and Manchester. Gandy was a visiting associate professor at Stanford from 1966 to 1967, and held a similar position at University of California, Los Angeles in 1968. In 1969, he moved to Wolfson College, Oxford, where he became Reader in Mathematical Logic. One of the residential buildings of the college is now named in his honour. He is best known for his work in recursion theory. His contributions include the Spector–Gandy theorem, the Gandy Stage Comparison theorem, and the Gandy Selection Theorem. He also made a significant contribution to the understanding of the Church—Turing thesis, and his generalization of the Turing machine is called a Gandy machine. Gandy died in Oxford, England.   == References ==   == Further reading == Hodges, Andrew (1983). Alan Turing: The Enigma. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-49207-1.  "Notices". The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 2 (1): 121–125. March 1996. doi:10.1017/s1079898600007988. JSTOR 421052.  Moschovakis, Yannis & Yates, Mike (September 1996). "In Memoriam: Robin Oliver Gandy, 1919–1995". The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 2 (3): 367–370. doi:10.1017/s1079898600007873. JSTOR 420996.    == External links == Robin Gandy — The Alan Turing Scrapbook, archived at Archive.Today Robin Gandy — The Mathematics Genealogy Project List of publications from Microsoft Academic Search

Rodolphus Agricola (Phrisius) (?February 17, 1444, August 28, 1443? – October 27, 1485) was a pre-Erasmian humanist of the northern Low Countries, famous for his supple Latin and one of the first north of the Alps to know Greek well. Agricola was a Hebrew scholar towards the end of his life, an educator, musician and builder of a church organ, a poet in Latin as well as the vernacular, a diplomat and a sportsman of sorts (boxing). He is best known today as the author of De inventione dialectica, as the father of northern European humanism and as a zealous anti-scholastic in the late-fifteenth century.   == Biography ==  Born at Baflo, in the Dutch province of Groningen, Agricola was originally named Roelof Huusman. The Latin adjective Phrisius identifies him as a Frisian. Educated first by the celebrated school of St. Maarten in Groningen, he matriculated at the universities of Erfurt (BA in 1458) and Louvain (MA in 1465), where he won renown for the purity of his Latin and for his skill in disputation. He concentrated his studies on Cicero and Quintilian, and during his university years added French and Greek to his ever-growing list of languages. At the end of his life he would learn Hebrew in order to be able to read the Old Testament - and especially the Psalms - unadulterated by translation. In the 1460s Agricola travelled to Italy, where he associated with humanist masters and statesmen. From 1468 (?) until 1475 he studied civil law at the university of Pavia, and later went to Ferrara (1475–1479), where he became the protégé of Prince d'Este of Ferrara, was a pupil of Theodor Gaza and attended lectures by the famous Battista Guarino. He devoted himself wholly to the study of classical texts. He won renown for the elegance of his Latin style and his knowledge of philosophy. Also while in Ferrara he gained formal employment as the organist to the ducal chapel, at that time one of the most opulent musical establishments in Europe. He held that post until 1479, after which he returned to the North to become secretary to the city of Groningen. Here at the Cistercian Abbey of St Bernard at Aduard near Groningen and at 's-Heerenbergh near Emmerich in the south-east he was at the centre of a group of scholars and humanists with whom he kept up a lively exchange of letters. His correspondents included the musician and choirmaster of Antwerp, Jacobus Barbirianus (Barbireau), Alexander Hegius von Heek, rector of the Latin school at Deventer (of Erasmian fame), and the humanist scholar and later famed student of Hebrew, Johannes Reuchlin. In 1470 he taught a deaf child how to communicate orally and in writing. De inventione dialectica documents this pioneering educational effort. Once in Germany again, he spent time in Dillingen, where he continued to correspond with humanist friends and colleagues throughout Europe, promoting interest in his project to promote the study of classical learning and the studia humanitatis. He remained an independent scholar, unattached to a university or religious establishment—this independence became a hallmark of humanist scholars. In Dillingen Agricola in 1479 completed his De inventione dialectica (On Dialectical Invention), which argued for the precise application of loci in scholarly argumentation. From 1480 to 1484 he held the post of secretary of the city of Groningen. In 1481, Agricola spent six months in Brussels at the court of archduke Maximilian (later Maximilian I, the Holy Roman Emperor). Friends attempted to dissuade him from accepting the archduke's patronage; they feared that the archduke's influence would undermine his philosophical ideals. He also declined the offer to become head of a Latin school at Antwerp. In 1484, Agricola moved to Heidelberg by invitation of Johann von Dalberg, the Bishop of Worms. The two men had met in Pavia, and they became close friends in Heidelberg. The bishop was a generous benefactor of learning. At this time Agricola began studying Hebrew, and he is said to have published an original translation of the Psalms. In 1485, Dalberg was sent as an ambassador to Pope Innocent VIII in Rome. Agricola accompanied him and was struck gravely ill on their journey. He died shortly after their return to Heidelberg. Ermolao Barbaro composed an epitaph for him.   == Legacy and influence == De inventione dialectica was influential in creating a place for logic in rhetorical studies, and was of significance in the education of early humanists.  It was a critical, and systematic treatment of ideas and concepts related to dialectics. "The significance of De inventione dialectica for the history of argumentation is that it assimilated the art of dialectic to that of rhetoric. Argumentation focused not on truth but on what might be said with reason. Accordingly, Agricola focused on the Topics rather than the Analytics of Aristotle and on Cicero, but also on the writings of historians, poets, and orators. Thus, for Agricola, dialectic was an open field; the art of finding 'whatever can be said with any degree of probability on any subject'(Hamilton, David. From Dialectic to Didactic).  It also had an impact on the deaf community. He held that a person who is born deaf can express himself by putting down his thoughts in writing. The book was not published until 1515. His statement that deaf people can be taught a language is one of the earliest positive statements about deafness on record (Gannon, 1981). Agricola's De formando studio—his long letter on a private educational programme—was printed as a small booklet and thus influenced pedagogical insights of the early-sixteenth century. Agricola's real legacy was his personal influence over others. Erasmus admired Agricola, eulogizing him in "Adagia" and calling him "the first to bring a breath of better literature from Italy." Erasmus claimed him as a father/teacher figure and may have met him through his own schoolmaster Alexander Hegius (most probably one of Agricola's students) at Hegius's school in Deventer. In addition to Hegius, Agricola's students include Conrad Celtis (in Heidelberg). Erasmus made it his personal mission to ensure that several of Agricola's major works were printed posthumously. Agricola's literary executor was Adolphus Occo, a physician of Augsburg. By about 1530 disciples and followers had gathered in the manuscripts left by Agricola, and these were edited by Alardus of Amsterdam.   == Works == De Inventione Dialectica libri tres (1479): This is the work for which Agricola is particularly known. There is a modern edition (and translation into German) by Lothar Mundt, Rudolf Agricola. De inventione dialectica libri tres (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1992). Letters: The letters of Agricola, of which fifty-one survive, offer an interesting insight in the humanist circle to which he belonged. They have been published and translated with extensive notes in: Agricola, Letters; edited by Adrie van der Laan and Fokke Akkerman (2002). A Life of Petrarch "De nativitate Christi" "De formando studio" (= letter 38 [to Jacobus Barbireau of Antwerp on June 7, 1484, when Agricola was in Heidelberg]: see the edition of the letters by Van der Laan / Akkerman, pp. 200–219) His minor works include some speeches, poems, translations of Greek dialogues and commentaries on works by Seneca, Boethius and Cicero For a selection of his works with facing French translation: Rodolphe Agricola, Écrits sur la dialectique et l'humanisme, ed. Marc van der Poel (Paris: Honoré Champion, 1997) For a bibliography of Agricola's works: Gerda C. Huisman, Rudolph Agricola. A Bibliography of Printed Works and Translations (Nieuwkoop: B. de Graaf, 1985)   == References ==   == Sources == Agricola, R., from "Three Books Concerning Dialectical Invention." Renaissance Debates on Rhetoric. ed. & trans. W.A. Rebhorn. pp. 42–56. Ithaca, NY: Cornell U P. 2000. Gallaudet University Library: - Earliest Known Deaf People: http://library.gallaudet.edu/dr/faq-earliest-deaf.html Hamilton, David. "From Dialectic to Didactic." http://faculty.ed.uiuc.edu/westbury/textcol/HAMILTO1.html The History Guide - Renaissance Humanism: http://www.historyguide.org/intellect/humanism.html New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia - Rudolph Agricola: http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/01231b.htm Rodolphus Agricola Phrisius (1444–1485). Proceedings of the International Conference at the University of Groningen 28–30 October 1985, eds. Fokke Akkerman and Arjo Vanderjagt (Leiden: Brill, 1988). Wessel Gansfort (1419–1489) and Northern Humanism, eds. Fokke Akkerman, Gerda Huisman, and Arjo Vanderjagt (Leiden: Brill, 1993). Rudolf Agricola 1444-1485. Protagonist des nordeuropäischen Humanismus zum 550. Geburtstag, ed. Wilhelm Kühlman (Bern: Peter Lang, 1994). Northern Humanism in European Context. From the 'Adwert Academy' to Ubbo Emmius, ed. Fokke Akkerman, Arjo Vanderjagt, and Adrie van der Laan (Leiden: Brill, 1999). Agricola's logic and rhetoric are treated in Peter Mack, Renaissance Argument. Valla and Agricola in the Traditions of Rhetoric and Dialectic, (Leiden: Brill, 1993); see also Ann Moss, Renaissance Truth and the Latin Language Turn (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. For Agricola's knowledge of Hebrew: A.J. Vanderjagt, 'Wessel Gansfort (1419–1489) and Rudolph Agricola (1443?-1485): Piety and Hebrew', in Frömmigkeit - Theologie - Frömmigkeitstheologie: Contributions to European Church History. Festschrift für Berndt Hamm zum 60. Geburtstag, ed. Gudrun Litz, Heidrun Munzert, and Roland Liebenberg (Leiden: Brill, 2005), pp. 159–172.   == Further reading == DeCoursey, Matthew (2001). "Continental European Rhetoricians, 1400–1600, and Their Influence in Renaissance England". British Rhetoricians and Logicians, 1500–1660. First Series, DLB 236. Detroit: Gale. pp. 309–343. ISBN 0787646539.  Huisman, Gerda H. (1985). Rudolph Agricola: A Bibliography of Printed Works and Translations. Nieuwkoop: De Graaf. ISBN 9060043871.  McNally, J. R. (1966). "Dux illa Directrixque artium: Rudolph Agricola's Dialectical System". Quarterly Journal of Speech 52 (4): 337–347. doi:10.1080/00335636609382800.  McNally, J. R. (1967). "Rudolph Agricola's De inventione dialectica libri tres: A Translation of Selected Chapters". Speech Monographs 34 (4): 393–422. doi:10.1080/03637756709375551.  McNally, J. R. (1968). "Prima pars dialecticae: The Influence of Agricolan Dialectic upon English Accounts of Invention". Renaissance Quarterly 21 (2): 166–177. JSTOR 2859547.  McNally, J. R. (1969). "Rector et dux populi: Italian Humanists and the Relationship between Rhetoric and Logic". Modern Philology 67 (2): 168–176. doi:10.1086/390154. JSTOR 436006.  Ong, Walter J. (2004) [1958]. Ramus: Method and the Decay of Dialogue: From the Art of Discourse to the Art of Reason (New ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0226629767.

Roland Fraïssé (French: [ʁɔlɑ̃ fʁajse]; 12 March 1920 – 30 March 2008) was a French mathematical logician. He received his doctoral degree from the University of Paris in 1953. In his thesis, Fraïssé used the back-and-forth method to determine whether two model-theoretic structures were elementarily equivalent. This method of determining elementary equivalence was later formulated as the Ehrenfeucht–Fraïssé game. Fraïssé worked primarily in relation theory. Another of his important works was the Fraïssé construction of a Fraïssé limit of finite structures. He also introduced the notion of compensor in the theory of posets. Most of his career was spent as Professor at the University of Provence in Marseille, France.   == Selected publications == Sur quelques classifications des systèmes de relations, thesis, University of Paris, 1953; published in Publications Scientifiques de l'Université d'Alger, series A 1 (1954), 35–182. Cours de logique mathématique, Paris: Gauthier-Villars Éditeur, 1967; second edition, 3 vols., 1971–1975; tr. into English and ed. by David Louvish as Course of Mathematical Logic, 2 vols., Dordrecht: Reidel, 1973–1974. Theory of relations, tr. into English by P. Clote, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986; rev. ed. 2000.   == References ==   == External links == Roland Fraïssé at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Rolf Schock (5 April 1933 – 5 December 1986), Swedish–American philosopher and artist, was born in Cap-d'Ail, France of German parents. His parents, who had left Germany in 1931, would eventually settle in the United States, where Rolf would go on to study geology and psychology, with mathematics as a minor, at the University of New Mexico. After completing a bachelor of arts in 1955, he pursued studies in philosophy and logic from 1956 to 1960 at the University of California, first in Berkeley and then in Los Angeles (UCLA), and in 1960 moved to Stockholm, Sweden, to specialize in theoretical philosophy at Stockholm University with a particular interest in free logic, logic free of existence assumptions. He was awarded an intermediate post-graduate degree in 1964 and a Ph.D. in 1968, which was followed by an appointment as associate professor at Uppsala University in the following year. During the period 1964–1969 he also studied at the University College of Arts, Crafts and Design in Stockholm and he dedicated a lot of his time to painting and photography in addition to conducting research. He led a simple life as an independent scholar who was devoted to researching the field of logic and related areas in philosophy, and never held a permanent position, earning a living by temporary teaching assignments at universities and night-schools. For some years he was affiliated with the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, where he taught a series of courses. In 1986 Rolf Schock was killed in an accident in Berlin. To much surprise he left a large estate. Schock bequeathed half of the funds for prizes in the arts and sciences, and beginning in 1993, Schock Prizes (schockprisen) instituted by his will are awarded every two or three years.   == References == "Rolf Schock". The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. Retrieved 2010-06-16.

Ronald Björn Jensen (born April 1, 1936) is an American mathematician active in Europe, primarily known for his work in mathematical logic and set theory.   == Career == Jensen completed the BA in economics at American University in 1959, and a Ph.D. in mathematics at the University of Bonn in 1964. His supervisor was Gisbert Hasenjaeger. Jensen taught at Rockefeller University, 1969–71, and the University of California, Berkeley, 1971-73. The balance of his academic career was spent in Europe at the University of Bonn, the University of Oslo, the University of Freiburg, the University of Oxford, and the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, from which he retired in 2001. He now resides in Berlin. In 2015 the European Set Theory Society awarded him and John R. Steel the Hausdorff medal for their paper "K without a measurable".   == Results == Jensen's better-known results include the: Axiomatic set theory NFU, a variant of New Foundations (NF) where extensionality is weakened to allow several sets with no elements, and the proof of NFU's consistency relative to Peano arithmetic; Fine structure theory of the constructible universe L. This work led to his being awarded in 2003 the Leroy P. Steele Prize for Seminal Contribution to Research of the American Mathematical Society for his 1972 paper titled "The fine structure of the constructible hierarchy"; Definitions and proofs of various infinitary combinatorial principles in L, including diamond , square, and morass; Jensen's covering theorem for L; General theory of core models and the construction of the Dodd–Jensen core model; Consistency of CH plus Suslin's hypothesis. Technique of coding the universe by a real.   == External links == Jensen's page at the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Brief biographies of past presidents of the Kurt Gödel Society.

Rudolf Carnap (/ˈkɑrnæp/; German: [ˈkaɐ̯naːp]; May 18, 1891 – September 14, 1970) was a German-born philosopher who was active in Europe before 1935 and in the United States thereafter. He was a major member of the Vienna Circle and an advocate of logical positivism. He is considered "one of the giants among twentieth-century philosophers."   == Life and work ==  Carnap's father had risen from the status of a poor ribbon-weaver to become the owner of a ribbon-making factory. His mother came from academic stock; her father was an educational reformer and her oldest brother was the archaeologist Wilhelm Dörpfeld. As a ten-year-old, Carnap accompanied his uncle on an expedition to Greece. He began his formal education at the Barmen Gymnasium. From 1910 to 1914, he attended the University of Jena, intending to write a thesis in physics. But he also studied carefully Kant's Critique of Pure Reason during a course taught by Bruno Bauch, and was one of very few students to attend Gottlob Frege's courses in mathematical logic. While Carnap held moral and political opposition to World War I, he felt obligated to serve in the German army. After three years of service, he was given permission to study physics at the University of Berlin, 1917–18, where Albert Einstein was a newly appointed professor. Carnap then attended the University of Jena, where he wrote a thesis defining an axiomatic theory of space and time. The physics department said it was too philosophical, and Bruno Bauch of the philosophy department said it was pure physics. Carnap then wrote another thesis, with Bauch's supervision, on the theory of space in a more orthodox Kantian style, and published as Der Raum (Space) in a supplemental issue of Kant-Studien (1922). In it he makes the clear distinction between formal, physical and perceptual (e.g., visual) spaces. Frege's course exposed him to Bertrand Russell's work on logic and philosophy, which put a sense of the aims to his studies. He accepted the effort to surpass traditional philosophy with logical innovations that inform the sciences. He wrote a letter to Russell, who responded by copying by hand long passages from his Principia Mathematica for Carnap's benefit, as neither Carnap nor his university could afford a copy of this epochal work. In 1924 and 1925, he attended seminars led by Edmund Husserl, the founder of phenomenology, and continued to write on physics from a logical positivist perspective. Carnap discovered a kindred spirit when he met Hans Reichenbach at a 1923 conference. Reichenbach introduced Carnap to Moritz Schlick, a professor at the University of Vienna who offered Carnap a position in his department, which Carnap accepted in 1926. Carnap thereupon joined an informal group of Viennese intellectuals that came to be known as the Vienna Circle, directed largely by Moritz Schlick and including Hans Hahn, Friedrich Waismann, Otto Neurath, and Herbert Feigl, with occasional visits by Hahn's student Kurt Gödel. When Wittgenstein visited Vienna, Carnap would meet with him. He (with Hahn and Neurath) wrote the 1929 manifesto of the Circle, and (with Hans Reichenbach) initiated the philosophy journal Erkenntnis. In 1928, Carnap published two important books: The Logical Structure of the World (German: "Der logische Aufbau der Welt"), in which he developed a rigorous formal version of empiricism, defining all scientific terms in phenomenalistic terms. The formal system of the Aufbau (as the work is commonly termed) was grounded in a single primitive dyadic predicate, which is satisfied if "two" individuals "resemble" each other. The Aufbau was greatly influenced by Principia Mathematica, and warrants comparison with the mereotopological metaphysics A. N. Whitehead developed over 1916–29. It appears, however, that Carnap soon became somewhat disenchanted with this book. In particular, he did not authorize an English translation until 1967. Pseudoproblems in Philosophy asserted that many philosophical questions were meaningless, i.e., the way they were posed amounted to an abuse of language. An operational implication of this opinion was taken to be the elimination of metaphysics from responsible human discourse. This is the statement for which Carnap was best known for many years.  In February 1930 Tarski lectured in Vienna, and during November 1930 Carnap visited Warsaw. On these occasions he learned much about Tarski's model theoretic method of semantics. Rose Rand, another philosopher in the Vienna Circle, noted, "Carnap's conception of semantics starts from the basis given in Tarski's work but a distinction is made between logical and non-logical constants and between logical and factual truth... At the same time he worked with the concepts of intension and extension and took these two concepts as a basis of a new method of semantics." In 1931, Carnap was appointed Professor at the German language University of Prague. There he wrote the book that was to make him the most famous logical positivist and member of the Vienna Circle, his Logical Syntax of Language (Carnap 1934). In this work, Carnap advanced his Principle of Tolerance, according to which there is not any such thing as a "true" or "correct" logic or language. One is free to adopt whatever form of language is useful for one's purposes. In 1933, W. V. Quine met Carnap in Prague and discussed the latter's work at some length. Thus began the lifelong mutual respect these two men shared, one that survived Quine's eventual forceful disagreements with a number of Carnap's philosophical conclusions. Carnap, whose socialist and pacifist beliefs put him at risk in Nazi Germany, emigrated to the United States in 1935 and became a naturalized citizen in 1941. Meanwhile back in Vienna, Moritz Schlick was murdered in 1936. From 1936 to 1952, Carnap was a professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago. During the late 1930s, Carnap offered an assistant position in philosophy to Carl Gustav Hempel, who accepted. The two conducted research including Logical Syntax. Thanks partly to Quine's help, Carnap spent the years 1939–41 at Harvard, where he was reunited with Tarski. Carnap (1963) later expressed some irritation about his time at Chicago, where he and Charles W. Morris were the only members of the department committed to the primacy of science and logic. (Their Chicago colleagues included Richard McKeon, Mortimer Adler, Charles Hartshorne, and Manley Thompson.) Carnap's years at Chicago were nonetheless very productive ones. He wrote books on semantics (Carnap 1942, 1943, 1956), modal logic, being very similar in Carnap (1956) to the now-standard possible worlds semantics for that logic Saul Kripke proposed starting in 1959, and on the philosophical foundations of probability and induction (Carnap 1950, 1952). After a stint at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, he joined the philosophy department at UCLA in 1954, Hans Reichenbach having died the previous year. He had earlier refused an offer of a similar job at the University of California, because accepting that position required that he sign a loyalty oath, a practice to which he was opposed on principle. While at UCLA, he wrote on scientific knowledge, the analytic – synthetic dichotomy, and the verification principle. His writings on thermodynamics and on the foundations of probability and induction, were published posthumously as Carnap (1971, 1977, 1980). Carnap taught himself Esperanto when he was 14 years of age, and remained sympathetic to it (Carnap 1963). He later attended the World Congress of Esperanto in 1908 and 1922, and employed the language while traveling. Carnap had four children by his first marriage to Elizabeth Schöndube, which ended in divorce in 1929. He married his second wife, Elizabeth Ina Stögner, in 1933. Ina committed suicide in 1964.   == Logical syntax == Carnap's Logical Syntax of Language can be regarded as a response to Wittgenstein 's Tractatus. Carnap elaborated and extended the concept of logical syntax proposed by Wittgenstein in the Tractatus (Section 3.325).  However, Wittgenstein stated that propositions cannot represent logical form.  Carnap disagreed. Wittgenstein proposed the idea of logical syntax. It is Carnap who designed, formulated and implemented the details of logical syntax in philosophical analysis. Carnap defined logical syntax as:  In the U.S, the concept of logical syntax helped the development of natural language processing and compiler design.   === The purpose of logical syntax === The purpose of logical syntax is to provide a system of concepts, a language, by the help of which the results of logical analysis will be exactly formulable. Carnap stated :  Carnap wanted only to end metaphysics but not philosophy.   == Rejection of metaphysics == Carnap, in his book Philosophy and Logical Syntax, used the concept of verifiability to reject metaphysics.   === The function of logical analysis === Carnap used the method of logical analysis to reject metaphysics.   == Selected publications == For links to Carnap's publications and discussions of his work, see ""Carnap" in All Fields of Study". Microsoft Academic Search. Retrieved 2013-05-26.  1922. Der Raum: Ein Beitrag zur Wissenschaftslehre, Kant-Studien, Ergänzungshefte, no. 56. His Ph.D. thesis. 1926. Physikalische Begriffsbildung. Karlsruhe: Braun. 1928. Scheinprobleme in der Philosophie (Pseudoproblems of Philosophy). Berlin: Weltkreis-Verlag. 1928. Der Logische Aufbau der Welt. Leipzig: Felix Meiner Verlag. English translation by Rolf A. George, 1967. The Logical Structure of the World. Pseudoproblems in Philosophy. University of California Press. ISBN 0-812-69523-2 1929. Abriss der Logistik, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Relationstheorie und ihrer Anwendungen. Springer. 1934. Logische Syntax der Sprache. English translation 1937, The Logical Syntax of Language. Kegan Paul. 1996 (1935). Philosophy and Logical Syntax. Bristol UK: Thoemmes. Excerpt. 1939, Foundations of Logic and Mathematics in International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, Vol. I, no. 3. University of Chicago Press. 1942. Introduction to Semantics. Harvard Uni. Press. 1943. Formalization of Logic. Harvard Uni. Press. 1945. On Inductive Logic in Philosophy of Science, Vol.12, p. 72-97. 1945. The Two Concepts of Probability in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol.5, No.4 (Jun), p. 513-532. 1947. On the Application of Inductive Logic in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol. 8, p. 133-148. 1956 (1947). Meaning and Necessity: a Study in Semantics and Modal Logic. University of Chicago Press. 1950. Logical Foundations of Probability. University of Chicago Press. Pp. 3–15 online. 1950. "Empiricism, Semantics, Ontology", Revue Internationale de Philosophie 4: 20–40. 1952. The Continuum of Inductive Methods. University of Chicago Press. 1958. Introduction to Symbolic Logic and its Applications. Dover publications, New York. ISBN 9780486604534 1963, "Intellectual Autobiography" in Schilpp (1963: 1–84). 1966. Philosophical Foundations of Physics. Martin Gardner, ed. Basic Books. Online excerpt. 1971. Studies in inductive logic and probability, Vol. 1. University of California Press. 1977. Two essays on entropy. Shimony, Abner, ed. University of California Press. 1980. Studies in inductive logic and probability, Vol. 2. Jeffrey, R. C., ed. University of California Press. 2000. Untersuchungen zur Allgemeinen Axiomatik. Edited from unpublished manuscript by T. Bonk and J. Mosterín. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 167 pp. ISBN 3-534-14298-5. Online bibliography. Under construction, with no entries dated later than 1937. For a more comprehensive bibliography, see also http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rudolf_Carnap   == See also == Analytic–synthetic distinction Carnap–Ramsey sentence Internal–external distinction Meta-ontology Philosophy of science Skepticism Visual space   == References ==   == Sources == Richard Creath, Michael Friedman, ed. (2007). The Cambridge companion to Carnap. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521840155.  Roger F Gibson, ed. (2004). The Cambridge companion to Quine. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521639492.  Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. In Search of Mathematical Roots. Princeton Uni. Press. Thomas Mormann, 2000. "Rudolf Carnap" (book). München, Beck. Willard Quine 1951, Two Dogmas of Empiricism. The Philosophical Review 60: 20–43. Reprinted in his 1953 From a Logical Point of View. Harvard University Press. 1985, The Time of My Life: An Autobiography. MIT Press.  Richardson, Alan W., 1998. Carnap's construction of the world : the Aufbau and the emergence of logical empiricism. Cambridge Uni. Press. Schilpp, P. A., ed., 1963. The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap. LaSalle IL: Open Court. Spohn, Wolfgang, ed., 1991. Erkenntnis Orientated: A Centennial Volume for Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 1991. Logic, Language, and the Structure of Scientific Theories: Proceedings of the Carnap-Reichenbach Centennial, University of Konstanz, May 21–24, 1991. University of Pittsburgh Press. Wagner, Pierre, ed., 2009. Carnap's Logical Syntax of Language. Palgrave Macmillan. Wagner, Pierre, ed., 2012. Carnap's Ideal of Explication and Naturalism. Palgrave Macmillan.   == External links == Rudolf Carnap entry by Mauro Murzi in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Carnap's Modal Logic entry by M.J. Cresswell in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Rudolf Carnap Webpage and Directory of Internet Resources Homepage of the Collected Works of Rudolf Carnap. Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University Precis of Carnap's philosophy. The Life of Rudolf Carnap, Philosophy at RBJones.com R. Carnap: "Von der Erkenntnistheorie zur Wissenschaftslogik", Paris Congress in 1935, Paris, 1936. R. Carnap: "Über die Einheitssprache der Wissenschaft", Paris Congress in 1935, Paris, 1936. R. Carnap: "Wahrheit und Bewährung", Paris Congress in 1935, Paris, 1936. Rudolf Carnap Papers: (Rudolf Carnap Papers, 1905-1970, ASP.1974.01, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh.) Das Fremdpsychische bei Rudolf Carnap (German) by Robert Bauer. FBI file on Rudolph Carnap Luchte, James (2007). "Martin Heidegger and Rudolf Carnap: Radical Phenomenology, Logical Positivism and the Roots of the Continental/Analytic Divide". Philosophy Today 51 (3): 241–260. doi:10.5840/philtoday200751332.

Ruth Barcan Marcus (August 2, 1921 – February 19, 2012) was an American philosopher and logician who developed the Barcan formula. She was a pioneering figure in the quantification of modal logic and the theory of direct reference. She wrote seminal papers on identity, essentialism, possibilia, belief, moral conflict as well as some critical historical studies. Timothy Williamson, the Wykeham Professor of Logic at Oxford University, sums up his celebration of Professor Marcus's career by stating that many of her "main ideas are not just original, and clever, and beautiful, and fascinating, and influential, and way ahead of their time, but actually — I believe — true."   == Education == B.A., New York University (1941) M.A., Yale University (1942) Ph.D., Yale University (1946)   == Academic appointments == Professor of philosophy and founding department chair, University of Illinois at Chicago (1962–1970) Professor of philosophy, Northwestern University (1970–1973) Halleck professor of philosophy, Yale University (1973–1991) Professor emerita and senior research scholar, Yale University (1992-2012); Visiting distinguished professor, University of California, Irvine (one quarter each year, 1992–97)   == Professional offices and service (partial list) == Chair of the Board of Officers, American Philosophical Association (1976–83) President, Association for Symbolic Logic (1983–86) President, International Institut de Philosophie (1989–92) and Presidente Honoraire (continuing) Served on various visoring committees for programs and departments Serves on various editorial boards   == Philosophy ==   === Quantified Modal Logic === Ruth Barcan Marcus' earliest published work was the publication of the first axiomatic study of modal logic with quantifiers. These three ground-breaking articles were "A Functional Calculus of First Order Based on Strict Implication", Journal of Symbolic Logic (JSL, 1946), "The Deduction Theorem in a Functional Calculus of First Order Based on Strict Implication" (JSL, 1946), "The Identity of Individuals in a Strict Functional Calculus of Second Order", (JSL, 1947). The three articles are published under Marcus' maiden name: Ruth C. Barcan. The widely discussed Barcan formula is introduced as an axiom in QML. The papers of 1946 and 1947, were the first systems of quantified modal logic, which extended some propositional modal systems of Clarence Irving Lewis to first and second order; a major accomplishment in the development of 20th century logic. Lewis gives Marcus special recognition in his "Notes on the Logic of Intension", originally printed in Structure, Method, and Meaning: Essays in Honor of Henry M. Sheffer (New York, 1951). Here Lewis recognizes Barcan Marcus as the first logician to extend propositional logic as a higher order intensional logic.   === Direct Reference === Ruth Barcan Marcus proposed the view in the philosophy of language according to which proper names are what Marcus termed mere "tags". ("Modalities and Intensional Languages" (Synthese, 1961) and elsewhere). These "tags" are used to refer to an object, which is the bearer of the name. The meaning of the name is regarded as exhausted by this referential function. This view contrasts for example with late Bertrand Russell's description theory of proper names as well as John Searle's cluster description theory of names which prevailed at the time. This view of proper names (presented in 1962 with Quine as commentator) has been identified by Quentin Smith with the theory of reference given in Saul Kripke's Naming and Necessity. However, in a recent laudatio to Ruth Barcan Marcus, Professor Timothy Williamson says:  One of the ideas in them that resonates most with current philosophy of language is that of proper names as mere tags, without descriptive content. This is not Kripke's idea of names as rigid designators, designating the same object with respect to all relevant worlds, for ‘rigidified’ definite descriptions are rigid designators but still have descriptive content. Rather, it is the idea, later developed by David Kaplan and others, that proper names are directly referential, in the sense that they contribute only their bearer to the propositions expressed by sentences in which they occur.  The philosopher of language Stephen Neale has also argued against Professor Smith's claim in the Times Literary Supplement.   === Necessity of Identity === Marcus formally proved the necessity of identity in 1946 and informally argued for it in 1961 and thereafter thus rejecting the possibility of contingent identity. See Journal of Symbolic Logic, (1947) 12: pp 12–15   === Semantics of QML === Marcus prefers an interpretation where the domain of the interpretation comprises individual entities in the actual world. She also suggests that for some uses an alternative substitutional semantics is warranted (See below). She provides arguments against possibilia. See "Dispensing with Possibilia" (Proceedings of the American Philosophical Association, 1975–76); "Possibilia and Possible Worlds" (Grazer Philosophische Studien, 1985–86). T   === Moral Conflict === Marcus defines a consistent set of moral principles as one in which there is some "possible world " in which they are all obeyable. That they may conflict in the actual world is not a mark of inconsistency. As in the case of necessity of identity, there was a resistance to this interpretation of moral conflict. Her argument counts against a widely received view that systems of moral rules are inevitably inconsistent.   === Belief === It is proposed that believing is a relationship of an agent to a possible state of affairs under specified internal and external circumstances. Assenting to a quoted sentence (the disquotation account of belief) is only one behavioral marker of believing. Betting behavior is another. The wholly language centered account of belief (e.g. Davidson) is rejected. Where an agent would traditionally be described as believing an impossibility until its impossibility was disclosed, Marcus proposes that under those circumstances the agent should say that she only claimed to believe an impossibility. In much the same way, when a mathematician discovers that one of his conjectures is false, and since if it is mathematically false it is impossible, he would say he only claimed that the conjecture was true. Odd as this proposal is, it is analogous to the widely accepted principle about knowing: if we claim to know P, and P turns out false, we do not say we used to know it, we say we were mistaken in so claiming.   === Essentialism === Aristotelian Essentialism is concerned with properties which Marcus defines in the context of a modal framework. One proposal is that a property is essential if something has it, not everything has it, if something has it then it has it necessarily, and it is not wholly individuating e.g. a natural kind property. It is otherwise claimed by Quine and others that modal logic or semantics is committed to essentialist truths. Marcus argues informally that there are interpretations of some modal systems in which all essentialist claims are false. Terence Parsons later formally proved this result.   === Substitutional Quantification === An alternative to Tarskian (model theoretic) semantics is proposed for some uses where "the truth conditions for quantified formuli are given purely in terms of truth with no appeal to domains of interpretation". (Later called by others "truth value semantics".) She shows that the claim that such a semantics leads to contradictions is false. Such a semantics may be of interest for mathematics e.g. Hartry Field, or for fictional discourse. Objectual quantification is required for interpretation of identity and other metaphysical categories.   == Awards and recognitions == Guggenheim Fellow (1952) National Science Foundation Fellow (1963) Rockefeller Foundation Residency (Bellagio, 1973 and 1990) Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (1979) University of Edinburgh Fellow, Humanities Institute (1983) Wolfson College of Oxford University, Visiting Fellow (1985 and 1986) Clare Hall of Cambridge University, Visiting Fellow (1988) National Humanities Center, Mellon Fellow (1992–93) Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences(1977) Medal of the Collège de France (1986) Doctor of Humane Letters, honoris causa, University of Illinois at Chicago (1995) Wilbur Cross Medal, Yale University (2000) Lauener Prize in Analytic Philosophy, Lauener Foundation, 2007-08. Permanent Member of the Common Room, Clare Hall (1986-) Phi Beta Kappa (1941) Membre, Institut International de Philosophie, Presidente 1989-92, President Honoraire 1992- Quinn Prize, American Philosophical Association 2007, for service to the profession Dewey Lecture, APA, Dec 2009.   == Books (written or edited) == The Logical Enterprise, ed. with A. Anderson, R. Martin, Yale, 1995 Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, VII, eds. R. Barcan Marcus et al., North Holland, 1986 Modalities: Philosophical Essays, Oxford University Press, 1993. Paperback; 1995 (contains many of Marcus's important papers)   == See also == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == References and notes ==   == External links == Yale University philosophy department biography: Ruth Barcan Marcus Encyclopedia of Jewish Women: Ruth Barcan Marcus NY Times Ruth Barcan Marcus, Philosopher-Logician, Dies at 90 Ruth Barcan Marcus at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

S. Barry Cooper (9 October 1943 – 26 October 2015) was a British mathematician and computability theorist. He was a Professor of Pure Mathematics at the University of Leeds.   == Biography == Cooper grew up in Bognor Regis and attended Chichester High School for Boys, during which time he played scrum-half for the under-15s England rugby team. Cooper graduated from Jesus College, Oxford in 1966, and in 1970 received his PhD from University of Leicester under the supervision of Reuben Goodstein and C.E.M. Yates, with a thesis entitled Degrees of Unsolvability. In the 1970s, he was also a leading figure in the Chile Solidarity Campaign, welcoming Chilean refugees to Leeds. Cooper was appointed Lecturer in the School of Mathematics at the University of Leeds in 1969, where he remained for the rest of his career. He was promoted to Reader in Mathematical Logic in 1991 and to Professor of Pure Mathematics in 1996. In 2011, he was awarded an honorary doctorate at the University of Sofia "St. Kliment Ohridski". His book Computability Theory made the technical research area accessible to a new generation of students. He was a leading mover of the return to basic questions of the kind considered by Alan Turing, and of interdisciplinary developments related to computability. He was President of the Association Computability in Europe, and Chair of the Turing Centenary Advisory Committee (TCAC) which co-ordinated the Alan Turing Year. The book Alan Turing: His Work and Impact, edited by Cooper and Jan van Leeuwen, won the Association of American Publishers’ R. R. Hawkins Award. He was a keen long-distance runner and interested in jazz, founding Leeds Jazz and being involved in Termite Club. Cooper died on 26 October 2015 after a short illness.   == External links == Home page of S. Barry Cooper S. Barry Cooper's Mathematics Genealogy Page Computability in Europe Homepage The Alan Turing Centenary Homepage   == Some books and papers == S. B. Cooper, 2004. Computability Theory, Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN 1-58488-237-9 S. B. Cooper; J. van Leeuwen (eds.), 2013. Alan Turing - His Work and Impact, New York: Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-123-86980-7 S. B. Cooper, B. Löwe, A. Sorbi (eds.), 2008. New Computational Paradigms - Changing Conceptions of What is Computable, Springer. ISBN 978-1-58488-237-4 Cooper, S. B.; Harrington, L.; Lachlan, A. H.; Lempp, S.; Soare, R. I. (1991). "The d.r.e. degrees are not dense". Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 55 (2): 125–151. doi:10.1016/0168-0072(91)90005-7.  Cooper, S. B. (2006). "Definability as hypercomputational effect" (PDF). Applied Mathematics and Computation 178: 72–82. doi:10.1016/j.amc.2005.09.072.  Cooper, S. B. (2004). "The incomputable Alan Turing". British Computer Society, Electronic Workshops in Computing. Invited paper from 'Alan Mathison Turing 2004: A celebration of his life and achievements, Manchester University, 5 June 2004.  Cooper, S. B.; Odifreddi, P. (2003). "Incomputability in Nature". In S. B. Cooper and S. S. Goncharov. Computability and Models: Perspectives East and West (PDF). Plenum Publishers, New York, Boston, Dordrecht, London, Moscow. pp. 137–160.  Cooper, S. B. (1999). "Clockwork or Turing U/universe?". In S. B. Cooper and J. K. Truss. Models and Computability (PDF). London Mathematical Society Lecture Notes Series 259, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York, Melbourne. pp. 63–116.    == References ==

Saharon Shelah (Hebrew: שהרן שלח‎) is an Israeli mathematician. He is a professor of mathematics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and Rutgers University in New Jersey.   == BiographyEdit == Shelah was born in Jerusalem on July 3, 1945. He is the son of the Israeli poet and political activist Yonatan Ratosh. He received his PhD for his work on stable theories in 1969 from the Hebrew University. Shelah is married to Yael, and has three children. Shelah wanted to be a scientist while at primary school, but initially was attracted to physics and biology, not mathematics. Later he found mathematical beauty in studying geometry: He said, "But when I reached the ninth grade I began studying geometry and my eyes opened to that beauty—a system of demonstration and theorems based on a very small number of axioms which impressed me and captivated me." At the age of 15, he decided to become a mathematician, a choice cemented after reading Abraham Halevy Fraenkel's book "An Introduction to Mathematics". He received a B.Sc. from Tel Aviv University in 1964, served in the Israel Defense Forces Army between 1964 and 1967, and obtained a M.Sc. from Tel Aviv University in 1967. He then worked as a Teaching Assistant at the Institute of Mathematics of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem while completing a Ph.D. there under the supervision of Michael Oser Rabin, on a study of stable theories. Shelah was a Lecturer at Princeton University during 1969-70, and then worked as an Assistant Professor at the University of California, Los Angeles during 1970-71. He became a professor at Hebrew University in 1974, a position he continues to hold. He has been a Visiting Professor at the following Universities: the university of Wisconsin (1977–78), the University of California, Berkeley (1978 and 1982), the University of Michigan (1984–85), at Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia (1985), and Rutgers University, New Jersey (1985). He has been a Distinguished Visiting Professor at Rutgers University since 1986.   == Academic careerEdit == According to the list of Shelah's papers, he had published 1044 mathematical papers up to 2014 (including joint papers with over 220 co-authors). His main interests lie in mathematical logic, model theory in particular, and in axiomatic set theory. In model theory, he developed classification theory, which led him to a solution of Morley's problem. In set theory, he discovered the notion of proper forcing, an important tool in iterated forcing arguments. With PCF theory, he showed that in spite of the undecidability of the most basic questions of cardinal arithmetic (such as the continuum hypothesis), there are still highly nontrivial ZFC theorems about cardinal exponentiation. Shelah constructed a Kurosh monster, an uncountable group for which every proper subgroup is countable. He showed that Whitehead's problem is independent of ZFC. He gave the first primitive recursive upper bound to van der Waerden's numbers V(C,N). He extended Arrow's impossibility theorem on voting systems.   == AwardsEdit == The first recipient of the Erdős Prize, in 1977; The Karp Prize of the Association for Symbolic Logic in 1983 The Israel Prize, for mathematics, in 1998; The Bolyai Prize in 2000; The Wolf Prize in Mathematics in 2001. The EMET prize in 2011. The Leroy P. Steele Prize, for Seminal Contribution to Research, in 2013 Honorary member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, in 2013. Advanced Grant of the European Research Council (2013).   == Selected worksEdit == Proper forcing, Springer 1982 Proper and improper forcing (2nd edition of Proper forcing), Springer 1998 Around classification theory of models, Springer 1986 Classification theory and the number of non-isomorphic models, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, 1978, 2nd edition 1990, Elsevier Cardinal Arithmetic, Oxford University Press 1994   == See alsoEdit == List of Israel Prize recipients Sauer–Shelah lemma Shelah cardinal   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Archive of Shelah's mathematical papers, shelah.logic.at John T. Baldwin (July 7, 2006). "Abstract Elementary Classes: Some Answers, More Questions" (PDF). math.uic.ed.  A survey of recent work on AECs.

Saul Aaron Kripke (/sɔːl ˈkrɪpki/; born November 13, 1940) is an American philosopher and logician. He is a Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the City University of New York and emeritus professor at Princeton University. Since the 1960s Kripke has been a central figure in a number of fields related to mathematical logic, philosophy of language, philosophy of mathematics, metaphysics, epistemology, and set theory. Much of his work remains unpublished or exists only as tape-recordings and privately circulated manuscripts. Kripke was the recipient of the 2001 Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy. A recent academic poll ranked Kripke among the top ten most important philosophers of the past 200 years. Kripke has made influential and original contributions to logic, especially modal logic. His work has profoundly influenced analytic philosophy, with his principal contribution being a semantics for modal logic, involving possible worlds as described in a system now called Kripke semantics. Another of his most important contributions is his argument that necessity is a 'metaphysical' notion, which should be separated from the epistemic notion of a priori, and that there are necessary truths which are a posteriori truths, such as "Water is H2O." He has also contributed an original reading of Wittgenstein, referred to as "Kripkenstein." His most famous work is Naming and Necessity (1980).   == BiographyEdit == Saul Kripke is the oldest of three children born to Dorothy K. Kripke and Rabbi Myer S. Kripke. His father was the leader of Beth El Synagogue, the only Conservative congregation in Omaha, Nebraska, while his mother wrote educational Jewish books for children. Saul and his two sisters, Madeline and Netta, attended Dundee Grade School and Omaha Central High School. Kripke was labelled a prodigy, having taught himself Ancient Hebrew by the age of six, read the complete works of Shakespeare by nine, and mastered the works of Descartes and complex mathematical problems before finishing elementary school. He wrote his first completeness theorem in modal logic at the age of 17, and had it published a year later. After graduating from high school in 1958, Kripke attended Harvard University and graduated summa cum laude obtaining a bachelor's degree in mathematics. During his sophomore year at Harvard, Kripke taught a graduate-level logic course at nearby MIT. Upon graduation (1962) he received a Fulbright Fellowship, and in 1963 was appointed to the Society of Fellows. After teaching briefly at Harvard, he moved to Rockefeller University in New York City in 1967, and then received a full-time position at Princeton University in 1977. In 1988 he received the university's Behrman Award for distinguished achievement in the humanities. In 2002 Kripke began teaching at the CUNY Graduate Center in midtown Manhattan, and was appointed a distinguished professor of philosophy there in 2003. He was married to philosopher Margaret Gilbert. He has received honorary degrees from the University of Nebraska, Omaha (1977), Johns Hopkins University (1997), University of Haifa, Israel (1998), and the University of Pennsylvania (2005). He is a member of the American Philosophical Society, an elected Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. He won the Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy in 2001. He is the second cousin once removed of television writer, director, and producer Eric Kripke.   == Saul Kripke CenterEdit == The Saul Kripke Center at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York is dedicated to preserving and promoting Kripke's work. The Saul Kripke Center is directed by Gary Ostertag. The SKC hold events related to Kripke's work and is currently working to create a digital archive of Kripke's previously unpublished recordings of lectures, lecture notes, and correspondence dating back to the 1950s. In his favorable review of Kripke's Philosophical Troubles, Mark Crimmins, a philosopher at Stanford wrote "That four of the most admired and discussed essays in 1970s philosophy are here is enough to make this first volume of Saul Kripke's collected articles a must-have... The reader's delight will grow as hints are dropped that there is a great deal more to come in this series being prepared by Kripke and an ace team of philosopher-editors at the Saul Kripke Center at The Graduate Center of the City University of New York."   == WorkEdit ==  Kripke's contributions to philosophy include: Kripke semantics for modal and related logics, published in several essays beginning while he was still in his teens. His 1970 Princeton lectures Naming and Necessity (published in 1972 and 1980), that significantly restructured philosophy of language. His interpretation of Wittgenstein. His theory of truth. He has also contributed to set-theory (see admissible ordinal and Kripke-Platek set theory)   == Modal logicEdit == Two of Kripke's earlier works, A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic and Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic, the former written while he was still a teenager, were on the subject of modal logic. The most familiar logics in the modal family are constructed from a weak logic called K, named after Kripke for his contributions to modal logic. Kripke introduced the now-standard Kripke semantics (also known as relational semantics or frame semantics) for modal logics. Kripke semantics is a formal semantics for non-classical logic systems. It was first made for modal logics, and later adapted to intuitionistic logic and other non-classical systems. The discovery of Kripke semantics was a breakthrough in the making of non-classical logics, because the model theory of such logics was absent prior to Kripke. A Kripke frame or modal frame is a pair , where W is a non-empty set, and R is a binary relation on W. Elements of W are called nodes or worlds, and R is known as the accessibility relation. Depending on the properties of the accessibility relation (transitivity, reflexivity, etc.), the corresponding frame is described, by extension, as being transitive, reflexive, etc. A Kripke model is a triple , where  is a Kripke frame, and  is a relation between nodes of W and modal formulas, such that:  if and only if ,  if and only if  or ,  if and only if  implies . We read  as "w satisfies A", "A is satisfied in w", or "w forces A". The relation  is called the satisfaction relation, evaluation, or forcing relation. The satisfaction relation is uniquely determined by its value on propositional variables. A formula A is valid in: a model , if  for all w ∈ W, a frame , if it is valid in  for all possible choices of , a class C of frames or models, if it is valid in every member of C. We define Thm(C) to be the set of all formulas that are valid in C. Conversely, if X is a set of formulas, let Mod(X) be the class of all frames which validate every formula from X. A modal logic (i.e., a set of formulas) L is sound with respect to a class of frames C, if L ⊆ Thm(C). L is complete with respect to C if L ⊇ Thm(C). Semantics is useful for investigating a logic (i.e., a derivation system) only if the semantical entailment relation reflects its syntactical counterpart, the consequence relation (derivability). It is vital to know which modal logics are sound and complete with respect to a class of Kripke frames, and for them, to determine which class it is. For any class C of Kripke frames, Thm(C) is a normal modal logic (in particular, theorems of the minimal normal modal logic, K, are valid in every Kripke model). However, the converse does not hold generally. There are Kripke incomplete normal modal logics, which is unproblematic, because most of the modal systems studied are complete of classes of frames described by simple conditions. A normal modal logic L corresponds to a class of frames C, if C = Mod(L). In other words, C is the largest class of frames such that L is sound wrt C. It follows that L is Kripke complete if and only if it is complete of its corresponding class. Consider the schema T : . T is valid in any reflexive frame : if , then  since w R w. On the other hand, a frame which validates T has to be reflexive: fix w ∈ W, and define satisfaction of a propositional variable p as follows:  if and only if w R u. Then , thus  by T, which means w R w using the definition of . T corresponds to the class of reflexive Kripke frames. It is often much easier to characterize the corresponding class of L than to prove its completeness, thus correspondence serves as a guide to completeness proofs. Correspondence is also used to show incompleteness of modal logics: suppose L1 ⊆ L2 are normal modal logics that correspond to the same class of frames, but L1 does not prove all theorems of L2. Then L1 is Kripke incomplete. For example, the schema  generates an incomplete logic, as it corresponds to the same class of frames as GL (viz. transitive and converse well-founded frames), but does not prove the GL-tautology . For any normal modal logic L, a Kripke model (called the canonical model) can be constructed, which validates precisely the theorems of L, by an adaptation of the standard technique of using maximal consistent sets as models. Canonical Kripke models play a role similar to the Lindenbaum–Tarski algebra construction in algebraic semantics. A set of formulas is L-consistent if no contradiction can be derived from them using the axioms of L, and Modus Ponens. A maximal L-consistent set (an L-MCS for short) is an L-consistent set which has no proper L-consistent superset. The canonical model of L is a Kripke model , where W is the set of all L-MCS, and the relations R and  are as follows:  if and only if for every formula , if  then ,  if and only if . The canonical model is a model of L, as every L-MCS contains all theorems of L. By Zorn's lemma, each L-consistent set is contained in an L-MCS, in particular every formula unprovable in L has a counterexample in the canonical model. The main application of canonical models are completeness proofs. Properties of the canonical model of K immediately imply completeness of K with respect to the class of all Kripke frames. This argument does not work for arbitrary L, because there is no guarantee that the underlying frame of the canonical model satisfies the frame conditions of L. We say that a formula or a set X of formulas is canonical with respect to a property P of Kripke frames, if X is valid in every frame which satisfies P, for any normal modal logic L which contains X, the underlying frame of the canonical model of L satisfies P. A union of canonical sets of formulas is itself canonical. It follows from the preceding discussion that any logic axiomatized by a canonical set of formulas is Kripke complete, and compact. The axioms T, 4, D, B, 5, H, G (and thus any combination of them) are canonical. GL and Grz are not canonical, because they are not compact. The axiom M by itself is not canonical (Goldblatt, 1991), but the combined logic S4.1 (in fact, even K4.1) is canonical. In general, it is undecidable whether a given axiom is canonical. We know a nice sufficient condition: H. Sahlqvist identified a broad class of formulas (now called Sahlqvist formulas) such that: a Sahlqvist formula is canonical, the class of frames corresponding to a Sahlqvist formula is first-order definable, there is an algorithm which computes the corresponding frame condition to a given Sahlqvist formula. This is a powerful criterion: for example, all axioms listed above as canonical are (equivalent to) Sahlqvist formulas. A logic has the finite model property (FMP) if it is complete with respect to a class of finite frames. An application of this notion is the decidability question: it follows from Post's theorem that a recursively axiomatized modal logic L which has FMP is decidable, provided it is decidable whether a given finite frame is a model of L. In particular, every finitely axiomatizable logic with FMP is decidable. There are various methods for establishing FMP for a given logic. Refinements and extensions of the canonical model construction often work, using tools such as filtration or unravelling. As another possibility, completeness proofs based on cut-free sequent calculi usually produce finite models directly. Most of the modal systems used in practice (including all listed above) have FMP. In some cases, we can use FMP to prove Kripke completeness of a logic: every normal modal logic is complete wrt a class of modal algebras, and a finite modal algebra can be transformed into a Kripke frame. As an example, Robert Bull proved using this method that every normal extension of S4.3 has FMP, and is Kripke complete. Kripke semantics has a straightforward generalization to logics with more than one modality. A Kripke frame for a language with  as the set of its necessity operators consists of a non-empty set W equipped with binary relations Ri for each i ∈ I. The definition of a satisfaction relation is modified as follows:  if and only if  A simplified semantics, discovered by Tim Carlson, is often used for polymodal provability logics. A Carlson model is a structure  with a single accessibility relation R, and subsets Di ⊆ W for each modality. Satisfaction is defined as:  if and only if  Carlson models are easier to visualize and to work with than usual polymodal Kripke models; there are, however, Kripke complete polymodal logics which are Carlson incomplete. In "Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic", published in 1963, Kripke responded to a difficulty with classical quantification theory. The motivation for the world-relative approach was to represent the possibility that objects in one world may fail to exist in another. If standard quantifier rules are used, however, every term must refer to something that exists in all the possible worlds. This seems incompatible with our ordinary practice of using terms to refer to things that exist contingently. Kripke's response to this difficulty was to eliminate terms. He gave an example of a system that uses the world-relative interpretation and preserves the classical rules. However, the costs are severe. First, his language is artificially impoverished, and second, the rules for the propositional modal logic must be weakened. Kripke's possible worlds theory has been used by narratologists (beginning with Pavel and Dolezel) to understand "reader's manipulation of alternative plot developments, or the characters' planned or fantasized alternative action series." This application has become especially useful in the analysis of hyperfiction.   == Intuitionistic logicEdit == Kripke semantics for the intuitionistic logic follows the same principles as the semantics of modal logic, but uses a different definition of satisfaction. An intuitionistic Kripke model is a triple , where  is a partially ordered Kripke frame, and  satisfies the following conditions: if p is a propositional variable, , and , then  (persistency condition),  if and only if  and ,  if and only if  or ,  if and only if for all ,  implies , not . Intuitionistic logic is sound and complete with respect to its Kripke semantics, and it has the Finite Model Property. Intuitionistic first-order logic Let L be a first-order language. A Kripke model of L is a triple , where  is an intuitionistic Kripke frame, Mw is a (classical) L-structure for each node w ∈ W, and the following compatibility conditions hold whenever u ≤ v: the domain of Mu is included in the domain of Mv, realizations of function symbols in Mu and Mv agree on elements of Mu, for each n-ary predicate P and elements a1,...,an ∈ Mu: if P(a1,...,an) holds in Mu, then it holds in Mv. Given an evaluation e of variables by elements of Mw, we define the satisfaction relation :  if and only if  holds in Mw,  if and only if  and ,  if and only if  or ,  if and only if for all ,  implies , not ,  if and only if there exists an  such that ,  if and only if for every  and every , . Here e(x→a) is the evaluation which gives x the value a, and otherwise agrees with e.   == Naming and NecessityEdit ==  The three lectures that form Naming and Necessity constitute an attack on descriptivist theory of names. Kripke attributes variants of descriptivist theories to Frege, Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein and John Searle, among others. According to descriptivist theories, proper names either are synonymous with descriptions, or have their reference determined by virtue of the name's being associated with a description or cluster of descriptions that an object uniquely satisfies. Kripke rejects both these kinds of descriptivism. He gives several examples purporting to render descriptivism implausible as a theory of how names get their references determined (e.g., surely Aristotle could have died at age two and so not satisfied any of the descriptions we associate with his name, and yet it would seem wrong to deny that he was Aristotle). As an alternative, Kripke outlined a causal theory of reference, according to which a name refers to an object by virtue of a causal connection with the object as mediated through communities of speakers. He points out that proper names, in contrast to most descriptions, are rigid designators. That is, a proper name refers to the named object in every possible world in which the object exists, while most descriptions designate different objects in different possible worlds. For example, 'Nixon' refers to the same person in every possible world in which Nixon exists, while 'the person who won the United States presidential election of 1968' could refer to Nixon, Humphrey, or others in different possible worlds. Kripke also raised the prospect of a posteriori necessities — facts that are necessarily true, though they can be known only through empirical investigation. Examples include "Hesperus is Phosphorus", "Cicero is Tully", "Water is H2O" and other identity claims where two names refer to the same object. Finally, Kripke gave an argument against identity materialism in the philosophy of mind, the view that every mental particular is identical with some physical particular. Kripke argued that the only way to defend this identity is as an a posteriori necessary identity, but that such an identity — e.g., pain is C-fibers firing — could not be necessary, given the (clearly conceivable) possibility that pain be separate from the firing of C-fibers, or the firing of C-fibers be separate from pain (See: Philosophical zombie). Similar arguments have been proposed by David Chalmers. In any event, the psychophysical identity theorist, according to Kripke, incurs a dialectical obligation to explain the apparent logical possibility of these circumstances, for in the opinion of such theorists they should be impossible. Kripke delivered the John Locke lectures in philosophy at Oxford in 1973. Titled Reference and Existence, they are in many respects a continuation of Naming and Necessity, and deal with the subjects of fictional names and perceptual error. They have recently been published by Oxford University Press. In a 1995 paper, philosopher Quentin Smith argued that key concepts in Kripke's new theory of reference had originated from the work of Ruth Barcan Marcus more than a decade earlier. Smith identified six significant ideas to the New Theory that he claimed Marcus had developed: (1) The idea that proper names are direct references, which don't consist of contained definitions. (2) While one can single out a single thing by a description, this description is not equivalent with a proper name of this thing. (3) The modal argument that proper names are directly referential, and not disguised descriptions. (4) A formal modal logic proof of the necessity of identity. (5) The concept of a rigid designator, though the actual name of the concept was coined by Kripke.(6) The idea of a posteriori identity. Smith proceeded to argue that Kripke failed to understand Marcus' theory at the time, yet later adopted many of its key conceptual themes in his New Theory of Reference. Other scholars have subsequently offered detailed responses arguing that no plagiarism occurred.   == "A Puzzle about Belief"Edit == Kripke's main propositions in Naming and Necessity concerning proper names are that the meaning of a name simply is the object it refers to and that a name's referent is determined by a causal link between some sort of "baptism" and the utterance of the name. Nevertheless, he acknowledges the possibility that propositions containing names may have some additional semantic properties, properties that could explain why two names referring to the same person may give different truth values in propositions about beliefs. For example, Lois Lane believes that Superman can fly, although she does not believe that Clark Kent can fly. This can be accounted for if the names "Superman" and "Clark Kent", though referring to the same person, have distinct semantic properties. In the article "A Puzzle about Belief" Kripke seems to oppose even this possibility. His argument can be reconstructed in the following way: The idea that two names referring to the same object may have different semantic properties is supposed to explain that coreferring names behave differently in propositions about beliefs (as in Lois Lane's case). But the same phenomenon occurs even with coreferring names that obviously have the same semantic properties: Kripke invites us to imagine a French, monolingual boy, Pierre, who believes the following: "Londres est joli." ("London is beautiful.") Pierre moves to London without realizing that London = Londres. He then learns English the same way a child would learn the language, that is, not by translating words from French to English. Pierre learns the name "London" from the unattractive part of the city in which he lives, so he comes to believe that London is not beautiful. If Kripke's account is correct, Pierre now believes both that "Londres" is "joli" and that "London" is not beautiful. This cannot be explained by coreferring names having different semantic properties. According to Kripke, this demonstrates that attributing additional semantic properties to names does not explain what it is intended to.   == WittgensteinEdit == First published in 1982, Kripke's Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language contends that the central argument of Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations centers on a devastating rule-following paradox that undermines the possibility of our ever following rules in our use of language. Kripke writes that this paradox is "the most radical and original skeptical problem that philosophy has seen to date." (p. 60) Kripke argues that Wittgenstein does not reject the argument that leads to the rule-following paradox, but accepts it and offers a 'skeptical solution' to ameliorate the paradox's destructive effects. Whilst most commentators accept that the Philosophical Investigations contains the rule-following paradox as Kripke presents it, few have concurred with Kripke when he attributes a skeptical solution to Wittgenstein. It should be noted that Kripke himself expresses doubts in Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language as to whether Wittgenstein would endorse his interpretation of the Philosophical Investigations. He says that the work should not be read as an attempt to give an accurate statement of Wittgenstein's views, but rather as an account of Wittgenstein's argument "as it struck Kripke, as it presented a problem for him" (p. 5). The portmanteau "Kripkenstein" has been coined as a jesting nickname for Kripke's reading of the Philosophical Investigations. The real significance of "Kripkenstein" was to put forward a clear statement of a new kind of skepticism, dubbed "meaning skepticism", which is the idea that for an isolated individual there is no fact in virtue of which he/she means one thing rather than another by the use of a word. Kripke's "skeptical solution" to meaning skepticism is to ground meaning in the behavior of a community. Kripke's book generated a large secondary literature, divided between those who find his skeptical problem interesting and perceptive, and others, such as Gordon Baker and Peter Hacker, who argue that his meaning skepticism is a pseudo-problem that stems from a confused, selective reading of Wittgenstein. Kripke's position has, however recently been defended against these and other attacks by the Cambridge philosopher Martin Kusch (2006), and Wittgenstein scholar David G. Stern considers the book to be "the most influential and widely discussed" work on Wittgenstein since the 1980s.   == TruthEdit == In his 1975 article "Outline of a Theory of Truth", Kripke showed that a language can consistently contain its own truth predicate, which was deemed impossible by Alfred Tarski, a pioneer in the area of formal theories of truth. The approach involves letting truth be a partially defined property over the set of grammatically well-formed sentences in the language. Kripke showed how to do this recursively by starting from the set of expressions in a language which do not contain the truth predicate, and defining a truth predicate over just that segment: this action adds new sentences to the language, and truth is in turn defined for all of them. Unlike Tarski's approach, however, Kripke's lets "truth" be the union of all of these definition-stages; after a denumerable infinity of steps the language reaches a "fixed point" such that using Kripke's method to expand the truth-predicate does not change the language any further. Such a fixed point can then be taken as the basic form of a natural language containing its own truth predicate. But this predicate is undefined for any sentences that do not, so to speak, "bottom out" in simpler sentences not containing a truth predicate. That is, " 'Snow is white' is true" is well-defined, as is " ' "Snow is white" is true' is true," and so forth, but neither "This sentence is true" nor "This sentence is not true" receive truth-conditions; they are, in Kripke's terms, "ungrounded." Nevertheless, it has been shown by Gödel that self-reference cannot be avoided naively, since propositions about seemingly unrelated objects (such as integers) can have an informal self-referential meaning, and this idea - manifested by the diagonal lemma - is the basis for Tarski's theorem that truth cannot be consistently defined. It has thus been claimed  that Kripke's suggestion does lead to contradiction: while its truth predicate is only partial, it does give truth value (true/false) to propositions such as the one built in Tarski's proof, and is therefore inconsistent. While there is still a debate on whether Tarski's proof can be implemented to every variation of such a partial truth system, none have been shown to be consistent by acceptable proving methods used in mathematical logic. Kripke's proposal is also problematic in the sense that while the language contains a "truth" predicate of itself (at least a partial one), some of its sentences - such as the liar sentence ("this sentence is false") - have an undefined truth value, but the language does not contain its own "undefined" predicate. In fact, it cannot, as this will create a new version of the liar paradox , called the strengthened liar paradox ("this sentence is false or undefined"). Thus while the liar sentence is undefined in the language, the language cannot express that it is undefined.   == Religious viewsEdit == Kripke is an observant Jew. Discussing how his religious views influenced his philosophical views (in an interview with Andreas Saugstad) he stated: "I don't have the prejudices many have today, I don't believe in a naturalist world view. I don't base my thinking on prejudices or a worldview and do not believe in materialism."   == Awards and recognitionsEdit == Fulbright Scholar (1962–1963) Society of Fellows, Harvard University (1963–1966). Doctor of Humane Letters, honorary degree, University of Nebraska, 1977. Fellow, American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1978–). Corresponding Fellow, British Academy (1985–). Howard Behrman Award, Princeton University, 1988. Fellow, Academia Scientiarum et Artium Europaea (1993–). Doctor of Humane Letters, honorary degree, Johns Hopkins University, 1997. Doctor of Humane Letters, honorary degree, University of Haifa, Israel, 1998. Fellow, Norwegian Academy of Sciences (2000–). Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy, Swedish Academy of Sciences, 2001. Doctor of Humane Letters, honorary degree, University of Pennsylvania, 2005. Fellow, American Philosophical Society (2005–).   == WorksEdit ==   === BooksEdit === Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-59845-8 and reprints 1972. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language: an Elementary Exposition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1982. ISBN 0-674-95401-7. Sets out his interpretation of Wittgenstein aka Kripkenstein. Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011. ISBN 9780199730155 Reference and Existence. The John Locke Lectures. New York: Oxford University Press, 2013. ISBN 9780199928385   === Abstracts and articlesEdit === 1959. "A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic", Journal of Symbolic Logic 24(1):1–14. 1959. "Distinguished Constituents" (abstract), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 24(4):323. 1959. "Semantical Analysis of Modal Logic" (abstract), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 24(4):323-324. 1959. "The Problem of Entailment" (abstract), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 24(4):324. 1962. "'Flexible' Predicates of Formal Number Theory," Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 13(4):647-650. 1962. "The Undecidability of Monadic Modal Quantification Theory", Zeitschrift für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 8:113–116 1963. "Semantical Considerations on Modal Logic", Acta Philosophica Fennica 16:83–94 1963. "Semantical Analysis of Modal Logic I: Normal Modal Propositional Calculi", Zeitschrift für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagen der Mathematik 9:67–96 1964. "Transfinite Recursions on Admissible Ordinals, I" (abstract), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 29, No. 3, p. 162. 1964. "Transfinite Recursions on Admissible Ordinals, II" (abstract), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 29, No. 3, p. 162. 1964. "Admissible Ordinals and the Analytic Hierarchy" (abstract), The Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 29, No. 3, p. 162. 1965. "Semantical Analysis of Intuitionistic Logic I", In Formal Systems and Recursive Functions, edited by M. Dummett and J. N. Crossley. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co. 1965. "Semantical Analysis of Modal Logic II: Non-Normal Modal Propositional Calculi", In The Theory of Models, edited by J. W. Addison, L. Henkin and A. Tarski. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co. 1967. Research Announcement: "Deduction-preserving 'Recursive Isomorphisms' between Theories" (with Marian Boykan Pour-El), Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 73:145-148. 1967. "An Extension of a Theorem of Gaifman-Hales-Solovay," Fundamenta Mathematicae 61: pp. 29–32. 1967. "Transfinite Recursion, Constructible Sets, and Analogues of Cardinals," Summaries of Talks Prepared in Connection with the Summer Institute on Axiomatic Set Theory, American Mathematical Society, U.C.L.A., pp. IV-0-1 - IV-0-12. 1967. "On the Application of Boolean-Valued Models to Solutions of Problems in Boolean Algebra," in Summaries of Talks Prepared in Connection with the Summer Institute on Axiomatic Set Theory, American Mathematical Society, U.C.L.A. (1967), pp. IV-T-1 through IV-T-7. 1967. "Deduction-preserving 'Recursive Isomorphisms' between Theories" (with Marian Boykan Pour-El), Fundamenta Mathematicae 61: pp. 141–163. 1971. "Identity and Necessity", In Identity and Individuation, edited by M. K. Munitz. New York: New York University Press. Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 1972 (1980). "Naming and Necessity", In Semantics of Natural Language, edited by D. Davidson and G. Harman. Dordrecht; Boston: Reidel. Sets out the causal theory of reference. 1975. "Outline of a Theory of Truth", Journal of Philosophy 72:690–716. Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. Sets his theory of truth (against Alfred Tarski), where an object language can contain its own truth predicate. 1976. "Is There a Problem about Substitutional Quantification?", In Truth and Meaning: Essays in Semantics, edited by Gareth Evans and John McDowell. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1976. "A Theory of Truth I. Preliminary Report," abstract, Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 41, No. 2, pp. 556. 1976. "A Theory of Truth II. Preliminary Report," abstract, Journal of Symbolic Logic, Vol. 41, No. 2, pp. 556–557. 1977. "Speaker's Reference and Semantic Reference", Midwest Studies in Philosophy 2:255–276.Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 1979. "A Puzzle about Belief", In Meaning and Use, edited by A. Margalit. Dordrecht and Boston: Reidel.Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 1982. "Nonstandard Models of Peano Arithmetic" (with S. Kochen), in Logic and Algorithmic: International Symposium Held in Honor of Ernst Specker, H. Läuchli (ed.), University of Geneva: 277-295. 1986. "A Problem in the Theory of Reference: the Linguistic Division of Labor and the Social Character of Naming," Philosophy and Culture (Proceedings of the XVIIth World Congress of Philosophy), Montreal, Editions Montmorency: 241-247. 1992. "Summary: Individual Concepts: Their Logic, Philosophy, and Some of Their Uses." Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 66: 70-73 2005. "Russell's Notion of Scope", Mind 114:1005–1037. Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2008. "Frege's Theory of Sense and Reference: Some Exegetical Notes," Theoria 74:181-218. Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2009. "Presupposition and Anaphora: Remarks on the formulation of the projection problem," Linguistic Inquiry 40(3):367-386.Reprinted in Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2009. "The Collapse of the Hilbert Program," (Abstract) Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 15(2):229-231. 2011. "The First Person," Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. The videos "The First Person" and "Questions and Answers" in which the paper is based are available here. 2011. "Two Paradoxes of Knowledge," Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2011. "Nozick on Knowledge," Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2011. "A Puzzle about Time and Thought," Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2011. "Vacuous Names and Fictional Entities," Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. 2011. "Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy of Language," Philosophical Troubles. Collected Papers Vol. I, Oxford University Press. Podcast of the talk available here. 2013. "The Church-Turing 'Thesis' as a Special Corollary of Gödel's Completeness Theorem," in Computability: Turing, Gödel, Church, and Beyond, Copeland, B. J., Posy, C., and Shagrir, O. (eds), Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press.   === Unpublished manuscripts and lecturesEdit === 1963. "History and Idealism: the Theory of R. G. Collingwood". 1975. "Three Lectures on Truth". Princeton University. Discussed here. 197-. "On The Completeness and Decidability of Intuitionistic Propositional Logic". 1978. "Time and Identity". Seminar given at Princeton University, 1978. Several versions of this material have circulated. Some of its ideas are discussed by Ted Sider in his book Four-Dimensionalism: An Ontology of Persistence and Time 19- "Non-Standard Models and Godel's Theorem: A Model-Theoretic Proof of Godel's Theorem". Summary by Hilary Putnam. 1984. "Lessons on Functionalism and Automata". Delivered at the International Wittgenstein Symposium, 1984. Transcribed by Roderick Chisholm. 198-. "A Proof of Gamma." 198-. "A Note on Zabludowski's Critique of Goodman's Theory of Projection". 1986. "Rigid Designation and the Contingent A Priori: The Meter Stick Revisited" (Notre Dame, 1986). 1988/89. "Seminars on Truth". Three-semester seminar at Princeton in 1988-89, only the first two semesters have been transcribed by Jim Cain. See here. 19- "Semantical Analysis of Intuitionistic Logic II. Undecidability of the Monadic Fragment" (Undated manuscript). 19- "Semantical Analysis of Intuitionistic Logic III" (Undated manuscript). 1989. "No Fool's Red? Some Considerations on the Primary/Secondary Quality Distinction"(includes comments by David Velleman). University of Michigan, 1989. 1992. Whitehead Lectures: "Logicism, Wittgenstein, and De Re Beliefs about Natural Numbers". Delivered at Harvard University, 1992. 1992. "Individual Concepts: Their Logic, Philosophy, and Some of Their Uses". Transcribed by Stephen Webb. 1996."The Ordered Pair: A Philosophical Paradigm Revisited". 1996. "Elementary Recursion Theory and its Applications to Formal Systems." Transcribed by Mario Gomez Torrente and John Barker. Index available here. 1999. "The Road to Gödel". (Read at Haifa University, Israel, 1999. Several transcripts exist.) 2006. "From Church's Thesis to the First Order Algorithm Theorem," Tel Aviv University, June 13, 2006. Video available here and abstract available here. 2007. "Roundtable on Externalism" (Hilary Putnam, Tyler Burge, Saul Kripke, and Michael Devitt). University College Dublin, Ireland. Podcast available here. 2007. "The Collapse of the Hilbert Program". Indiana University, Presidential Lecture. Video available here. 2008. "Mathematical Incompleteness Results in Peano Arithmetic, a Revisionist View of the Early History".   === Interviews and articlesEdit === "New Frontiers in American Philosophy" by Taylor Branch, New York Times Magazine, August 14, 1977. "Saul Kripke, Genius Logician." Interview by Andreas Saugstad, February 25, 2001. "Celebrating CUNY's Genius Philosopher" by Gary Shapiro, The New York Sun, January 27, 2006. "Philosopher, 65, Lectures Not About 'What Am I?' but 'What Is I?'" by Charles McGrath, The New York Times, January 28, 2006.   == See alsoEdit ==  Disquotational principle American philosophy List of American philosophers Barry Kripke (a character on The Big Bang Theory who is believed to be named after Saul)   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Taylor Branch (1977), "New Frontiers in American Philosophy: Saul Kripke". New York Times Magazine. Nathan Salmon (1981), Reference and Essence. ISBN 1-59102-215-0 ISBN 978-1591022152. Consuelo Preti (2002), On Kripke. Wadsworth. ISBN 0-534-58366-0. Scott Soames (2002), Beyond Rigidity: The Unfinished Semantic Agenda of Naming and Necessity. ISBN 0-19-514529-1. Christopher Hughes (2004), Kripke : Names, Necessity, and Identity. ISBN 0-19-824107-0. G.W. Fitch (2005), Saul Kripke. ISBN 0-7735-2885-7. Martin Kusch (2006), A Sceptical Guide to Meaning and Rules. Defending Kripke's Wittgenstein. Acumben: Publishing Limited. Arif Ahmed (2007), Saul Kripke. New York, NY; London: Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-9262-2. Christopher Norris (2007), Fiction, Philosophy and Literary Theory: Will the Real Saul Kripke Please Stand Up? London: Continuum   == External linksEdit == CUNY Graduate Center Philosophy Department faculty page The Saul Kripke Center, at the CUNY Graduate Center Saul Kripke's archive on the CUNY Philosophy Commons Second Annual Saul Kripke Lecture by John Burgess on the Necessity of Origin at the CUNY Graduate Center, November 13th, 2012 Saul Kripke at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Saul Kripke, Genius Logician A short, non-technical interview by Andreas Saugstad, February 25, 2001. The conference in honor of Kripke's sixty-fifth birthday with a video of his speech "The First Person", January 25–26, 2006 Video of his talk "From Church's Thesis to the First Order Algorithm Theorem," June 13, 2006. Podcast of his talk "Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy of Language," May 21, 2008. London Review of Books article by Jerry Fodor discussing Kripke's work Celebrating CUNY's Genius Philosopher, by Gary Shapiro, January 27, 2006, in The New York Sun. information from 'Wisdom Supreme' website A New York Times article about his 65th birthday Roundtable on Kripke's critique of mind-body identity with Scott Soames as the main presenter May 26, 2010.



Sedulius Scotus or Scottus (fl. 840-860) was an Irish teacher, Latin grammarian and scriptural commentator, who lived in the 9th century. Sedulius is sometimes called Sedulius the Younger, to distinguish him from Coelius Sedulius (a 5th-century poet). The usual Irish form of the name is Siadhal, but he appears to have been called Suadbar.   == Life == Sedulius Scotus was, during the reign of the Emperor Lothair (840-855), one of a colony of Irish teachers at Liège. It appears from the manuscript records of the 9th century that there was a teacher at St. Lambert, Liège, who was known as Sedulius Scotus, and was a scribe and a poet. He was a student of Greek, and, according to Bernard de Montfaucon, it was he who copied the Greek Psalter (now no. 8047 in the "Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal", Paris). His poems, to the number of ninety, are published by Traube in the Poetae Aevi Carolini, which is a portion of the Monumenta Germaniae Historica. It is quite probable that, towards the end of his days, he went to Milan, following the example of his countryman, Dungal, who established a school at Pavia. When and where he died is unknown.   == Works == Sedulius's most important works are his treatise De Rectoribus Christianis, a commentary on Porphyry's Isagoge, or introduction to the logic of Aristotle, and a scriptural commentary Collectanea in omnes beati Pauli Epistolas. The first of these is a noteworthy contribution to Christian ethics. It is the first, apparently, of a long line of treatises written during the Middle Ages for the instruction of Christian princes and rulers, a dissertation on the duties peculiar to that state of life, a Mirror for Princes, as such works came to be called at a much later period. Sedulius's work shows, among other traits, a deep moral feeling, a realization of the fact that the mission of the state is neither purely economic on the one hand nor exclusively ecclesiastical, on the other. The question of the relations between Church and State had, indeed, been raised, and Sedulius affirms the rights of the Church, to defend them. He is not on the side of those who, seeing in Charlemagne the ideal of a pontiff and ruler in one person, were in favor of the idea that the prince should in fact be supreme in matters religious. On the contrary, he is in favor of a division of temporal and spiritual powers and requires of the prince a careful observance of the Church's rights and privileges. The description of the qualifications of the Queen is not only Christian in feeling and tone, but also humanistic, in the best sense of the word. The commentary on the Isagoge was known in Western Europe in the Latin version only. Not the least interesting of the writings of Sedulius are his letters, some of which are published in the "Neues Archiv", II, 188, and IV, 315. In them are narrated the vicissitudes of the Irish exiles on the Continent, and an insight is given into the attitude towards those exiles by the authorities, civil and ecclesiastical, as well as by the people.   == "The Scholars of Clonard" == The poem, "The Scholars of Clonard", is attributed to Sedulius: Look on the marble columns surpassing the stars, which the sand of the saint-bearing land supports here happy, famous Ailerán, Vinnau, Fergus, shining lights made by gift-carrying God. O He sent a great present of Scotia [i.e.Ireland], rich relics which Pictonia [i.e. Poitiers] wishes to be its own, whence comes Titan and where night established the stars and where midday is hot with blazing hours [i.e. the east and the west and the south]. (The Celtic Latin Tradition of Biblical Style, p. 129, edited and translated by David Howlett, Dublin, 1995)   == See also == Aaron Scotus (died 1052) Blessed Marianus Scotus (died c. 1088) David Scotus (died 1139), chronicler Joseph Scottus (died near 800), Irish deacon, scholar, diplomat, poet, and ecclesiastic Johannes Scotus Eriugena (c. 815–877), Irish theologian Marianus Scotus (c. 1028–1082), Irish monk Marianus Scotus (died c. 1088), Irish abbot of St Peter's at Ratisbon (Regensburg)   == References ==  Hellmann, Sedulius Scotus (Munich 1906); Cath. Univ. Bulletin (April, 1898, and July, 1907) Montague, John, ed. The Faber Book of Irish Verse (1974); Nune Viridant Segetes and Apologia Pro Vita Sua, p. 65.   == External links == Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Latina with analytical indexes (Latin)  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Sedulius Scotus". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company.

Sergei Ivanovich Adian, also Adyan (Armenian: Սերգեյ Իվանովիչ Ադյան; Russian: Серге́й Ива́нович Адя́н, born 1 January 1931), is a Soviet and Russian mathematician. He is a professor at the Moscow State University and is known for his work in group theory, especially on the Burnside problem.   == Biography == Adian was born near Elizavetpol. He grew up there in an Armenian family. He studied at Yerevan and Moscow pedagogical institutes. His advisor was Pyotr Novikov. He has been working at Moscow State University since 1965. Alexander Razborov was one of his students.   == Mathematical career == In his first work as a student in 1950, Adian proved that the graph of a function f(x) of a real variable satisfying the functional equation f(x + y) = f(x) + f(y) and having discontinuities is dense in the plane. (Clearly, all continuous solutions of the equation are linear functions.) This result was not published at the time. It is curious that about 25 years later the American mathematician Edwin Hewitt from Seattle gave preprints of some of his papers to Adian during a visit to MSU, one of which was devoted to exactly the same result, which was published by Hewitt much later. By the beginning of 1955 Adian had managed to prove the undecidability of practically all non-trivial invariant group properties, including the undecidability of being isomorphic to a fixed group G, for any group G. These results made up his Ph.D. thesis and his first published work. This is one of the most remarkable, beautiful, and general results in algorithmic group theory and is now known as the Adian–Rabin theorem. What distinguishes the first published work by Adian, is its completeness. In spite of numerous attempts, nobody has added anything fundamentally new to the results during the past 50 years. Adian’s result was immediately used by A. A. Markov in his proof of the algorithmic unsolvability of the classical problem of deciding when topological manifolds are homeomorphic.   === Burnside problem === About the Burnside problem:  Very much like Fermat’s Last Theorem in number theory, Burnside’s problem has acted as a catalyst for research in group theory. The fascination exerted by a problem with an extremely simple formulation which then turns out to be extremely difficult has something irresistible about it to the mind of the mathematician.  Before the work of Novikov and Adian an affirmative answer to the problem was known only for n 2 {2, 3, 4, 6} and the matrix groups. However, this did not hinder the belief in an affirmative answer for any period n. The only question was to find the right methods for proving it. As later developments showed, this belief was too naive. This just demonstrates that before their work nobody even came close to imagining the nature of the free Burnside group, or the extent to which subtle structures inevitably arose in any serious attempt to investigate it. In fact, there were no methods for proving inequalities in groups given by identities of the form X^n = 1. An approach to solving the problem in the negative was first outlined by P. S. Novikov in his note, which appeared in 1959. However, the concrete realization of his ideas encountered serious difficulties, and in 1960, at the insistence of Novikov and his wife Lyudmila Keldysh, Adian settled down to work on the Burnside problem. Completing the project took intensive efforts from both collaborators in the course of eight years, and in 1968 their famous paper appeared, containing a negative solution of the problem for all odd periods n > 4381, and hence for all multiples of those odd integers as well. The solution of the Burnside problem was certainly one of the most outstanding and deep mathematical results of the past century. At the same time, this result is one of the hardest theorems: just the inductive step of a complicated induction used in the proof took up a whole issue of volume 32 of Izvestiya, even lengthened by 30 pages. In many respects the work was literally carried to its conclusion by the exceptional persistence of Adian. In that regard it is worth recalling the words of Novikov, who said that he had never met a mathematician more ‘penetrating’ than Adian. In contrast to the Adian–Rabin theorem, the paper of Adian and Novikov in no way ‘closed’ the Burnside problem. Moreover, over a long period of more than ten years Adian continued to improve and simplify the method they had created and also to adapt the method for solving some other fundamental problems in group theory. By the beginning of the 1980s, when other contributors appeared who mastered the Novikov–Adian method, the theory already represented a powerful method for constructing and investigating new groups (both periodic and non-periodic) with interesting properties prescribed.   == External links == (Russian) On 75th birthday – an article by L. D. Beklemishev, I. G. Lysenok, S. P. Novikov, M. R. Pentus, A. A. Razborov, A. L. Semenov and V. A. Uspensky. Dedicated to Adian Sergei Ivanovich in 2006 Moscow Symposium on Logic, Algebra and Computation. Sergei Adian at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Siegfried Johannes Gottwald (30 March 1943 – 20 September 2015) was a German mathematician, logician and historian of science.   == Life and work == Gottwald was born in Limbach, Saxony in 1943. From 1961 to 1966, he studied mathematics at the University of Leipzig, where he was awarded his doctor title in 1969 and his habilitation in 1977. He was tenured professor of non-classical and mathematical logic at University of Leipzig where he taught from 1972 to his retirement in 2008. His main research areas are fuzzy sets and fuzzy methodologies, many-valued logic and history of mathematics. He published several books on many-valued logic, fuzzy sets and their applications, co-authored a textbook on calculus and a reader in the history of logic. He also contributed to the German biographical dictionary of mathematicians, Lexikon berühmter Mathematiker. Professor Gottwald was Vice-Dean of the Faculty of Social Sciences and Philosophy at University of Leipzig for several years. He was married with three children.   == Published books == H. Bock, S. Gottwald, R.-P. Mühlig: Zum Sprachgebrauch in der Mathematik. Geest & Portig: Leipzig 1972 and Bagel: Düsseldorf / Vieweg: Braunschweig 1973. S. Gottwald, P. Günther, K. Beyer, V. Wünsch: Grundkurs Analysis. Parts 1–4, Math.-Naturwiss. Bibl., Vols. 53–56, Teubner: Leipzig 1972–74. K. Berka, S.Gottwald, L. Kreiser, W. Stelzner: Logik-Texte., Akademie-Verlag: Berlin and Wissensch. Buchgesellschaft: Darmstadt 1983. S. Gottwald: Mehrwertige Logik. Eine Einführung in Theorie und Anwendungen. Akademie-Verlag: Berlin 1989. S. Gottwald, H. Bandemer: Einführung in Fuzzy-Methoden. Theorie und Anwendungen unscharfer Mengen. Akademie-Verlag: Berlin 1989 (WTB Mathematik / Physik, Bd. 305). [also at Harry Deutsch: Thun – Frankfurt/Main 1990 (Deutsch Taschenbücher, Bd. 73)]. S. Gottwald: Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic. Foundations of Application – from a Mathematical Point of View. Vieweg: Braunschweig/Wiesbaden and Teknea: Toulouse, 1993. S. Gottwald, H. Bandemer: Fuzzy Sets, Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Methods with Applications. John Wiley & Sons: Chichester, 1995. S. Gottwald: A Treatise on Many-Valued Logics. Studies in Logic and Computation, vol. 9, Research Studies Press: Baldock, Hertfordshire, England, 2001.   == References ==   == External links == Biography

Simplicius (/sɪmˈplɪʃiəs/; Greek: Σιμπλίκιος; c. 490 – c. 560) of Cilicia, was a disciple of Ammonius Hermiae and Damascius, and was one of the last of the Neoplatonists. He was among the pagan philosophers persecuted by Justinian in the early 6th century, and was forced for a time to seek refuge in the Persian court, before being allowed back into the empire. He wrote extensively on the works of Aristotle. Although his writings are all commentaries on Aristotle and other authors, rather than original compositions, his intelligent and prodigious learning makes him the last great philosopher of pagan antiquity. His works have preserved much information about earlier philosophers which would have otherwise been lost.   == LifeEdit == Simplicius was a disciple of Ammonius Hermiae, and Damascius, and was consequently one of the last members of the Neoplatonist school. The school had its headquarters in Athens. It became the centre of the last efforts to maintain Hellenistic religion against the encroachments of Christianity. Imperial edicts enacted in the 5th century against paganism gave legal protection to pagans against personal maltreatment. In the year 528 the emperor Justinian ordered that pagans should be removed from government posts. Some were robbed of their property, some put to death. The order specified that if they did not within three months convert to Christianity, they were to be banished from the Empire. In addition, it was forbidden any longer to teach philosophy and jurisprudence in Athens. Probably also the property of the Platonist school, which in the time of Proclus was valued at more than 1000 gold pieces, was confiscated; at least, Justinian deprived the physicians and teachers of the liberal arts of the provision-money which had been assigned to them by previous emperors, and confiscated funds which the citizens had provided for spectacles and other civic purposes. Seven philosophers, among whom were Simplicius, Eulamius, Priscian, and others, with Damascius, the last president of the Platonist school in Athens at their head, resolved to seek protection at the court of the famous Persian king Chosroes, who had succeeded to the throne in 531. But they were disappointed in their hopes. Chosroes, in a peace treaty concluded with Justinian c. 533 stipulated that the philosophers should be allowed to return without risk and to practise their rites, after which they returned. Of the subsequent fortunes of the seven philosophers we learn nothing. We know little about where Simplicius lived and taught. That he not only wrote, but taught, is proved by the address to his hearers in the commentary on the Physica Auscultatio of Aristotle, as well as by the title of his commentary on the Categories. He had received his training partly in Alexandria, under Ammonius, partly in Athens, as a disciple of Damascius; and it was probably in one of these two cities that he subsequently took up his abode; for, with the exception of these cities and Constantinople, it would have been difficult to find a town which possessed the collections of books he needed, and he is unlikely to have gone to Constantinople. As to his personal history, especially his migration to Persia, no definite allusions are to be found in the writings of Simplicius. Only at the end of his explanation of the treatise of Epictetus, Simplicius mentions, with gratitude, the consolation which he had found under tyrannical oppression in such ethical contemplations; which might suggest that it was composed during, or immediately after, the above-mentioned persecutions.   == WritingsEdit ==  The works which have survived are his commentaries upon Aristotle's de Caelo, Physica Auscultatio, and Categories, as well as a commentary upon the Enchiridion of Epictetus. There is also a commentary on Aristotle's de Anima under his name, but it is stylistically inferior and lacks the breadth of historical information usually used by Simplicius. It has been suggested that it was written by Priscian of Lydia, but other scholars see it as authentic. The commentary on de Caelo was written before that on the Physica Auscultatio, and probably not in Alexandria, since he mentions in it an astronomical observation made during his stay in that city by Ammonius. Simplicius wrote his commentary on the Physica Auscultatio after the death of Damascius, and therefore after his return from Persia. When it was that he wrote his explanations of the Categories, whether before or after those on the above-mentioned Aristotelian treatises, it is impossible to ascertain. Besides these commentaries of Simplicius which have been preserved, the de Anima commentary mentions explanations on the metaphysical books, and an epitome of the Physica of Theophrastus. Simplicius, as a Neoplatonist, endeavoured to show that Aristotle agrees with Plato even on those points which he controverts, so that he may lead the way to their deeper, hidden meaning. In his view not only Plotinus, but also Syrianus, Proclus, and Ammonius, are great philosophers, who have penetrated into the depths of the wisdom of Plato. Many of the more ancient Greek philosophers he also brings into a connection with Platonism. He is, however distinguished from his predecessors, whom he so admires, in making less frequent application of Orphic, Hermetic, Chaldean, and other Theologumena of the East; partly in proceeding carefully and modestly in the explanation and criticism of particular points, and in striving with diligence to draw from the original sources a thorough knowledge of the older Greek philosophy. His commentaries can, therefore, be regarded as the richest in their contents of any that have come down to us concerning Aristotle. But for them, we should be without the most important fragments of the writings of the Eleatics, of Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Diogenes of Apollonia, and others, which were at that time already very scarce, as well as without many extracts from the lost books of Aristotle, Theophrastus and Eudemus: but for them we should hardly be able to unriddle the doctrine of the Categories, so important for the system of the Stoics. It is true he himself complains that in his time both the school and the writings of the followers of Zeno had perished. But where he cannot draw immediately from the original sources, he looks round for guides whom he can depend upon, who had made use of those sources. In addition, we have to thank him for such copious quotations from the Greek commentaries from the time of Andronicus of Rhodes down to Ammonius and Damascius, that, for the Categories and the Physics, the outlines of a history of the interpretation and criticism of those books may be composed. With a correct idea of their importance, Simplicius made the most diligent use of the commentaries of Alexander of Aphrodisias and Porphyry; and although he often enough combats the views of the former, he knew how to value, as it deserved, his (in the main) sound critical sense. He has also preserved for us intelligence of several more ancient readings, which now, in part, have vanished from the manuscripts without leaving any trace, and in the paraphrastic sections of his interpretations furnishes us with valuable contributions for correcting or settling the text of Aristotle. Not less valuable are the contributions towards a knowledge of the ancient astronomical systems for which we have to thank him in his commentary on the books de Caelo. We even find in his writings some traces of a disposition for the observation of nature. Although averse to Christianity he abstains from assailing Christian doctrines, even when he combats expressly the work of his contemporary, John Philoponus, directed against the Aristotelian doctrine of the eternity of the universe. In Ethics he seems to have abandoned the mystical pantheistic purification-theory of the Neoplatonists, and to have found full satisfaction in the ethical system of the later Stoics, however little he was disposed towards their logical and physical doctrines. While some sources attribute to Simplicius the coining of the phrase πάντα ῥεῖ (panta rhei), meaning "everything flows/is in a state of flux", to characterize the concept in the philosophy of Heraclitus, the essential phrasing "everything changes" and variations on it, in contexts where Heraclitus's thought is being alluded to, was current in both Plato and Aristotle's writings.   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Simplicius". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.  Barnes, Jonathan (1982). The Presocratic Philosophers [Revised Edition]. London & New York: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN 0-415-05079-0.    == English translationsEdit ==   === On Aristotle's CategoriesEdit === Simplicius: On Aristotle, Categories 1-4, translated by Michael Chase (2003). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-4101-3, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3197-7 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Categories 5-6, translated by Frans A.J. de Haas and Barrie Fleet (2001). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3838-1, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3037-7 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Categories 7-8, translated by Barrie Fleet (2002). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3839-X, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3038-5 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Categories 9-15, translated by Richard Gaskin (2000). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3691-5, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2900-X   === On Aristotle's On the HeavensEdit === Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 1.1-4, translated by Robert J. Hankinson (2001). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3907-8, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3070-9 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 1.3-4, translated by Ian Mueller (2011). Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-4063-1 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 1.5-9, translated by Robert J. Hankinson (2004). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-4212-5, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3231-0 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 1.10-12, translated by Robert J. Hankinson (2006). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-4216-8, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3232-9 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 2.1-9, translated by Ian Mueller (2004). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-4102-1, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3200-0 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 2.10-14, translated by Ian Mueller (2005). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-4415-2, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3342-2 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 3.1-7, translated by Ian Mueller (2009). Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3843-2 Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Heavens 3.7-4.6, translated by Ian Mueller (2009). Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3844-0   === On Aristotle's PhysicsEdit === Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 1.3-4, translated by Pamela M. Huby and C. C. W. Taylor (2011). Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3921-8 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 1.5-9, translated by Han Baltussen (2011). Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3857-2 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 2, translated by Barrie Fleet (1997). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3283-9, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2732-5 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 3, translated by James O. Urmson (2002). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3903-5, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3067-9 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 4.1-5, 10-14, translated by James O. Urmson (1992). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-2817-3, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2434-2 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 5, translated by James O. Urmson (1997). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3407-6, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2765-1 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 6, translated by David Konstan (1989). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-2238-8, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2217-X Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 7, translated by Charles Hagen (1994). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-2992-7, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2485-7 Simplicius: On Aristotle, Physics 8.6-10, translated by Richard McKirahan (2001). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3787-3, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3039-3   === On Aristotle's On the SoulEdit === Simplicius: On Aristotle, On the Soul 1.1-2.4, translated by James O. Urmson (1995). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3160-3, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2614-0 Priscian: On Theophrastus on Sense-Perception, with "Simplicius": On Aristotle, On the Soul 2.5-12, translated by Carlos Steel (1997). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3282-0, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2752-X "Simplicius": On Aristotle, On the Soul 3.1-5, translated by Henry J. Blumenthal (2000). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3687-7, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2896-8   === On Epictetus' HandbookEdit === Simplicius: On Epictetus, Handbook 1-26, translated by Tad Brennan and Charles Brittain (2002). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3904-3, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3068-7 Simplicius: On Epictetus, Handbook 27-53, translated by Tad Brennan and Charles Brittain (2002). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3905-1, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-3069-5   === Other worksEdit === Simplicius: Corollaries on Place and Time, translated by James O. Urmson (1992). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-2713-4, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2252-8 Philoponus: Corollaries on Place and Void, with Simplicius: Against Philoponus On the Eternity of the World, translated by David Furley and Christian Wildberg (1991). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-2634-0, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2250-1 Philoponus: On Aristotle, Physics 5-8, with Simplicius: On Aristotle on the Void, translated by Paul Lettinck and J. O. Urmson (1994). Cornell University Press: ISBN 0-8014-3005-4, and Duckworth, London: ISBN 0-7156-2493-8   == Further readingEdit == Ilsetraut Hadot (ed.), Simplicius, sa vie, son œuvre, sa survie. Actes du Colloque international de Paris (28 septembre - 1 octobre 1985) / organised by the Centre de recherche sur les œuvres et la pensée de Simplicius (RCP 739-CNRS), Berlin & New York, Walter de Gruyter, 1987, X-406 p. ISBN 3-11-010924-7 Ilsetraut Hadot: The life and work of Simplicius in Greek and Arabic sources. In: Richard Sorabji (Ed.): Aristotle Transformed. Duckworth, London 1990, pp. 275–303. ISBN 0-7156-2254-4 Han Baltussen: Philosophy and Exegesis in Simplicius. The methodology of a commentator. Duckworth, London 2008, 292 p. ISBN 978-0-7156-3500-1   == External linksEdit == Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion of Epictetus, translated by George Stanhope, 1722 Commentators on Aristotle entry by Andrea Falcon in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Extract from Taylor's translation of Aristotle's Physics with Simplicius' Commentary

Solomon "Sol" Garfunkel PhD born 1943, in Brooklyn, New York, is an American mathematician who has dedicated his career to mathematics education. Since 1980, Garfunkel has served as the executive director of the award winning non-profit organization the Consortium for Mathematics and Its Applications. Working with teachers, students, and business people to create learning environments where mathematics is used to investigate and model real issues in our world. Sol is best known for hosting the 1987, PBS series titled "For All Practical Purposes: An Introduction to Contemporary Mathematics", followed by the 1991 series, "Algebra: In Simplest Terms", both often used in classrooms. At the age of 24, Sol received his PhD in Mathematical Logic from the University of Wisconsin–Madison . While in attendance he worked with Howard Jerome Keisler, Michael D. Morley, and Stephen Kleene. Dr. Garfunkel then served on faculty of Cornell University and the University of Connecticut at Storrs. Dr. Garfunkel continues his work advocating for the improvement of Mathematics in public school systems. Coauthoring the article "How to Fix Our Math Education" with David Mumford emeritus professor of mathematics at Brown University. Since published this article has been credited with successfully bringing new awareness to the topic. Interest and debate on the article has been become topic for a vast number of blogs and has been printed in several languages and counties. Sol has served as project director for several National Science Foundation curriculum projects, and in 2009 was awarded the Glenn Gilbert National Leadership Award from the National Council of Supervisors of Mathematics. Most recently, Dr. Garfunkel co-founded the International Mathematical Modeling Challenge.   == References == ^ COMAP ^ Op Ed Published: August 24, 2011 in the New York Times   == External Links == http://itech.fgcu.edu/faculty/fmaa/1998program/plenary.html http://www.comap.com/product/?idx=746 For All Practical Purposes hosted by Sol http://www.learner.org/resources/series66.html Algebra Video Course hosted by Sol

Solomon Feferman (born December 13, 1928) is an American philosopher and mathematician with works in mathematical logic. He was born in New York City, New York, and received his Ph.D. in 1957 from the University of California, Berkeley under Alfred Tarski. He is Patrick Suppes Professor Emeritus of Humanities and Sciences, with appointments in the Departments of Mathematics and Philosophy at Stanford University. Feferman was awarded the Schock Prize in logic and philosophy in 2003 and delivered the Tarski Lectures in 2006. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. Feferman was the editor-in-chief of the Collected Works of Kurt Gödel.   == Selected publications == In the Light of Logic (Oxford University Press, 1998, ISBN 0-19-508030-0, Logic and Computation in Philosophy series) review. Avigad, J.; Feferman, S. (1998) Gödel's functional (Dialectica) interpretation. Handbook of proof theory, 337–405, Stud. Logic Found. Math., 137, North-Holland, Amsterdam. Feferman, S.; Vaught, R. L. (1959) The first order properties of products of algebraic systems. Fund. Math. 47, 57–103. Feferman, Solomon (1979) Constructive theories of functions and classes. Logic Colloquium '78 (Mons, 1978), pp. 159–224, Stud. Logic Foundations Math., 97, North-Holland, Amsterdam-New York. Feferman, Solomon (1975) A language and axioms for explicit mathematics. Algebra and logic (Fourteenth Summer Res. Inst., Austral. Math. Soc., Monash Univ., Clayton, 1974), pp. 87–139. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 450, Springer, Berlin. Buchholz, Wilfried; Feferman, Solomon; Pohlers, Wolfram; Sieg, Wilfried (1981) Iterated inductive definitions and subsystems of analysis: recent proof-theoretical studies. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 897. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York. Feferman, Solomon; Hellman, Geoffrey (1995) Predicative foundations of arithmetic. J. Philos. Logic 24, no. 1, 1--17.   == See also == Criticism of non-standard analysis   == References ==   == External links == Solomon Feferman official website at Stanford University

Solomon Isaac Passy (Bulgarian: Соломон Исак Паси) (born December 22, 1956) is a Bulgarian politician, foreign minister of Bulgaria from July 2001 until August 2005, and the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe in 2004.   == Summary == Solomon Passy was born in Plovdiv. He is the son of famous Bulgarian philosopher Isaac Passy. He is a mathematician and holds a Ph.D. in Mathematical Logic and Computer Science from Sofia University. He was involved in the dissident movement under the socialist regime. In 1990, Passy was the founding President and CEO of the Atlantic Club of Bulgaria, a non-governmental organization to lobby for NATO membership, and the founder and spokesman of the Green Party of Bulgaria.   == Career == June 2007 – to present: Special Adviser to the Macedonian Government on NATO accession August 2006 – to present: Chairman of the Transparency and Accountability Committee of the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly August 2005 – to present: Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 40th National Assembly August 2005 – to present: Chairman of the Bulgaria–USA caucus of the 40th National Assembly June 2005 – to present: MP, National Movement Simeon II, third term as MP since 1990. July 2001 – August 2005: Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Government of Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg.   == Biography and activities ==   === 1980-1994 === During that period Passy was a PhD student and Assistant Professor in Mathematical Logic and Computer Science at Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski” and at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. Passy and his team completed a study on modal logic, originally initiated by Aristotle, framing the theory of the necessary truths in the possible worlds – popular today as hybrid logic. Before that he was studying the boundaries of human understanding and limits of knowledge. Solomon Passy is the author of dozens of publications in international journals on logics and computer science.   === 1990-1991 === During that period, Passy was an MP in the Bulgarian Grand National Assembly from the Green Party, a member party of the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF). As an MP in August 1990, Passy drafted a bill for Bulgaria’s withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact and accession to NATO, which was the start of the nations’ efforts to join the Alliance. This was also the beginning of the public discussion in Central and Eastern Europe for the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and NATO’s enlargement eastwards. The Warsaw Pact was officially disbanded in July 1991 while the enlargement of NATO materialized in 1999. In 1990 Passy drafted also the bill for Bulgaria’s accession to the European Union. Passy was a co-author of the new Bulgarian Constitution (1991) In August 1990 after Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait, Passy was a co-sponsor of the bill which authorized Bulgaria’s participation in the international coalition commissioned with expelling Iraqi forces from Kuwait. In the next decade he was continuously advocating the liberation of Iraq from Saddam Hussein's regime. In 1990, Passy was the sponsor of the draft bill for abolishment of the death penalty in Bulgaria, a cause which he had defended since 1985. The respective law was approved in 1998.   === 1991-2001 === During that period, Passy became founding President and CEO of the Atlantic Club of Bulgaria, the first pro-Atlantic NGO ever founded in a non-NATO member state. Passy launched (1994) the idea of joint Bulgarian-Greek and Bulgarian-Turkish military contingents which materialized in 1999 with the creation of the South-Eastern European Brigade, SEEBRIG. Passy was a prominent public supporter of NATO’s involvement in Former Yugoslavia and in particular of NATO’s operation in Kosovo in 1999. In the mid ‘90s Passy was a proponent of the movement of US military facilities in Europe eastwards and to Bulgaria in particular – a goal materialized, for Bulgaria's part, with his work as foreign minister in 2006.   === July 2001 to present === Passy was MP and Chairman of the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Security Committee of the 39th National Assembly. Following Passy's proposal, the Bulgarian Parliament decided to unite the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committees in order to secure a coherent foreign and defence policy, paving the way to the country’s accession to NATO. Passy was minister of foreign affairs in the National Movement Simeon II government from July 2001 until August 2005 and Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) in 2004. NATO - During Passy's mandate as Minister of Foreign Affairs Bulgaria was invited to join NATO (Prague 2002) and effectively joined the Alliance (March 2004). In 2003 with the participation of Passy, the Governments of the US and Bulgaria started negotiations for the establishment of joint US-Bulgarian military facilities in Bulgaria. The negotiations were completed and ratified by the Bulgarian Parliament in May 2006 during Passy’s mandate as Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee. In July 2004, Passy launched the idea for a common code for hostage crisis management which evolved into the Policy statement of the Global coalition against terrorism. EU - During Passy's mandate as Minister of Foreign Affairs Bulgaria concluded the negotiations with the European Union on all chapters (2004), agreed with the EU (2002) on the date of accession – January 1, 2007, signed the Accession Treaty (April 2005) and ratified the Treaty (May 2005). During his term as Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Bulgaria succeeded in finalizing all procedures and effectively joined the Union in 2007. UNSC - During Passy's mandate Bulgaria served on the UN Security Council (2002–2003) and contributed to the Security Council resolutions that defining the security policy of the international community after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Passy chaired the UNSC in September 2002 and December 2003. In 2001–2005, the Government made the key decisions for Bulgaria’s participation in United States and NATO operations in Afghanistan and United States operations in Iraq. OSCE - In 2004 Passy was the Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE. He was a member of the OSCE Troika during 2003-2005. During his tenure OSCE reached a consensus on further reforms in the Organization, stepped up efforts in fighting anti-Semitism, xenophobia and discrimination, sought to contribute to democratic processes in Georgia and Ukraine, supported peace efforts in Georgia, Moldova, Kosovo, Armenia and Azerbaijan and addressed the countries of Central Asia. The Organization resumed its activities in the Middle East and reached out to new countries in Asia. Balkans and Neighbours - In 2004-2005, Passy launched the vision for Bulgaria to become a pro-active exporter of "Euro-Atlantic values" to Balkan and Black Sea regions. He proposed and signed agreements in that respect with Albania, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Montenegro, Georgia and Ukraine. In 2005 Passy launched a strategy, adopted by the Bulgarian Government, to almost double the crossing points over Bulgarian borders in the period 2005-15, which would bring the Balkans closer to the European infrastructural standards. Pope John Paul II visit in Bulgaria - Passy campaigned for eight years to invite Pope John Paul II to Bulgaria. In May 2002, during his ministerial mandate, the Pope visited Bulgaria. During his visit he denied the so-called “Bulgarian connection” in the attempted assassination of 1981. The event was intended to restore the country’s reputation. The Bulgarian medics in Libya - On July 24, 2001, Passy inherited with his portfolio the very dramatic case with 6 Bulgarian nationals and 1 Palestinian doctor detained in Libyan prison, unjustly accused for deliberate infection of over than 400 Libyan children by HIV/AIDS. Passy built up the strategy of his Government for negotiations with Libya, officially based on five basic principles: - Full commitment of the Bulgarian state and government with this case; - Establishment a full-fledged dialogue with Libya, channelled through Seif Al-Islam and his Gaddafi Charity Foundation. Passy visited Libya 5 times, met with Libyan leader Muammar al-Gaddafi and relevant Libyan authorities 3 times; - Full-fledged internationalization of the case, realized, among others, through EU and US, UN and UNSC, NATO, OSCE, Council of Europe, The Pope, The Ecumenical Patriarch. These efforts resulted in the three-lateral format EU-US-BG (March 2005) which in concert conducted and concluded the negotiations with Libya. Support of building conditions for full reintegration of Libya in the international community; - A satisfactory and respectful solution for both sides, based on the knowledge of the full innocence of the six Bulgarian medics and the Palestinian doctor, and the full sympathy with the tragedy of over than 400 Libyan families of the children in Benghazi, infected by the HIV/AIDS. The medics were liberated six years later, on July 24, 2007, when Passy was Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee and Vice-Chairman of the Bulgarian-Libyan caucus in the Bulgarian Parliament. North Korea - After the successful developments with the Bulgarian medics in Libya in July 2007, Passy assumed a goodwill visit to Pyongyang to propose to the government of North Korea the positive model of Libya for reintegration in the international community and to share the painful Bulgarian know-how in this process. MFA - During Passy's mandate and on his initiative, the Bulgarian government established the Position of the Minister of European Affairs (2002) as well as the Diplomatic Institute of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2003) – the first Diplomatic School in the history of Bulgaria. He established also the Cultural Institute of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (2005) – the largest open air collection of sculptures in Bulgaria.   == Public == 2005-2007: Vice-President of the National Movement Simeon II (NMSS) 2002-2005: Member of Political Council of NMSS 1996-1999: Vice-Chairman of the Atlantic Treaty Association, Paris 1999: Co-chairman of the Host Committee for the visit of United States President Bill Clinton to Bulgaria 1994: Leader of the Bulgarian delegation for the Audience with H.H. Pope John Paul II 1991: Chairman of the Host Committee for the Dalai Lama’s visit to Sofia 1993-2005: Member of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 13th Bulgarian Antarctic Expeditions to Livingston Island, Antarctic. He was the first Bulgarian Cabinet Member to visit the Bulgarian Antarctic Base. As a result of the efforts of the Bulgarian Antarctic community and of Dr. Passy in particular, in 1998 Bulgaria was accepted as the 28th consultative member to the Antarctic Treaty. In recognition of his contribution to the Bulgarian Antarctic program, a peak on *Livingston Island was named after Passy. 1989: Founder and Spokesman of the Green Party of Bulgaria 1990-1991: Co-founder and member of the Coordinating Council of UDF 1989-1990: Participant in the National Round Table for transition to democracy 1989: Activist of the Ecoglasnost opposition movement 1985-1989: In opposition to anti-Muslim repressive policy of the Communist regime He is currently a Member of Parliament of the 40th National Assembly of Bulgaria, and Chairperson of the Foreign Policy Committee. Solomon Passy took part in several Antarctic expeditions to Livingston Island. Passy is also well known for his muddy-grey Trabant. The car became an ironic symbol of Bulgaria's aspirations to join NATO and the EU when Passy gave rides in the car to several NATO Secretaries-General, including Manfred Wörner and Jaap de Hoop Scheffer. Pope John Paul II, on a visit to Sofia in 2002, blessed Passy's Trabant. Passy transported numerous dignitaries in his Trabant, beginning with an impromptu lift he provided late NATO Secretary General Manfred Wörner to the Queen's Birthday celebration at the British Embassy in Sofia in summer 1991. The car, which was parked in front of the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry during Passy's tenure as minister, is now on display at the Bulgarian National Historical Museum.   == Education and degrees == 1985 Ph.D. in Mathematical Logic & Computer Science, Sofia University 1979 M.S. in Mathematical Logic, Sofia University   == Co-founder of == Bulgarian Aero-Space Agency (1993) Manfred Woerner Foundation (1994) Bulgarian Antarctic Institute (1994) Bulgarian Wildlife Fund (1989)   == Member of == Board of trustees of the American University in Bulgaria Board of trustees of the Burgas Free University Bulgarian Society for Protection of Birds - BirdLife Bulgaria National Geographic Society Honorary Member of the International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation   == International State Awards ==   == Awards == Doctor Honoris Causa of the South-West University of Bulgaria (2005). Dr. Passy is the bearer of the first Balkan Peace Award, awarded by the South East European Journalists Union (Edirne) for his contribution to peace in the region (2004). Award for contribution to social peace from the Turkish daily newspaper “Zaman”. The American Jewish Committee’s Distinguished statesman award in recognition of distinguished leadership to advance the principles of peace, democracy and international cooperation (2002). Award for longstanding dedication to Euro-Atlantic ideals from the Greek Association for Atlantic and European cooperation (2001). Honorary citizen of the town of Nedelino (2003).   == Languages == Bulgarian (native) English (fluent) Russian French Understands the Balkan Slavic languages: Bosnian, Croatian, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Serbian   == Hobbies == Solomon Passy loves sports and occasionally practices some: jogging swimming and rappelling He was honoured a black belt in aikido. Enjoys chess. At the age of 50 Passy performed his first flight on an F-16 fighter, for a 1.5 hour training of a combat mission destroying a terrorists’ bunker, during a joint BG-US exercise over the airspace of Bulgaria.   == References ==   == External links == Solomon Passy as a NATO SG nominee Solomon Passy CV, National Assembly of Bulgaria National Assembly of Bulgaria, Foreign Affairs Committee Pope blesses Trabant during visit to Bulgaria Foreign Ministry, Network Operator React to Espionage Allegations OSCE PA member directory (Bulgaria): Passy on page 3 from OSCE Parliamentary Assembly

Stanisław Jaśkowski (April 22, 1906, Warsaw – November 16, 1965, Warsaw) was a Polish logician who made important contributions to proof theory and formal semantics. He was a student of Jan Łukasiewicz and a member of the Lwów–Warsaw School of Logic. Upon his death his name was added to the Genius Wall of Fame. He was the President (rector) of the Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń. Jaśkowski is considered to be one of the founders of natural deduction, which he discovered independently of Gerhard Gentzen in the 1930s. (Gentzen's approach initially became more popular with logicians because it could be used to prove the cut-elimination theorem. But Jaśkowski's is closer to the way that proofs are done in practice.) He was also one of the first, if not the first, to propose a formal calculus of inconsistency-tolerant (or paraconsistent) logic. Furthermore, Jaśkowski was a pioneer in the investigation of both intuitionistic logic and free logic.   == Works == On the Rules of Suppositions in Formal Logic Studia Logica 1, 1934 pp. 5–32 (reprinted in: Storrs McCall (ed.), Polish logic 1920-1939, Oxford University Press, 1967 pp. 232–258 Investigations into the System of Intuitionist Logic 1936 (translated in: Storrs McCall (ed.), Polish logic 1920-1939, Oxford University Press, 1967 pp. 259–263 A propositional Calculus for Inconsistent Deductive Systems 1948 (reprinted in: Studia Logica, 24 1969, pp 143–157 and in: Logic and Logical Philosophy 7, 1999 pp. 35–56) On the Discussive Conjunction in the Propositional Calculus for Inconsistent Deductive Systems 1949 (reprinted in: Logic and Logical Philosophy 7, 1999 pp. 57–59) On Formulas in which no Individual Variable occurs more than Twice, Journal of Symbolic Logic, 31, 1966, pp. 1–6) in Polish O symetrii w zdobnictwie i przyrodzie - matematyczna teoria ornamentów (English title: On Symmetry in Art and Nature), PWS, Warszawa, 1952 (book 168 pages) Matematyczna teoria ornamentów (English title: Mathematical Theory of Ornaments), PWN, Warszawa, 1957 (book 100 pages)   == References == Jerzy Perzanowski (1999). "Fifty Years of Parainconsistent Logics" (PDF). Logic and Logical Philosophy 7: 21–24.  Woleński, Jan (2003). "Lvov-Warsaw School". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2003 Edition). Retrieved 2006-03-11.  Jerzy Kotas, August Pieczkowski. Scientific works of Stanisław Jaśkowski, Studia Logica 21, 1967, 7-15   == External links == Polish Logic of the Postwar Period

Stanisław Leśniewski (March 30, 1886 – May 13, 1939) was a Polish mathematician, philosopher and logician. Leśniewski went to a high school in Irkutsk. Later he attended lectures by Hans Cornelius at the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich and lectures by Wacław Sierpiński at the Lviv University.   == Life == Leśniewski belonged to the first generation of the Lwów-Warsaw School of logic founded by Kazimierz Twardowski. Together with Alfred Tarski and Jan Łukasiewicz, he formed the troika, which made the University of Warsaw, during the Interbellum, perhaps the most important research center in the world for formal logic. His main contribution was the construction of three nested formal systems, to which he gave the Greek-derived names of protothetic, ontology, and mereology. ("Calculus of names" is sometimes used instead of ontology, a term widely employed in metaphysics in a very different sense.) A good textbook presentation of these systems is Simons (1987), who compares and contrasts them with the variants of mereology, more popular nowadays, descending from the calculus of individuals of Leonard and Goodman. Simons clarifies something that is very difficult to determine by reading Leśniewski and his students, namely that Polish mereology is a first-order theory isomorphic to what is now called classical extensional mereology. While he did publish a fair body of work (Leśniewski, 1992, is his collected works in English translation), some of it in German, the leading language for mathematics of his day, his writings had limited impact because of their enigmatic style and highly idiosyncratic notation. Leśniewski was also a radical nominalist: he rejected axiomatic set theory at a time when that theory was in full flower. He pointed to Russell's paradox and the like in support of his rejection, and devised his three formal systems as a concrete alternative to set theory. Even though Alfred Tarski was his sole doctoral pupil, Leśniewski nevertheless strongly influenced an entire generation of Polish logicians and mathematicians via his teaching at the University of Warsaw. It is mainly thanks to the writings of his students (e.g., Srzednicki and Rickey 1984) that Leśniewski's thought is known. During the Polish-Soviet War of 1919-21, Leśniewski served the cause of Poland's independence by breaking Soviet Russian ciphers for the Polish General Staff's Cipher Bureau. Leśniewski died suddenly of cancer, shortly before the German invasion of Poland, which resulted in the destruction of his Nachlass.   == Works == 1988. Lecture Notes in Logic. Kluwer. Table of Contents. 1992. Collected Works. 2 vols. Kluwer. Table of Contents. 1929, "Über Funktionen, deren Felder Gruppen mit Rücksicht auf diese Funktionen sind", Fundamenta Mathematicae 13: 319-32. 1929, "Grundzüge eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik", Fundamenta Mathematicae 14: 1-81. 1929, "Über Funktionen, deren Felder Abelsche Gruppen in bezug auf diese Funktionen sind", Fundamenta Mathematicae 14: 242-51.   == See also == History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles   == References == Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. In Search of Mathematical Roots. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Luschei, Eugene, 1962. The Logical Systems of Lesniewski. Amsterdam: North-Holland. Miéville, Denis, 1984. "Un développement Des systèmes logiques de Stanislas Lesniewski", Peter Lang, European University Studies. Simons, Peter, 1987. Parts: A Study in Ontology. New York: Oxford University Press. Srzednicki, J. T. J., and Rickey, V. F., (eds.), 1984. Lesniewski's Systems: Ontology and Mereology. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Urbaniak, Rafal, 2013. Leśniewski's Systems of Logic and Foundations of Mathematics, Dordrecht: Springer. Wolenski, Jan, 1989. Logic and Philosophy in the Lwow-Warsaw School. Dordrecht: Kluwer.   == External links == Lesniewski entry by Peter Simons in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Lvov-Warsaw school entry by Jan Woleński in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Betti, Arianna, 2001, "Sempiternal Truth: The Bolzano-Twardowski-Lesniewski connection." Polish Philosophy: Stanislaw Lesniewski by Francesco Coniglione and Arianna Betti. Raul Corazzon's Theory and History of Ontology web page: Lesniewski. Selected bibliography of and about Lesniewski. Includes the English translations and selected bibliography of the secondary literature. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Stanisław Leśniewski", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Stephen Cole Kleene /ˈkliːniː/ KLEE-nee (January 5, 1909 – January 25, 1994) was an American mathematician. One of the students of Alonzo Church, Kleene, along with Alan Turing, Emil Post, and others, is best known as a founder of the branch of mathematical logic known as recursion theory, which subsequently helped to provide the foundations of theoretical computer science. Kleene's work grounds the study of which functions are computable. A number of mathematical concepts are named after him: Kleene hierarchy, Kleene algebra, the Kleene star (Kleene closure), Kleene's recursion theorem and the Kleene fixpoint theorem. He also invented regular expressions, and made significant contributions to the foundations of mathematical intuitionism. Although his last name is commonly pronounced /ˈkliːniː/ KLEE-nee or /ˈkliːn/ kleen, Kleene himself pronounced it /ˈkleɪniː/ KLAY-nee. His son, Ken Kleene, wrote: "As far as I am aware this pronunciation is incorrect in all known languages. I believe that this novel pronunciation was invented by my father."   == Biography == Kleene was awarded the BA degree from Amherst College in 1930. He was awarded the Ph.D. in mathematics from Princeton University in 1934. His thesis, entitled A Theory of Positive Integers in Formal Logic, was supervised by Alonzo Church. In the 1930s, he did important work on Church's lambda calculus. In 1935, he joined the mathematics department at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where he spent nearly all of his career. After two years as an instructor, he was appointed assistant professor in 1937. While a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, 1939–40, he laid the foundation for recursion theory, an area that would be his lifelong research interest. In 1941, he returned to Amherst College, where he spent one year as an associate professor of mathematics. During World War II, Kleene was a lieutenant commander in the United States Navy. He was an instructor of navigation at the U.S. Naval Reserve's Midshipmen's School in New York, and then a project director at the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C. In 1946, Kleene returned to Wisconsin, becoming a full professor in 1948 and the Cyrus C. MacDuffee professor of mathematics in 1964. He was chair of the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, 1962–63, and Dean of the College of Letters and Science from 1969 to 1974. The latter appointment he took on despite the considerable student unrest of the day, stemming from the Vietnam War. He retired from the University of Wisconsin in 1979. The mathematics library at the University of Wisconsin was renamed in his honour. Kleene's teaching at Wisconsin resulted in three texts in mathematical logic, Kleene (1952, 1967) and Kleene and Vesley (1965), often cited and still in print. Kleene (1952) wrote alternative proofs to the Gödel's incompleteness theorems that enhanced their canonical status and made them easier to teach and understand. Kleene and Vesley (1965) is the classic American introduction to intuitionist logic and mathematics. Kleene served as president of the Association for Symbolic Logic, 1956–58, and of the International Union of History and Philosophy of Science, 1961. In 1990, he was awarded the National Medal of Science. Kleene and his wife Nancy Elliott had four children. He had a lifelong devotion to the family farm in Maine. An avid mountain climber, he had a strong interest in nature and the environment, and was active in many conservation causes.   == Important publications == 1936. « General recursive functions of natural numbers », Math. Ann., 112, 727-742. 1952. Introduction to Metamathematics. New York: Van Nostrand. (Ishi Press: 2009 reprint). 1956. "Representation of Events in Nerve Nets and Finite Automata" in Automata Studies. Claude Shannon and John McCarthy, eds. 1965 (with Richard Eugene Vesley). The Foundations of Intuitionistic Mathematics. North-Holland. 1967. Mathematical Logic. John Wiley. Dover reprint, 2001. ISBN 0-486-42533-9. 1981. "Origins of Recursive Function Theory" in Annals of the History of Computing 3, No. 1.   == See also == Kleene star Kleene hierarchy Kleene's smn theorem Realizability Intuitionism Kleene–Rosser paradox Kleene's algorithm Kleene's theorem   == References == This article is based on material taken from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing prior to 1 November 2008 and incorporated under the "relicensing" terms of the GFDL, version 1.3 or later.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Stephen Cole Kleene", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Stephen Cole Kleene at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Biographical memoir – by Saunders Mac Lane Kleene bibliography. Interview with Kleene and John Barkley Rosser about their experiences at Princeton Stephen Cole Kleene's publications indexed by the DBLP Bibliography Server at the University of Trier

Stewart Shapiro (born 1951) is O'Donnell Professor of Philosophy at the Ohio State University and a regular visiting professor at the University of St Andrews in Scotland. He is a figure in the philosophy of mathematics where he defends a version of structuralism. He studied Mathematics and Philosophy at Case Western Reserve University in 1973. Then, he got his M.A. in Mathematics at the State University of New York at Buffalo in 1975. He transferred to the UB Philosophy Department, where three years later he received a Ph.D. His doctoral supervisor was John Corcoran.   == Publications ==   === Books === Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology. Oxford University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-19-513930-5 Thinking about Mathematics: The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-289306-8 Foundations without Foundationalism: A Case for Second-Order Logic. Oxford University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-19-853391-8 Vagueness in Context. Oxford University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-19-928039-8   === Editorships === The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic. Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-19-514877-0 Special issue of "Philosophia Mathematica", devoted to structuralism. Contributors: P. Benacerraf, G. Hellman, B. Hale, C. Parsons, M. Resnik, S. Shapiro, forthcoming. "The limits of logic: Second order logic and the Skolem paradox", The international research library of philosophy, Dartmouth Publishing Company, forthcoming. Intensional Mathematics, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics 113, Amsterdam, North Holland Publishing Company, 1985. Contributors: S. Shapiro, J. Myhill, N. D. Goodman, A. Scedrov, V. Lifschitz, R. Flagg, R. Smullyan.   === Papers === "The Work of John Corcoran: an Appreciation" Scanlan, M. and Shapiro, S. 1999., ‘‘History and Philosophy of Logic’’, 20, 149–158. "Corcoran the mathematician", Current Issues in Logic / Temas Actuales de Lógica. Imprenta Universidade Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2007, 271-288. "Cognitive command and excluded middle" (with William Taschek), Journal of Philosophy, forthcoming. "Space, number, and structure: A tale of two debates", Philosophia Mathematica, forthcoming. "Introduction", Philosophia Mathematica (see above), forthcoming. "The limits of logic", introduction to The limits of logic: Second order logic and the Skolem paradox, The international research library of philosophy (see above), Dartmouth Publishing Company, forthcoming. "The triumph of first order logic", Festschrift for Alonzo Church, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming. "Logical consequence: Models and modality", Philosophy of mathematics today: Proceedings of an international conference in Munich, The Mind Association, Oxford, Oxford University Press, forthcoming. "Understanding Church's thesis, again", Acta Analytica 11 (1993), 59-77 published in August 1995. "Reasoning, logic, and computation", Philosophia Mathematica (3) 3 (1995), 31-51. "Mathematics and philosophy of mathematics", Philosophia Mathematica (3) 2 (1994), 148-160. "Modality and ontology", Mind 102 (1993), 455-481. "Antirealism and modality", Philosophy of Mathematics: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Wittgenstein Symposium, Vienna, Verlag Holder Pichler Tempsky, 1993,269-287. "Foundationalism and foundations of mathematics", in Proof and knowledge in mathematics, ed. by Michael Detlefsen, London and New York, Routledge, 1992, 171-207. "Second order logic, foundations, and rules", Journal of Philosophy 87 (1990), 234-261. "Expressive completeness and decidability" (with George Schumm),Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 31 (1990), 576-579. "Structure and ontology", Philosophical Topics 17 (1989), 145-171. "Logic, ontology, mathematical practice", Synthese 79 (1989), 13-50 "The Lindenbaum construction and decidability", Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 29 (1988), 208-213. "Principles of reflection and second-order logic", Journal of Philosophical Logic 16 (1987), 309-333. "Turing projectibility" (with Timothy McCarthy), Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 28 (1987), 520-535. "Actuality and essence" (with William Lycan), Midwest Studies in Philosophy 11 (1986), 343-377. "Second-order languages and mathematical practice", Journal of Symbolic Logic 50 (1985), 714-742. "Epistemic arithmetic and intuitionistic arithmetic" in Intensional Mathematics (see above), 11-46. "Introduction" in Intensional Mathematics (see above), 1-10. "Arithmetic Sinn and effectiveness", Dialectica 38 (1984), 3-16. "On an empiricist philosophy of mathematics", Philosophia 14 (1984), 213-223. "Mathematics and reality", Philosophy of Science 50 (1983), 523-548. "Remarks on the development of computability", History and Philosophy of Logic 4 (1983), 203-220. "Conservativeness and incompleteness", The Journal of Philosophy 80 (1983), 521-531 "Acceptable notation", Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 23 (1982), 14-20 "Understanding Church's thesis", Journal of Philosophical Logic 10 (1981), 353-365 "Largomento con la tesi di Church" (Argument by Church's thesis), Nominazione 2 (1981), 195-199. "On the notion of effectiveness", History and Philosophy of Logic 1 (1980), 209-230. "Incomplete translations of complete logics", Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 18 (1977), 248-250.   == See also == American philosophy List of American philosophers   == External links == Stewart Shapiro's webpage at Ohio State University Stewart Shapiro's Home Page at St. Andrews

Susan Haack (born 1945) is Distinguished Professor in the Humanities, Cooper Senior Scholar in Arts and Sciences, Professor of Philosophy, and Professor of Law at the University of Miami (B.A., M.A., B.Phil, Oxford; Ph.D., Cambridge). She has written on logic, the philosophy of language, epistemology, and metaphysics. Her pragmatism follows that of Charles Sanders Peirce.   == Career == Haack is a graduate of the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge. At Oxford, she studied at St. Hilda's College, where her first philosophy teacher was Jean Austin, the widow of J. L. Austin. As an undergraduate, she took Politics, Philosophy and Economics and said of her taste for philosophy: "initially, the 'politics' part that most appealed to me. But somewhere down the line, despite encouragement from my politics tutor to pursue that subject, philosophy took over." She studied Plato with Gilbert Ryle and logic with Michael Dummett. David Pears supervised her B.Phil. dissertation on ambiguity. At Cambridge, she wrote her PhD under the supervision of Timothy Smiley. She held the positions of Fellow of New Hall, Cambridge and professor of philosophy at the University of Warwick before taking her current position at the University of Miami. Haack has said of her career that she is "very independent":  rather than follow philosophical fads and fashions, I pursue questions I believe are important, and tackle them in the ways that seem most likely to yield results; I am beholden to no clique or citation cartel; I put no stock in the ranking of philosophy graduate programs over which my colleagues obsess; I accept no research or travel funds from my university; I avoid publishing in journals that insist on taking all the rights to my work; etc., etc. Naturally, this independence comes at a price; but it also earns me the freedom to do the best work I can, without self-censorship, and to communicate with a much wider audience than the usual "niche literature" does   == Ideas == Haack's major contribution to philosophy, in the 1993 book Evidence and Inquiry is her epistemological theory called foundherentism, which is her attempt to avoid the logical problems of both pure foundationalism (which is susceptible to infinite regress) and pure coherentism (which is susceptible to circularity). She illustrates this idea with the metaphor of the crossword puzzle. A highly simplified version of this proceeds as follows: Finding an answer using a clue is analogous to a foundational source (grounded in empirical evidence). Making sure that the interlocking words are mutually sensible is analogous to justification through coherence. Both are necessary components in the justification of knowledge. At least one scholar has claimed that Haack's foundherentism collapses into foundationalism upon further inspection. Haack has been a fierce critic of Richard Rorty. She wrote a play, We Pragmatists ...: Peirce and Rorty in Conversation, consisting entirely of quotes from both philosophers. She performed the role of Peirce. Haack published a vigorous essay in the New Criterion, taking strong exception to many of Rorty's views, especially his claim to be a sort of pragmatist. In Manifesto of a Passionate Moderate, Haack is highly critical of the view that there is a specifically female perspective on logic and scientific truth and is critical of feminist epistemology. She holds that many feminist critiques of science and philosophy are overly concerned with 'political correctness'. Haack describes her 2003 book Defending Science – Within Reason: Between Scientism and Cynicism, as a defence of scientific inquiry from the moderate viewpoint. During an interview with D.J. Grothe, then of the Center for Inquiry, Haack put forward the proposition that those on the far left consider science to be rhetoric motivated by power or politics, then proceeds to show how science can, and often does provide real benefits and gains, regardless of what the left may claim. Conversely, Haack argues the book is an attempt to make a sounder and solider defence of inquiry in light of some philosophers of science narrow logical models of rationality. Haack's opinion on the topic of inquiry, whomever may be undertaking it, is that good evidence, sound methods, transparent review and fitting new discovery into the collective sphere of human knowledge are signs of robust inquiry. Haack claims that quality inquiry can be done by many, however the scientific community has numerous tools or helps that have brought many benefits to mankind, and which help foster science's credibility. These tools and helps may not be available to those engaged in individual inquiry. When asked about how she responds to paranormal or supernatural claims, Haack indicates supporters of such claims have a heavy burden of proof. Rather than labelling such claims as pseudo-science, she admits these things can be "pretty bad stuff" and if they are to be considered seriously, they would need extraordinary evidence, and that such evidence should fit with the best warranted scientific theory about how things are. In this interview Haack also responds to the question of religion's compatibility with science. She agrees there is great tension between the two. While stating her disagreement with British philosopher of religion Richard G. Swinburne and Stephen Jay Gould, she referred to the pertinent chapter of her book for a comprehensive understanding of her views on this matter. In the related chapter ten of Defending Science, Haack disagrees with Gould's claim that science and religion have their own distinct domains that do not overlap. (See NOMA). Haack also disagrees with Swinburne. Haack believes that while scientists, historians and detectives play a useful role in scientific inquiry, theologians do not. Haack shows how religion and science make claims about how the world is. She shows how science and religion also make assertions as to what could lead to a better human condition. By these statements, Haack shows that religion and science do not enjoy their own separate space. She points out areas where prior and current religious claims about the natural universe are strongly refuted by the best warranted findings of science. She also stipulates that controversy and unanswered questions abound in modern science. She summarises her defence for scientific inquiry by stating that she makes no apology for reserving her "greatest admiration for those who delight to exercise the mind, no matter which way it takes them…those for whom doing their damnedest with the mind, no holds barred, is a point of honor". She has written for Free Inquiry magazine and the Council for Secular Humanism. Haack's work has been reviewed and cited in the popular press, such as The Times Literary Supplement as well as in academic journals.   == Memberships == Haack is an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa Society and Phi Kappa Phi, a past President of the Charles S. Peirce Society, and a past member of the US/UK Educational Commission.   == Selected writings == 1974. Deviant Logic. Cambridge University Press. Haack, Susan; Kolenda, Konstantin (1977). "Two Fallibilists in Search of the Truth". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 51 (Supplementary Volumes): 63–104. JSTOR 4106816.  (Charles Sanders Peirce and Karl Popper have strikingly similar views on the propensity theory of probability and philosophy of science.) 1978. Philosophy of Logics. 1993, Evidence and Inquiry. 1996, Deviant Logic, Fuzzy Logic: Beyond the Formalism. The University of Chicago Press. (Extends the 1974 Deviant Logic, with some additional essays published between 1973 and 1980, particularly on fuzzy logic, cf The Philosophical Review, 107:3, 468–471 [1]) 1997, "Vulgar Rortyism," The New Criterion 16. 1998. Manifesto of a Passionate Moderate: Unfashionable Essays. 2003. Defending Science – Within Reason: Between Scientism and Cynicism. ISBN 1-59102-117-0. 2005, "Trial and Error: The Supreme Court's Philosophy of Science, ," American Journal of Public Health. 2006 (edited with Robert Lane). Pragmatism, Old and New. 2008. Putting Philosophy to Work: Inquiry and Its Place in Culture   == References ==   == Sources == Christian, Rose Ann (2009). "Restricting the Scope of the Ethics of Belief: Haack's Alternative to Clifford and James". J Am Acad Relig 77 (3): 461–493. doi:10.1093/jaarel/lfp037.    == External links ==  Susan Haack's Web Page at University of Miami. Interview with Susan Haack by Richard Carrier

Tadeusz Czeżowski (July 26, 1889 – March 28, 1981) was a Polish philosopher and logician. Czeżowski, born in Vienna, Austria-Hungary, became a student of Kazimierz Twardowski and member of the Lwów-Warsaw School of Logic. From 1923 to 1939 he was a professor at Stefan Batory University in Vilnius, Lithuania, and from 1945 to 1960 a professor at Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, Poland. In 1948 he became editor of the magazine Ruch Filozoficzny. He died in Toruń in 1981.   == Works == O metafizyce, jej kierunkach i zagadnieniach (On Metaphysics, its directions and problems) (1948) Logika (1949) Odczyty filozoficzne (1958 and 1969) Filozofia na rozdrożu (1966) Pisma z etyki i teorii wartości (1989) Knowledge, Science, and Values. A Program for Scientific Philosophy Edited by Leon Gumanski, Amsterdam, Rodopi, 2000   == External links == Polish Philosophy Page: Tadeusz Czeżowski, at the Internet Archive

Tadeusz Kotarbiński (Polish: ['kotarbiński]; 31 March 1886, Warsaw, Congress Poland, Russian Empire – 3 October 1981, Warsaw, People's Republic of Poland), a pupil of Kazimierz Twardowski, was a Polish philosopher, logician, one of the most representative figures of the Lwów-Warsaw School, and a member of the Polish Academy of Learning (PAU) as well as the Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN). He created a philosophical theory called reism (Polish: reizm). Henryk Greniewski (pl) and Kazimierz Pasenkiewicz (pl) have been doctoral students of Kotarbiński.   == Works == Elementy teorii poznania, logiki formalnej i metodologii nauk (1929); second revised edition 1961; translated in English as Gnosiology (1966). Traktat o dobrej robocie (1955); English translation: Praxiology. An introduction to the science of efficient action, New York: Pergamon Press, 1965. Sprawność i błąd (Efficiency and Error) (1956) Medytacje o życiu godziwym (Meditations about decent life) (1966) Leçons sur l'histoire de la logique. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France 1964. Original Polish edition 1957. Gnosiology. The scientific approach to the theory of knowledge. Oxford: Pergamon Press 1966.   == See also == Lwów-Warsaw school of logic History of philosophy in Poland Casimir Lewy   == External links ==  Media related to Tadeusz Kotarbiński at Wikimedia Commons Tadeusz Kotarbinski, at the Polish Philosophy Page Kotarbinski from Ontological Reism to Semantical Concretism Selected bibliography of and about Kotarbinski Kotarbinski, Tadeusz, "The Reistic, or Concretistic, Approach," Mysl Wspolczesna, 1949, No. 10(41). Tadeusz Kotarbinski Praxiology Research Group at Faculty of Philosophy and Sociology, Maria Curie-Skłodowska University in Lublin, Poland Tadeusz Kotarbiński at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Theodore Allen Slaman is a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Berkeley who works in recursion theory. Slaman and W. Hugh Woodin formulated the Bi-interpretability Conjecture for the Turing degrees, which conjectures that the partial order of the Turing degrees is logically equivalent to second order arithmetic. They showed that the Bi-interpretability Conjecture is equivalent to there being no nontrivial automorphism of the Turing degrees. They also exhibited limits on the possible automorphisms of the Turing degrees by showing that any automorphism will be arithmetically definable.   == References == Slaman, Theodore A. (1991). "Degree structures". Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. I, II (Kyoto, 1990). pp. 303–316. MR 93b:03074.    == External links == home page. Theodore Slaman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Theophrastus (/ˌθiːəˈfræstəs/; Greek: Θεόφραστος Theόphrastos; c. 371 – c. 287 BC), a Greek native of Eresos in Lesbos, was the successor to Aristotle in the Peripatetic school. He came to Athens at a young age and initially studied in Plato's school. After Plato's death, he attached himself to Aristotle. Aristotle bequeathed to Theophrastus his writings and designated him as his successor at the Lyceum. Theophrastus presided over the Peripatetic school for thirty-six years, during which time the school flourished greatly. He is often considered the "father of botany" for his works on plants. After his death, the Athenians honoured him with a public funeral. His successor as head of the school was Strato of Lampsacus. The interests of Theophrastus were wide ranging, extending from biology and physics to ethics and metaphysics. His two surviving botanical works, Enquiry into Plants (Historia Plantarum) and On the Causes of Plants, were an important influence on Renaissance science. There are also surviving works On Moral Characters, On Sensation, On Stones, and fragments on Physics and Metaphysics. In philosophy, he studied grammar and language and continued Aristotle's work on logic. He also regarded space as the mere arrangement and position of bodies, time as an accident of motion, and motion as a necessary consequence of all activity. In ethics, he regarded happiness as depending on external influences as well as on virtue and famously said that "life is ruled by fortune, not wisdom."   == LifeEdit == Most of the biographical information we have of Theophrastus was provided by Diogenes Laërtius' Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, written more than four hundred years after Theophrastus' time. He was a native of Eresos in Lesbos. His given name was Tyrtamus (Τύρταμος), but he later became known by the nickname "Theophrastus," given to him, it is said, by Aristotle to indicate the grace of his conversation (from Ancient Greek Θεός "god" and φράζειν "to phrase", i.e. divine expression).  After receiving instruction in philosophy in Lesbos from one Alcippus, he moved to Athens, where he may have studied under Plato. He became friends with Aristotle, and when Plato died (348/7 BC) Theophrastus may have joined Aristotle in his self-imposed exile from Athens. When Aristotle moved to Mytilene on Lesbos in 345/4, it is very likely that he did so at the urging of Theophrastus. It seems that it was on Lesbos that Aristotle and Theophrastus began their research into natural science, with Aristotle studying animals and Theophrastus studying plants. Theophrastus probably accompanied Aristotle to Macedonia when Aristotle was appointed tutor to Alexander the Great in 343/2. Around 335 BC, Theophrastus moved with Aristotle to Athens where Aristotle began teaching in the Lyceum. When, after the death of Alexander, anti-Macedonian feeling forced Aristotle to leave Athens, Theophrastus remained behind as head (scholarch) of the Peripatetic school, a position he continued to hold after Aristotle's death in 322/1. Aristotle in his will made him guardian of his children, including Nicomachus with whom he was close. Aristotle likewise bequeathed to him his library and the originals of his works, and designated him as his successor at the Lyceum. Eudemus of Rhodes also had some claims to this position, and Aristoxenus is said to have resented Aristotle's choice. Theophrastus presided over the Peripatetic school for thirty-five years, and died at the age of eighty-five according to Diogenes. He is said to have remarked "we die just when we are beginning to live". Under his guidance the school flourished greatly — there were at one period more than 2000 students, Diogenes affirms, and at his death, according to the terms of his will preserved by Diogenes, he bequeathed to it his garden with house and colonnades as a permanent seat of instruction. The comic poet Menander was among his pupils. His popularity was shown in the regard paid to him by Philip, Cassander, and Ptolemy, and by the complete failure of a charge of impiety brought against him. He was honored with a public funeral, and "the whole population of Athens, honouring him greatly, followed him to the grave." He was succeeded as head of the Lyceum by Strato of Lampsacus.   == WritingsEdit ==  From the lists of Diogenes Laërtius, giving 227 titles, it appears that the activity of Theophrastus extended over the whole field of contemporary knowledge. His writing probably differed little from Aristotle's treatment of the same themes, though supplementary in details. Like Aristotle, most of his writings are lost works. Thus Theophrastus, like Aristotle, had composed a first and second Analytic (Ἀναλυτικῶν προτέρων and Ἀναλυτικῶν ὑστέρων). He had also written books on Topics (Ἀνηγμένων τόπων, Τοπικῶν and Τὰ πρὸ τῶν τόπων); on the Analysis of Syllogisms (Περὶ ἀναλύσεως συλλογισμῶν and Περὶ συλλογισμῶν λύσεως), on Sophisms (Σοφισμάτων) and On Affirmation and Denial (Περὶ καταφάσεως καὶ ἀποφάσεως) as well as on the Natural Philosophy (Περὶ φύσεως, Περὶ φυσικῶν, Φυσικῶν and others), on Heaven (Περὶ οὐρανοῦ), and on Meteorological Phenomena (Τῆς μεταρσιολεσχίας and Μεταρσιολογικῶν).  In addition, Theophrastus wrote on the Warm and the Cold (Περὶ θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ), on Water (Περὶ ὕδατος), Fire (Περὶ πυρὸς), the Sea (Περὶ θαλάττης), on Coagulation and Melting (Περὶ πήξεων καὶ τήξεων), on various phenomena of organic and spiritual life, and on the Soul (Περὶ ψυχῆς), On Experience (Περὶ ἐμπειρίας) and On Sense Perception (also known as On the Senses; Περὶ αἰσθήσεων). Likewise, we find mention of monographs of Theophrastus on the early Greek philosophers Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Empedocles, Archelaus, Diogenes of Apollonia, Democritus, which were made use of by Simplicius; and also on Xenocrates, against the Academics, and a sketch of the political doctrine of Plato. He studied general history, as we know from Plutarch's lives of Lycurgus, Solon, Aristides, Pericles, Nicias, Alcibiades, Lysander, Agesilaus, and Demosthenes, which were probably borrowed from the work on Lives (Περὶ βίων). But his main efforts were to continue the labours of Aristotle in natural history. This is testified to not only by a number of treatises on individual subjects of zoology, of which, besides the titles, only fragments remain, but also by his books on Stones, his Enquiry into Plants, and On the Causes of Plants (see below), which have come down to us entire. In politics, also, he seems to have trodden in the footsteps of Aristotle. Besides his books on the State (Πολιτικῶν and Πολιτικοῦ), we find quoted various treatises on Education (Περὶ παιδείας βασιλέως and Περὶ παιδείας), on Royalty (Περὶ βασιλείας, Περὶ παιδείας βασιλέως and Πρὸς Κάσανδρον περὶ βασιλείας), on the Best State (Περὶ τῆς ἀρίστης πολιτείας), on Political Morals (Πολιτικῶν ἐθῶν), and particularly his works on the Laws (Νόμων κατὰ στοιχεῖον, Νόμων ἐπιτομῆς and Περὶ νόμων), one of which, containing a recapitulation of the laws of various barbarian as well as Greek states, was intended to be a companion to Aristotle's outline of Politics, and must have been similar to it. He also wrote on oratory and poetry. Theophrastus, without doubt, departed further from Aristotle in his ethical writings, as also in his metaphysical investigations of motion, the soul, and God. Besides these writings, Theophrastus wrote several collections of problems, out of which some things at least have passed into the Problems that have come down to us under the name of Aristotle, and commentaries, partly dialogues, to which probably belonged the Erotikos (Ἐρωτικός), Megacles (Μεγακλῆς), Callisthenes (Καλλισθένης), and Megarikos (Μεγαρικός), and letters, partly books on mathematical sciences and their history. Many of his surviving works exist only in fragmentary form. "The style of these works, as of the botanical books, suggests that, as in the case of Aristotle, what we possess consists of notes for lectures or notes taken of lectures," his translator Arthur F. Hort remarks. "There is no literary charm; the sentences are mostly compressed and highly elliptical, to the point sometimes of obscurity". The text of these fragments and extracts is often so corrupt that there is a certain plausibility to the well-known story that the works of Aristotle and Theophrastus were allowed to languish in the cellar of Neleus of Scepsis and his descendents.   === On PlantsEdit ===  The most important of his books are two large botanical treatises, Enquiry into Plants (Περὶ φυτῶν ἱστορία), and On the Causes of Plants (Περὶ φυτῶν αἰτιῶν), which constitute the most important contribution to botanical science during antiquity and the Middle Ages, the first systemization of the botanical world; on the strength of these works some, following Linnaeus, call him the "father of botany." The Enquiry into Plants was originally ten books, of which nine survive. The work is arranged into a system whereby plants are classified according to their modes of generation, their localities, their sizes, and according to their practical uses such as foods, juices, herbs, etc. The first book deals with the parts of plants; the second book with the reproduction of plants and the times and manner of sowing; the third, fourth, and fifth books are devoted to trees, their types, their locations, and their practical applications; the sixth book deals with shrubs and spiny plants; the seventh book deals with herbs; the eighth book deals with plants that produce edible seeds; and the ninth book deals with plants that produce useful juices, gums, resins, etc.  On the Causes of Plants was originally eight books, of which six survive. It concerns the growth of plants; the influences on their fecundity; the proper times they should be sown and reaped; the methods of preparing the soil, manuring it, and the use of tools; and of the smells, tastes, and properties of many types of plants. The work deals mainly with the economical uses of plants rather than their medicinal uses, although the latter is sometimes mentioned. Although these works contain many absurd and fabulous statements, they include valuable observations concerning the functions and properties of plants. Theophrastus detected the process of germination and realized the importance of climate and soil to plants. Much of the information on the Greek plants may have come from his own observations, as he is known to have travelled throughout Greece, and to have had a botanical garden of his own; but the works also profit from the reports on plants of Asia brought back from those who followed Alexander the Great:  to the reports of Alexander's followers he owed his accounts of such plants as the cotton-plant, banyan, pepper, cinnamon, myrrh, and frankincense.  Theophrastus' Enquiry into Plants was first published in a Latin translation by Theodore Gaza, at Treviso, 1483; in its original Greek it first appeared from the press of Aldus Manutius at Venice, 1495–98, from a third-rate manuscript, which, like the majority of the manuscripts that were sent to printers' workshops in the fifteenth and sixteenth century, has disappeared. Wimmer identified two manuscripts of first quality, the Codex Urbinas in the Vatican Library, which was not made known to J. G. Schneider, who made the first modern critical edition, 1818–21, and the excerpts in the Codex Parisiensis in the Bibliothèque nationale de France.   === CharactersEdit === His book Characters (Ἠθικοὶ χαρακτῆρες), if it is indeed his, deserves a separate mention. The work contains thirty brief, vigorous, and trenchant outlines of moral types, which form a most valuable picture of the life of his time, and in fact of human nature in general. They are the first recorded attempt at systematic character writing. The book has been regarded by some as an independent work; others incline to the view that the sketches were written from time to time by Theophrastus, and collected and edited after his death; others, again, regard the Characters as part of a larger systematic work, but the style of the book is against this. Theophrastus has found many imitators in this kind of writing, notably Joseph Hall (1608), Sir Thomas Overbury (1614–16), Bishop Earle (1628), and Jean de La Bruyère (1688), who also translated the Characters. George Eliot also took inspiration from Theophrastus' Characters, most notably in her book of caricatures, Impressions of Theophrastus Such. Writing the "character sketch" as a scholastic exercise also originated in Theophrastus's typology.   === On SensationEdit === A treatise On Sense Perception (Περὶ αἰσθήσεων) and its objects is important for a knowledge of the doctrines of the more ancient Greek philosophers regarding the subject. A paraphrase and commentary on this work was written by Priscian of Lydia in the sixth century. With this type of work we may connect the fragments on Smells, on Fatigue, on Dizziness, on Sweat, on Swooning, on Palsy, and on Honey.   === PhysicsEdit === We also possess in fragments a History of Physics (Περὶ φυσικῶν ἱστοριῶν). To this class of work belong the still extant sections on Fire, on the Winds, and on the signs of Waters, Winds, and Storms. Various smaller scientific fragments have been collected in the editions of Johann Gottlob Schneider (1818–21) and Friedrich Wimmer (1842—62) and in Hermann Usener's Analecta Theophrastea.   === MetaphysicsEdit === The Metaphysics (anachronistic Greek title: Θεοφράστου τῶν μετὰ τὰ φυσικά), in nine chapters (also known as On First Principles), was considered a fragment of a larger work by Usener in his edition (Theophrastos, Metaphysica, Bonn, 1890), but according to Ross and Fobes in their edition (Theophrastus, Metaphysica, Oxford, 1929), the treatise is complete (p. X) and this opinion is now widely accepted. There is no reason for assigning this work to some other author because it is not noticed in Hermippus and Andronicus, especially as Nicolaus of Damascus had already mentioned it.   === On StonesEdit ===  In his treatise On Stones (Περὶ λίθων), which was to be used as a source for other lapidaries until at least the Renaissance, Theophrastus classified rocks and gems based on their behavior when heated, further grouping minerals by common properties, such as amber and magnetite, which both have the power of attraction. He also comments on the effect of heat on minerals and their different hardnesses. Theophrastus describes different marbles; mentions coal, which he says is used for heating by metal-workers; describes the various metal ores; and knew that pumice-stones had a volcanic origin. He also deals with precious stones, emeralds, amethysts, onyx, jasper, etc., and describes a variety of "sapphire" that was blue with veins of gold, and thus was presumably lapis-lazuli. He knew that pearls came from shell-fish, that coral came from India, and speaks of the fossilized remains of organic life. Theophrastus made the first known reference to the phenomenon of pyroelectricity, noting that the mineral tourmaline becomes charged when heated. He also considers the practical uses of various stones, such as the minerals necessary for the manufacture of glass; for the production of various pigments of paint such as ochre; and for the manufacture of plaster. He discusses the use of the touchstone for assaying gold and gold alloys, an important property which would require the genius of Archimedes to resolve in quantitative detail when he was asked to investigate the suspected debasement of a crown a few years later. Many of the rarer minerals were found in mines, and he mentions the famous copper mines of Cyprus and the even more famous silver mines, presumably of Laurium near Athens, and upon which the wealth of the city was based, as well as referring to gold mines. The Laurium silver mines, which were the property of the state, were usually leased for a fixed sum and a percentage on the working. Towards the end of the fifth century the output fell, partly owing to the Spartan occupation of Decelea. But the mines continued to be worked, though Strabo records that in his time the tailings were being worked over, and Pausanias speaks of the mines as a thing of the past. The ancient workings, consisting of shafts and galleries for excavating the ore, and washing tables for extracting the metal, may still be seen. Theophrastus wrote a separate work On Mining, which like most of his writings is a lost work. Pliny the Elder makes clear references to his use of On Stones in his Naturalis Historia of 77 AD, while updating and making much new information available on minerals himself. Although Pliny's treatment of the subject is more extensive, Theophrastus is more systematic and his work is comparatively free from fable and magic, although he did describe lyngurium, a gemstone supposedly formed of the solidified urine of the lynx (the best ones coming from wild males), which was included in many lapidiaries until it gradually disappeared from view in the 17th century. From both of these early texts was to emerge the science of mineralogy, and ultimately geology. Pliny is especially observant on crystal habit and mineral hardness, for example.   == PhilosophyEdit ==  The extent to which Theophrastus followed Aristotle's doctrines, or defined them more accurately, or conceived them in a different form, and what additional structures of thought he placed upon them, can only be partially determined because of the loss of so many of his writings. Many of his opinions have to be reconstructed from the works of later writers such as Alexander of Aphrodisias and Simplicius.   === LogicEdit === Theophrastus seems to have carried out still further the grammatical foundation of logic and rhetoric, since in his book on the elements of speech, he distinguished the main parts of speech from the subordinate parts, and also direct expressions (κυρία λέξις kuria lexis) from metaphorical expressions, and dealt with the emotions (πάθη pathe) of speech. He further distinguished a twofold reference of speech (σχίσις schisis) to things (πράγματα pragmata) and to the hearers, and referred poetry and rhetoric to the latter. He wrote at length on the unity of judgment, on the different kinds of negation, and on the difference between unconditional and conditional necessity. In his doctrine of syllogisms he brought forward the proof for the conversion of universal affirmative judgments, differed from Aristotle here and there in the laying down and arranging the modi of the syllogisms, partly in the proof of them, partly in the doctrine of mixture, i.e. of the influence of the modality of the premises upon the modality of the conclusion. Then, in two separate works, he dealt with the reduction of arguments to the syllogistic form and on the resolution of them; and further, with hypothetical conclusions. For the doctrine of proof, Galen quotes the second Analytic of Theophrastus, in conjunction with that of Aristotle, as the best treatises on that doctrine. In different monographs he seems to have tried to expand it into a general theory of science. To this, too, may have belonged the proposition quoted from his Topics, that the principles of opposites are themselves opposed, and cannot be deduced from one and the same higher genus. For the rest, some minor deviations from the Aristotelian definitions are quoted from the Topica of Theophrastus. Closely connected with this treatise was that upon ambiguous words or ideas, which, without doubt, corresponded to book Ε of Aristotle's Metaphysics.   === Physics and metaphysicsEdit === Theophrastus introduced his Physics with the proof that all natural existence, being corporeal and composite, requires principles, and first and foremost, motion, as the basis of all change. Denying the substance of space, he seems to have regarded it, in opposition to Aristotle, as the mere arrangement and position (taxis and thesis) of bodies. Time he called an accident of motion, without, it seems, viewing it, with Aristotle, as the numerical determinant of motion. He attacked the doctrine of the four classical elements and challenged whether fire could be called a primary element when it appears to be compound, requiring, as it does, another material for its own nutriment.  He departed more widely from Aristotle in his doctrine of motion, since on the one hand he extended it over all categories, and did not limit it to those laid down by Aristotle. He viewed motion, with Aristotle, as an activity, not carrying its own goal in itself (ateles), of that which only potentially exists, but he opposed Aristotle's view that motion required a special explanation, and he regarded it as something proper both to nature in general and the celestial system in particular: — Theophrastus, Metaphysics, 10a.16-29 He recognised no activity without motion, and so referred all activities of the soul to motion: the desires and emotions to corporeal motion, judgment (kriseis) and contemplation to spiritual motion. The idea of a spirit entirely independent of organic activity, must therefore have appeared to him very doubtful; yet he appears to have contented himself with developing his doubts and difficulties on the point, without positively rejecting it. Other Peripatetics, like Dicaearchus, Aristoxenus, and especially Strato, developed further this naturalism in Aristotelian doctrine. Theophrastus seems, generally speaking, where the investigation overstepped the limits of experience, to have preferred to develop the difficulties rather than solve them, as is especially apparent in his Metaphysics. He was doubtful of Aristotle's teleology and recommended that such ideas be used with caution: - Theophrastus, Metaphysics, 10a.22–24, 11a.1–3 He did not follow the incessant attempts by Aristotle to refer phenomena to their ultimate foundations, or his attempts to unfold the internal connections between the latter, and between them and phenomena. In antiquity, it was a subject of complaint that Theophrastus had not expressed himself with precision and consistency respecting God, and had understood it at one time as Heaven, at another an (enlivening) breath (pneuma).   === EthicsEdit ===  Theophrastus did not allow a happiness resting merely upon virtue, or, consequently, to hold fast by the unconditional value of morality. He subordinated moral requirements to the advantage at least of a friend, and had allowed in prosperity the existence of an influence injurious to them. In later times, fault was found with his expression in the Callisthenes, "life is ruled by fortune, not wisdom" (vitam regit fortuna non sapientia). That in the definition of pleasure, likewise, he did not coincide with Aristotle, seems to be indicated by the titles of two of his writings, one of which dealt with pleasure generally, the other with pleasure as Aristotle had defined it. Although, like his teacher, he preferred contemplative (theoretical), to active (practical) life, he preferred to set the latter free from the restraints of family life, etc. in a manner of which Aristotle would not have approved. Theophrastus was opposed to eating meat on the grounds that it robbed animals of life and was therefore unjust. Non-human animals, he said, can reason, sense, and feel just as human beings do.   == The "portrait" of TheophrastusEdit == The marble herm figure with the bearded head of philosopher type, bearing the explicit inscription, must be taken as purely conventional. Unidentified portrait heads did not find a ready market in post-Renaissance Rome. This bust was formerly in the collection of marchese Pietro Massimi at Palazzo Massimi and belonged to marchese L. Massimi at the time the engraving was made. It is now in the Villa Albani, Rome (inv. 1034). The inscribed bust has often been illustrated in engravings and photographs: a photograph of it forms the frontispiece to the Loeb Classical Library Theophrastus: Enquiry into Plants vol. I, 1916. André Thevet illustrated in his iconographic compendium, Les vraies Pourtrats et vies des Hommes Illustres (Paris, 1584), an alleged portrait plagiarized from the bust, supporting his fraud with the invented tale that he had obtained it from the library of a Greek in Cyprus and that he had seen a confirming bust in the ruins of Antioch.   == In popular cultureEdit == A world is named Theophrastus in the 2014 Firefly graphic novel Serenity: Leaves on the Wind. Perhaps alluding to his skill at botany, it appears to be a green and pleasant world.   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit == "Theophrastus" entry in the Penny cyclopaedia of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, edited by George Long, (1842), Volume 24, pp. 332–4 Georges Cuvier, "Lecture Ninth - Theophrastus" in Baron Cuvier's Lectures on the Natural Sciences, Edinburgh new philosophical journal, (1830), Volume 18, pp. 76–83 Walton, S. A., Theophrastus on Lyngurium: medieval and early modern lore from the classical lapidary tradition, Annals of Science, Oct. 2001, 58(4):357–79, PDF on Academia.edu  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Theophrastus". Encyclopædia Britannica 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Theophrastus". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.    == BibliographyEdit ==   === Works by TheophrastusEdit === Metaphysics (=On First Principles). Translated by M. van Raalte, 1993, Brill. On First Principles. Translated by Dimitri Gutas, 2010, Brill.  Enquiry into Plants: Books 1-5. Translated by A. F. Hort, 1916. Loeb Classical Library. ISBN 0-674-99077-3 Vol 1 - Vol 2 Enquiry into Plants: Books 6-9; Treatise on Odours; Concerning Weather Signs. Translated by A. F. Hort, 1916. Loeb Classical Library. ISBN 0-674-99088-9 De Causis Plantarum. Translated by B. Einarson and G. Link, 1989-1990. Loeb Classical Library. 3 volumes: ISBN 0-674-99519-8, ISBN 0-674-99523-6, ISBN 0-674-99524-4. On Characters (Greek) Translated by R.C. Jebb, 1870. Translated by J. M. Edmonds, 1929, with parallel text. Translated by J. Rusten, 2003. Loeb Classical Library. ISBN 0-674-99603-8  On Sweat, On Dizziness and On Fatigue. Translated by W. Fortenbaugh, R. Sharples, M. Sollenberger. Brill 2002. ISBN 90-04-12890-5 On Weather Signs. Translated by J. G. Wood, G. J. Symons, 1894. Edited by Sider David and Brunschön Carl Wolfram. Brill 2007.  On Stones   === Works about TheophrastusEdit === Project Theophrastus, edited by William Fortenbaugh et al. Brill. Sources for His Life, Writings, Thought and Influence (two volumes), 1992. I. Life, Writings, Various Reports, Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, Theology, Mathematics. II. Psychology, Human Physiology, Living Creatures, Botany, Ethics, Religion, Politics, Rhetoric and Poetics, Music, Miscellanea.  Commentary, 9 volumes planned; published volumes: 2. Logic, by Pamela Huby 29 November 2015; with contributions on the Arabic material by Dimitri Gutas. 3.1. Sources on Physics (Texts 137-223), by R. W. Sharples 29 November 2015. 4. Psychology (Texts 265-327), by Pamela Huby 29 November 2015; with contributions on the Arabic material by Dimitri Gutas. 5. Sources on Biology (Human Physiology, Living Creatures, Botany: Texts 328-435), by R. W. Sharples 29 November 2015. 6.1. Sources on Ethics, by William W. Fortenbaugh; with contributions on the Arabic material by Dimitri Gutas 29 November 2015. 8. Sources on Rhetoric and Poetics (Texts 666-713), by William W. Fortenbaugh 29 November 2015; with contributions on the Arabic material by Dimitri Gutas. 9.2 Sources on Discoveries and Beginnings, Proverbs et al. (Texts 727-741), by William W. Fortenbaugh 29 November 2015.   == External linksEdit == Theophrastus and the Greek physiological psychology before Aristotle, by George Malcolm Stratton, (1917), at the Internet Archive. Contains a translation of On the Senses by Theophrastus.  Diogenes Laërtius, Life of Theophrastus, translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925). Peripatetic Logic: The Work of Eudemus of Rhodes and Theophrastus of Eresus Project Theophrastus (Greek) Online Galleries, University of Oklahoma Libraries

Tommaso d'Aquino, OP (1225 – 7 March 1274), also known as Thomas Aquinas (/əˈkwaɪnəs/), was an Italian Dominican friar and Catholic priest who was an immensely influential philosopher, theologian and jurist in the tradition of scholasticism, within which he is also known as the "Doctor Angelicus" and "Doctor Communis". The name "Aquinas" identifies his ancestral origins in the county of Aquino (in the present-day Lazio region), an area where his family held land until 1137. He was the foremost classical proponent of natural theology and the father of Thomism. His influence on Western thought is considerable, and much of modern philosophy developed or opposed his ideas, particularly in the areas of ethics, natural law, metaphysics, and political theory. Unlike many currents in the Church of the time, Thomas embraced several ideas put forward by Aristotle—whom he called "the Philosopher"—and attempted to synthesize Aristotelian philosophy with the principles of Christianity. The works for which he is best known are the Summa Theologica and the Summa contra Gentiles. His commentaries on Sacred Scripture and on Aristotle form an important part of his body of work. Furthermore, Thomas is distinguished for his eucharistic hymns, which form a part of the Church's liturgy. The Catholic Church honors Thomas Aquinas as a saint and regards him as the model teacher for those studying for the priesthood, and indeed the highest expression of both natural reason and speculative theology. In modern times, under papal directives, the study of his works was long used as a core of the required program of study for those seeking ordination as priests or deacons, as well as for those in religious formation and for other students of the sacred disciplines (philosophy, Catholic theology, church history, liturgy, and canon law). Also honored as a Doctor of the Church, Thomas is considered the Catholic Church's greatest theologian and philosopher. Pope Benedict XV declared: "This (Dominican) Order ... acquired new luster when the Church declared the teaching of Thomas to be her own and that Doctor, honored with the special praises of the Pontiffs, the master and patron of Catholic schools."   == Biography ==   === Early life (1225–1244) === Thomas was most probably born in the castle of Roccasecca, located in Aquino, old county of the Kingdom of Sicily (present-day Lazio region, Italy), c.1225. According to some authors, he was born in the castle of his father, Landulf of Aquino. Though he did not belong to the most powerful branch of the family, Landulf of Aquino was a man of means. As a knight in the service of King Roger II, he held the title miles. Thomas's mother, Theodora, belonged to the Rossi branch of the Neapolitan Caracciolo family. Landulf's brother Sinibald was abbot of the first Benedictine monastery at Monte Cassino. While the rest of the family's sons pursued military careers, the family intended for Thomas to follow his uncle into the abbacy;. This would have been a normal career path for a younger son of southern Italian nobility. At the age of five Thomas began his early education at Monte Cassino but after the military conflict between the Emperor Frederick II and Pope Gregory IX spilled into the abbey in early 1239, Landulf and Theodora had Thomas enrolled at the studium generale (university) recently established by Frederick in Naples. It was here that Thomas was probably introduced to Aristotle, Averroes and Maimonides, all of whom would influence his theological philosophy. It was also during his study at Naples that Thomas came under the influence of John of St. Julian, a Dominican preacher in Naples, who was part of the active effort by the Dominican order to recruit devout followers. There his teacher in arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music was Petrus de Ibernia.  At the age of nineteen Thomas resolved to join the recently founded Dominican Order. Thomas's change of heart did not please his family. In an attempt to prevent Theodora's interference in Thomas's choice, the Dominicans arranged to move Thomas to Rome, and from Rome, to Paris. However, while on his journey to Rome, per Theodora's instructions, his brothers seized him as he was drinking from a spring and took him back to his parents at the castle of Monte San Giovanni Campano. Thomas was held prisoner for about one year in the family castles at Monte San Giovanni and Roccasecca in an attempt to prevent him from assuming the Dominican habit and to push him into renouncing his new aspiration. Political concerns prevented the Pope from ordering Thomas's release, which had the effect of extending Thomas's detention. Thomas passed this time of trial tutoring his sisters and communicating with members of the Dominican Order. Family members became desperate to dissuade Thomas, who remained determined to join the Dominicans. At one point, two of his brothers resorted to the measure of hiring a prostitute to seduce him. According to legend Thomas drove her away wielding a fire iron. That night two angels appeared to him as he slept and strengthened his determination to remain celibate.  By 1244, seeing that all of her attempts to dissuade Thomas had failed, Theodora sought to save the family's dignity, arranging for Thomas to escape at night through his window. In her mind, a secret escape from detention was less damaging than an open surrender to the Dominicans. Thomas was sent first to Naples and then to Rome to meet Johannes von Wildeshausen, the Master General of the Dominican Order.   === Paris, Cologne, Albert Magnus, and first Paris regency (1245–1259) === In 1245 Thomas was sent to study at the Faculty of the Arts at the University of Paris, where he most likely met Dominican scholar Albertus Magnus, then the Chair of Theology at the College of St. James in Paris. When Albertus was sent by his superiors to teach at the new studium generale at Cologne in 1248, Thomas followed him, declining Pope Innocent IV's offer to appoint him abbot of Monte Cassino as a Dominican. Albertus then appointed the reluctant Thomas magister studentium. Because Thomas was quiet and didn't speak much, some of his fellow students thought he was slow. But Albertus prophetically exclaimed: "You call him the dumb ox, but in his teaching he will one day produce such a bellowing that it will be heard throughout the world." Thomas taught in Cologne as an apprentice professor (baccalaureus biblicus), instructing students on the books of the Old Testament and writing Expositio super Isaiam ad litteram (Literal Commentary on Isaiah), Postilla super Ieremiam (Commentary on Jeremiah) and Postilla super Threnos (Commentary on Lamentations). Then in 1252 he returned to Paris to study for the master's degree in theology. He lectured on the Bible as an apprentice professor, and upon becoming a baccalaureus Sententiarum (bachelor of the Sentences) devoted his final three years of study to commenting on Peter Lombard's Sentences. In the first of his four theological syntheses, Thomas composed a massive commentary on the Sentences entitled Scriptum super libros Sententiarium (Commentary on the Sentences). Aside from his masters writings, he wrote De ente et essentia (On Being and Essence) for his fellow Dominicans in Paris. In the spring of 1256 Thomas was appointed regent master in theology at Paris and one of his first works upon assuming this office was Contra impugnantes Dei cultum et religionem (Against Those Who Assail the Worship of God and Religion), defending the mendicant orders, which had come under attack by William of Saint-Amour. During his tenure from 1256 to 1259, Thomas wrote numerous works, including: Questiones disputatae de veritate (Disputed Questions on Truth), a collection of twenty-nine disputed questions on aspects of faith and the human condition prepared for the public university debates he presided over on Lent and Advent; Quaestiones quodlibetales (Quodlibetal Questions), a collection of his responses to questions posed to him by the academic audience; and both Expositio super librum Boethii De trinitate (Commentary on Boethius's De trinitate) and Expositio super librum Boethii De hebdomadibus (Commentary on Boethius's De hebdomadibus), commentaries on the works of 6th-century Roman philosopher Boethius. By the end of his regency, Thomas was working on one of his most famous works, Summa contra Gentiles.   === Naples, Orvieto, Rome (1259–1268) === In 1259 Thomas completed his first regency at the studium generale and left Paris so that others in his order could gain this teaching experience. He returned to Naples where he was appointed as general preacher by the provincial chapter of 29 September 1260. In September 1261 he was called to Orvieto as conventual lector responsible for the pastoral formation of the friars unable to attend a studium generale. In Orvieto Thomas completed his Summa contra Gentiles, wrote the Catena aurea, (The Golden Chain), and produced works for Pope Urban IV such as the liturgy for the newly created feast of Corpus Christi and the Contra errores graecorum (Against the Errors of the Greeks). In February 1265 the newly elected Pope Clement IV summoned Aquinas to Rome to serve as papal theologian. This same year he was ordered by the Dominican Chapter of Agnani to teach at the studium conventuale at the Roman convent of Santa Sabina, founded some years before, in 1222. The studium at Santa Sabina now became an experiment for the Dominicans, the Order's first studium provinciale, an intermediate school between the studium conventuale and the studium generale. Prior to this time the Roman Province had offered no specialized education of any sort, no arts, no philosophy; only simple convent schools, with their basic courses in theology for resident friars, were functioning in Tuscany and the meridionale during the first several decades of the order's life. But the new studium at Santa Sabina was to be a school for the province", a studium provinciale. Tolomeo da Lucca, an associate and early biographer of Aquinas, tells us that at the Santa Sabina studium Aquinas taught the full range of philosophical subjects, both moral and natural. While at the Santa Sabina studium provinciale Thomas began his most famous work the Summa theologiae, which he conceived of specifically as suited to beginning students: "Because a doctor of Catholic truth ought not only to teach the proficient, but to him pertains also to instruct beginners. As the Apostle says in 1 Corinthians 3:1–2, as to infants in Christ, I gave you milk to drink, not meat, our proposed intention in this work is to convey those things that pertain to the Christian religion in a way that is fitting to the instruction of beginners." While there he also wrote a variety of other works like his unfinished Compendium Theologiae and Responsio ad fr. Ioannem Vercellensem de articulis 108 sumptis ex opere Petri de Tarentasia (Reply to Brother John of Vercelli Regarding 108 Articles Drawn from the Work of Peter of Tarentaise). In his position as head of the studium Aquinas conducted a series of important disputations on the power of God, which he compiled into his De potentia. Nicholas Brunacci [1240–1322] was among Aquinas's students at the Santa Sabina studium provinciale and later at the Paris studium generale. In November 1268 he was with Aquinas and his associate and secretary Reginald of Piperno, as they left Viterbo on their way to Paris to begin the academic year. Another student of Aquinas's at the Santa Sabina studium provinciale was Blessed Tommasello da Perugia. Aquinas remained at the studium at Santa Sabina from 1265 until he was called back to Paris in 1268 for a second teaching regency. With his departure for Paris in 1268 and the passage of time the pedagogical activities of the studium provinciale at Santa Sabina were divided between two campuses. A new convent of the Order at the Church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva had a modest beginning in 1255 as a community for women converts, but grew rapidly in size and importance after being given over to the Dominicans friars in 1275. In 1288 the theology component of the provincial curriculum for the education of the friars was relocated from the Santa Sabina studium provinciale to the studium conventuale at Santa Maria sopra Minerva, which was redesignated as a studium particularis theologiae. This studium was transformed in the 16th century into the College of Saint Thomas (Latin: Collegium Divi Thomæ). In the 20th century the college was relocated to the convent of Saints Dominic and Sixtus and was transformed into the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum.   === Quarrelsome third Paris regency (1269–1272) ===  In 1268 the Dominican order assigned Thomas to be regent master at the University of Paris for a second time, a position he held until the spring of 1272. Part of the reason for this sudden reassignment appears to have arisen from the rise of "Averroism" or "radical Aristotelianism" in the universities. In response to these perceived evils, Thomas wrote two works, one of them being De unitate intellectus, contra Averroistas (On the Unity of Intellect, against the Averroists) in which he blasts Averroism as incompatible with Christian doctrine. During his second regency, he finished the second part of the Summa and wrote De virtutibus and De aeternitate mundi, the latter of which dealt with controversial Averroist and Aristotelian beginninglessness of the world. Disputes with some important Franciscans such as Bonaventure and John Peckham conspired to make his second regency much more difficult and troubled than the first. A year before Thomas re-assumed the regency at the 1266–67 Paris disputations, Franciscan master William of Baglione accused Thomas of encouraging Averroists, calling him the "blind leader of the blind". Thomas called these individuals the murmurantes (Grumblers). In reality, Thomas was deeply disturbed by the spread of Averroism and was angered when he discovered Siger of Brabant teaching Averroistic interpretations of Aristotle to Parisian students. On 10 December 1270, the Bishop of Paris, Etienne Tempier, issued an edict condemning thirteen Aristotelian and Averroistic propositions as heretical and excommunicating anyone who continued to support them. Many in the ecclesiastical community, the so-called Augustinians, were fearful that this introduction of Aristotelianism and the more extreme Averroism might somehow contaminate the purity of the Christian faith. In what appears to be an attempt to counteract the growing fear of Aristotelian thought, Thomas conducted a series of disputations between 1270 and 1272: De virtutibus in communi (On Virtues in General), De virtutibus cardinalibus (On Cardinal Virtues), De spe (On Hope).   === Final days and "straw" (1272–1274) ===  In 1272 Thomas took leave from the University of Paris when the Dominicans from his home province called upon him to establish a studium generale wherever he liked and staff it as he pleased. He chose to establish the institution in Naples, and moved there to take his post as regent master. He took his time at Naples to work on the third part of the Summa while giving lectures on various religious topics. On 6 December 1273 at the Dominican convent of Naples in the Chapel of Saint Nicholas after Matins Thomas lingered and was seen by the sacristan Domenic of Caserta to be levitating in prayer with tears before an icon of the crucified Christ. Christ said to Thomas, "You have written well of me, Thomas. What reward would you have for your labor?" Thomas responded, "Nothing but you, Lord."  After this exchange something happened, but Thomas never spoke of it or wrote it down. Because of what he saw, he abandoned his routine and refused to dictate to his socius Reginald of Piperno. When Reginald begged him to get back to work, Thomas replied: "Reginald, I cannot, because all that I have written seems like straw to me" (mihi videtur ut palea). What exactly triggered Thomas's change in behavior is believed by Catholics to have been some kind of supernatural experience of God. After taking to his bed, he did recover some strength. In 1054 the Great Schism had occurred between the Latin church following the Pope (later known as the Roman Catholic Church) in the West, and the Patriarchate of Constantinople in the East (known as the Orthodox Church). Looking to find a way to reunite the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church, Pope Gregory X convened the Second Council of Lyon to be held on 1 May 1274 and summoned Thomas to attend. At the meeting, Thomas's work for Pope Urban IV concerning the Greeks, Contra errores graecorum, was to be presented. On his way to the Council, riding on a donkey along the Appian Way, he struck his head on the branch of a fallen tree and became seriously ill again. He was then quickly escorted to Monte Cassino to convalesce. After resting for a while, he set out again, but stopped at the Cistercian Fossanova Abbey after again falling ill. The monks nursed him for several days, and as he received his last rites he prayed: "I receive Thee, ransom of my soul. For love of Thee have I studied and kept vigil, toiled, preached and taught...." He died on 7 March 1274 while giving commentary on the Song of Songs.   === Claims of levitation ===  For centuries, there have been recurring claims that Aquinas had the ability to levitate. For example, G. K. Chesterton wrote that, "His experiences included well-attested cases of levitation in ecstasy; and the Blessed Virgin appeared to him, comforting him with the welcome news that he would never be a Bishop."   === Condemnation of 1277 ===  In 1277 Étienne Tempier, the same bishop of Paris who had issued the condemnation of 1270, issued another more extensive condemnation. One aim of this condemnation was to clarify that God's absolute power transcended any principles of logic that Aristotle or Averroes might place on it. More specifically, it contained a list of 219 propositions that the bishop had determined to violate the omnipotence of God, and included in this list were twenty Thomistic propositions. Their inclusion badly damaged Thomas's reputation for many years. In the Divine Comedy, Dante sees the glorified soul of Thomas in the Heaven of the Sun with the other great exemplars of religious wisdom. Dante asserts that Thomas died by poisoning, on the order of Charles of Anjou; Villani (ix. 218) cites this belief, and the Anonimo Fiorentino describes the crime and its motive. But the historian Ludovico Antonio Muratori reproduces the account made by one of Thomas's friends, and this version of the story gives no hint of foul play. Thomas's theology had begun its rise to prestige. Two centuries later, in 1567, Pope Pius V proclaimed St. Thomas Aquinas a Doctor of the Church and ranked his feast with those of the four great Latin fathers: Ambrose, Augustine of Hippo, Jerome and Gregory. At the Council of Trent, Thomas had the honor of having his Summa theologiae placed on the altar alongside the Bible and the Decretals. In his encyclical of 4 August 1879, Pope Leo XIII stated that Thomas's theology was a definitive exposition of Catholic doctrine. Thus, he directed the clergy to take the teachings of Thomas as the basis of their theological positions. Leo XIII also decreed that all Catholic seminaries and universities must teach Thomas's doctrines, and where Thomas did not speak on a topic, the teachers were "urged to teach conclusions that were reconcilable with his thinking." In 1880, Saint Thomas Aquinas was declared patron of all Catholic educational establishments.   === Canonization === When the devil's advocate at his canonization process objected that there were no miracles, one of the cardinals answered, "Tot miraculis, quot articulis"—"there are as many miracles (in his life) as articles (in his Summa)", viz., thousands. Fifty years after the death of Thomas, on 18 July 1323, Pope John XXII, seated in Avignon, pronounced Thomas a saint. A monastery at Naples, near the cathedral of St. Januarius, shows a cell in which he supposedly lived. His remains were placed in the Church of the Jacobins in Toulouse on 28 January 1369. Between 1789 and 1974, they were held in the Basilique de Saint-Sernin, Toulouse. In 1974, they were returned to the Church of the Jacobins, where they have remained ever since. When he was canonized, his feast day was inserted in the General Roman Calendar for celebration on 7 March, the day of his death. Since this date commonly falls within Lent, the 1969 revision of the calendar moved his memorial to 28 January, the date of the translation of his relics to Toulouse. Thomas is honored with a feast day in some churches of the Anglican Communion.   == Philosophy ==  Thomas was a theologian and a Scholastic philosopher. However, he never considered himself a philosopher, and criticized philosophers, whom he saw as pagans, for always "falling short of the true and proper wisdom to be found in Christian revelation." With this in mind, Thomas did have respect for Aristotle, so much so that in the Summa, he often cites Aristotle simply as "the Philosopher." Much of his work bears upon philosophical topics, and in this sense may be characterized as philosophical. Thomas's philosophical thought has exerted enormous influence on subsequent Christian theology, especially that of the Catholic Church, extending to Western philosophy in general. Thomas stands as a vehicle and modifier of Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism. In fact, Thomas modified both Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism by way of heavy reliance on the Pseudo-Dionysius, which was an apologetical concoction of an earlier era. This source has arguably been assessed not as a communicator of tradition, but as a polemicist, who tried to alter Neo-Platonic tradition in a novel way for the Christian world that would make notions of complicated Divine Hierarchies more of an emphasis than notions of direct relationship with the figure of Christ as Mediator. Indeed, a number of Catholic sources contend that Thomas was influenced more by this concoction than any other source, including Aristotle.   === Commentaries on Aristotle === Thomas wrote several important commentaries on Aristotle's works, including On the Soul, Nicomachean Ethics and Metaphysics. His work is associated with William of Moerbeke's translations of Aristotle from Greek into Latin.   === Epistemology ===  Thomas believed "that for the knowledge of any truth whatsoever man needs divine help, that the intellect may be moved by God to its act." However, he believed that human beings have the natural capacity to know many things without special divine revelation, even though such revelation occurs from time to time, "especially in regard to such (truths) as pertain to faith." But this is the light that is given to man by God according to man's nature: "Now every form bestowed on created things by God has power for a determined act[uality], which it can bring about in proportion to its own proper endowment; and beyond which it is powerless, except by a superadded form, as water can only heat when heated by the fire. And thus the human understanding has a form, viz. intelligible light, which of itself is sufficient for knowing certain intelligible things, viz. those we can come to know through the senses."   === Ethics ===  Thomas's ethics are based on the concept of "first principles of action." In his Summa theologiae, he wrote:  Virtue denotes a certain perfection of a power. Now a thing's perfection is considered chiefly in regard to its end. But the end of power is act. Wherefore power is said to be perfect, according as it is determinate to its act.  Aquinas emphasized that "Synderesis is said to be the law of our mind, because it is a habit containing the precepts of the natural law, which are the first principles of human actions." According to Aquinas "…all acts of virtue are prescribed by the natural law: since each one's reason naturally dictates to him to act virtuously. But if we speak of virtuous acts, considered in themselves, i.e., in their proper species, thus not all virtuous acts are prescribed by the natural law: for many things are done virtuously, to which nature does not incline at first; but that, through the inquiry of reason, have been found by men to be conductive to well living." Therefore, we must determine if we are speaking of virtuous acts as under the aspect of virtuous or as an act in its species. Thomas defined the four cardinal virtues as prudence, temperance, justice, and fortitude. The cardinal virtues are natural and revealed in nature, and they are binding on everyone. There are, however, three theological virtues: faith, hope, and charity. Aquinas also describes the virtues as imperfect (incomplete) and perfect (complete) virtues. A perfect virtue is any virtue with charity, charity completes a cardinal virtue. A non-Christian can display courage, but it would be courage with temperance. A Christian would display courage with charity. These are somewhat supernatural and are distinct from other virtues in their object, namely, God:  Now the object of the theological virtues is God Himself, Who is the last end of all, as surpassing the knowledge of our reason. On the other hand, the object of the intellectual and moral virtues is something comprehensible to human reason. Wherefore the theological virtues are specifically distinct from the moral and intellectual virtues.  Thomas Aquinas wrote "Greed is a sin against God, just as all mortal sins, in as much as man condemns things eternal for the sake of temporal things." Furthermore, Thomas distinguished four kinds of law: eternal, natural, human, and divine. Eternal law is the decree of God that governs all creation. It is, "That Law which is the Supreme Reason cannot be understood to be otherwise than unchangeable and eternal." Natural law is the human "participation" in the eternal law and is discovered by reason. Natural law is based on "first principles":  . . . this is the first precept of the law, that good is to be done and promoted, and evil is to be avoided. All other precepts of the natural law are based on this . . .  Whether the natural law contains several precepts, or one only is explained by Aquinas, "All the inclinations of any parts whatsoever of human nature, e.g., of the concupiscible and irascible parts, in so far as they are ruled by reason, belong to the natural law, and are reduced to one first precept, as stated above: so that the precepts of the natural law are many in themselves, but are based on one common foundation." The desires to live and to procreate are counted by Thomas among those basic (natural) human values on which all human values are based. According to Thomas, all human tendencies are geared towards real human goods. In this case, the human nature in question is marriage, the total gift of oneself to another that ensures a family for children and a future for mankind. To clarify for Christian believers, Thomas defined love as "to will the good of another." Concerning the Human Law, Aquinas concludes, "...that just as, in the speculative reason, from naturally known indemonstrable principles, we draw the conclusions of the various sciences, the knowledge of which is not imparted to us by nature, but acquired by the efforts of reason, so to it is from the precepts of the natural law, as from general and indemonstrable principles, that human reason needs to proceed to the more particular determination of certain matters. These particular determinations, devised by human reason, are called human laws, provided the other essential conditions of law be observed...." Human law is positive law: the natural law applied by governments to societies. Natural and human law is not adequate alone. The need for human behavior to be directed made it necessary to have Divine law. Divine law is the specially revealed law in the scriptures. Aquinas quotes, "The Apostle says (Hebrews 7.12): The priesthood being translated, it is necessary that a translation also be made of the law. But the priesthood is twofold, as stated in the same passage, viz, the levitical priesthood, and the priesthood of Christ. Therefore the Divine law is twofold, namely, the Old Law and the New Law."  Thomas also greatly influenced Catholic understandings of mortal and venial sins. Thomas Aquinas, refers to animals as dumb and that the natural order has declared animals for man's use. Thomas denied that human beings have any duty of charity to animals because they are not persons. Otherwise, it would be unlawful to use them for food. But this does not give humans the license to be cruel to them, for "cruel habits might carry over into our treatment of human beings." Thomas contributed to economic thought as an aspect of ethics and justice. He dealt with the concept of a just price, normally its market price or a regulated price sufficient to cover seller costs of production. He argued it was immoral for sellers to raise their prices simply because buyers were in pressing need for a product.   === Political order === Aquinas's theory of political order became highly influential. He sees man as a social being that lives in a community and interacts with its other members. That leads, among other things, to the division of labour. Thomas thinks that monarchy is the best form of government, because a monarch does not have to form compromises with other persons. Moreover, according to Thomas, oligarchy degenerates more easily into tyranny than monarchy. To prevent a king from becoming a tyrant, his political powers must be curbed. Unless an agreement of all persons involved can be reached, a tyrant must be tolerated, as otherwise the political situation could deteriorate into anarchy, which would be even worse than tyranny. The kings are God's representatives in their territories. But the church, represented by the popes, is above the kings in matters of doctrine and morality. As a consequence, the kings and other worldly rulers are obliged to adapt their laws to the Catholic church's doctrines and ethics. For example, the worldly authorities have to execute persons whom the church has sentenced to death for heresy and they have to fight and subdue groups of heretics such as the Albigenses and Waldensians to restore the unity of the church. Following Aristotle's concept of slavery, Thomas justifies this institution on the grounds of natural law.   === Psychology === Aquinas maintains that a human is a single material substance. He understands the soul as the form of the body, which makes a human being the composite of the two. Thus, only living, form-matter composites can truly be called human; dead bodies are "human" only analogously. One actually existing substance comes from body and soul. A human is a single material substance, but still should be understood as having an immaterial soul, which continues after bodily death. In his Summa theologiae Aquinas clearly states his position on the nature of the soul; defining it as "the first principle of life." The soul is not corporeal, or a body; it is the act of a body. Because the intellect is incorporeal, it does not use the bodily organs, as "the operation of anything follows the mode of its being." According to Thomas the soul is not matter, not even incorporeal or spiritual matter. If it were, it would not be able to understand universals, which are immaterial. A receiver receives things according to the receiver's own nature, so for soul (receiver) to understand (receive) universals, it must have the same nature as universals. Yet, any substance that understands universals may not be a matter-form composite. So, humans have rational souls, which are abstract forms independent of the body. But a human being is one existing, single material substance that comes from body and soul: that is what Thomas means when he writes that "something one in nature can be formed from an intellectual substance and a body", and "a thing one in nature does not result from two permanent entities unless one has the character of substantial form and the other of matter." The soul is a "substantial form"; it is a part of a substance, but it is not a substance by itself. Nevertheless, the soul exists separately from the body, and continues, after death, in many of the capacities we think of as human. Substantial form is what makes a thing a member of the species to which it belongs, and substantial form is also the structure or configuration that provides the object with the abilities that make the object what it is. For humans, those abilities are those of the rational animal. These distinctions can be better understood in the light of Aquinas's understanding of matter and form, a hylomorphic ("matter/form") theory derived from Aristotle. In any given substance, matter and form are necessarily united, and each is a necessary aspect of that substance. However, they are conceptually separable. Matter represents what is changeable about the substance – what is potentially something else. For example, bronze matter is potentially a statue, or also potentially a cymbal. Matter must be understood as the matter of something. In contrast, form is what determines some particular chunk of matter to be a specific substance and no other. When Aquinas says that the human body is only partly composed of matter, he means the material body is only potentially a human being. The soul is what actualizes that potential into an existing human being. Consequently, the fact that a human body is live human tissue entails that a human soul is wholly present in each part of the human. Walter Freeman proposes that Thomism is the philosophical system explaining cognition that is most compatible with neurodynamics, in a 2008 article in the journal Mind and Matter entitled "Nonlinear Brain Dynamics and Intention According to Aquinas."   == Theology ==  Thomas viewed theology, or the sacred doctrine, as a science, the raw material data of which consists of written scripture and the tradition of the Catholic Church. These sources of data were produced by the self-revelation of God to individuals and groups of people throughout history. Faith and reason, while distinct but related, are the two primary tools for processing the data of theology. Thomas believed both were necessary—or, rather, that the confluence of both was necessary—for one to obtain true knowledge of God. Thomas blended Greek philosophy and Christian doctrine by suggesting that rational thinking and the study of nature, like revelation, were valid ways to understand truths pertaining to God. According to Thomas, God reveals himself through nature, so to study nature is to study God. The ultimate goals of theology, in Thomas's mind, are to use reason to grasp the truth about God and to experience salvation through that truth.   === Revelation === Thomas believed that truth is known through reason (natural revelation) and faith (supernatural revelation). Supernatural revelation has its origin in the inspiration of the Holy Spirit and is made available through the teaching of the prophets, summed up in Holy Scripture, and transmitted by the Magisterium, the sum of which is called "Tradition". Natural revelation is the truth available to all people through their human nature and powers of reason. For example, he felt this applied to rational ways to know the existence of God. Though one may deduce the existence of God and his Attributes (Unity, Truth, Goodness, Power, Knowledge) through reason, certain specifics may be known only through the special revelation of God through Jesus Christ. The major theological components of Christianity, such as the Trinity, the Incarnation, and charity are revealed in the teachings of the Church and the Scriptures and may not otherwise be deduced.   ==== Preserving nature within grace ==== Revealed knowledge does not negate the truth and the completeness of human science as human, it further establishes them. First, it grants that the same things can be treated from two different perspectives without one canceling the other; thus there can be two sciences of God. Second, it provides the basis for the two sciences: one functions through the power of the light of natural reason, the other through the light of divine revelation. Moreover, they can, at least to some extent, keep out of each other's way because they differ "according to genus". Sacred doctrine is a fundamentally different kind of thing from theology, which is part of philosophy (ST I. 1.1 ad 2). Faith and reason complement rather than contradict each other, each giving different views of the same truth.   === Creation ===  As a Catholic Thomas believed that God is the "maker of heaven and earth, of all that is visible and invisible." Like Aristotle, Thomas posited that life could form from non-living material or plant life, a theory of ongoing abiogenesis known as spontaneous generation:  Since the generation of one thing is the corruption of another, it was not incompatible with the first formation of things, that from the corruption of the less perfect the more perfect should be generated. Hence animals generated from the corruption of inanimate things, or of plants, may have been generated then.  Additionally Thomas considered Empedocles's theory that various mutated species emerged at the dawn of Creation. Thomas reasoned that these species were generated through mutations in animal sperm, and argued that they were not unintended by nature; rather, such species were simply not intended for perpetual existence. That discussion is found in his commentary on Aristotle's Physics:  The same thing is true of those substances Empedocles said were produced at the beginning of the world, such as the ‘ox-progeny’, i.e., half ox and half man. For if such things were not able to arrive at some end and final state of nature so that they would be preserved in existence, this was not because nature did not intend this [a final state], but because they were not capable of being preserved. For they were not generated according to nature, but by the corruption of some natural principle, as it now also happens that some monstrous offspring are generated because of the corruption of seed.   === Just war ===  Augustine of Hippo agreed strongly with the conventional wisdom of his time, that Christians should be pacifists philosophically, but that they should use defense as a means of preserving peace in the long run. For example, he routinely argued that pacifism did not prevent the defence of innocents. In essence, the pursuit of peace might require fighting to preserve it in the long-term. Such a war must not be preemptive, but defensive, to restore peace. Clearly, some special characteristics sets apart "war" from "schism", "brawling", and "sedition." While it would be contradictory to speak of a "just schism", a "just brawling" or a "just sedition" (the three terms denote sin and sin only) "war" alone permits sub classification into good and bad kinds. Curiously, however, Aquinas does not work up a terminological contrast between "just" and "unjust" war.  Thomas Aquinas, centuries later, used the authority of Augustine's arguments in an attempt to define the conditions under which a war could be just. He laid these out in his historic work, Summa Theologica: First, war must occur for a good and just purpose rather than the pursuit of wealth or power. Second, just war must be waged by a properly instituted authority such as the state. Third, peace must be a central motive even in the midst of violence.   ==== School of Salamanca ==== The School of Salamanca expanded Aquinas's understanding of natural law and just war. Given that war is one of the worst evils suffered by mankind, the adherents of the School reasoned that it ought to be resorted to only when it was necessary to prevent an even greater evil. A diplomatic agreement is preferable, even for the more powerful party, before a war is started. Examples of "just war" are: In self-defense, as long as there is a reasonable possibility of success. If failure is a foregone conclusion, then it is just a wasteful spilling of blood. Preventive war against a tyrant who is about to attack. War to punish a guilty enemy. A war is not legitimate or illegitimate simply based on its original motivation: it must comply with a series of additional requirements: The response must be commensurate with the evil; more violence than is strictly necessary would be unjust. Governing authorities declare war, but their decision is not sufficient cause to begin a war. If the people oppose a war, then it is illegitimate. The people have a right to depose a government that is waging, or is about to wage, an unjust war. Once war has begun, there remain moral limits to action. For example, one may not attack innocents or kill hostages. The belligerents must exhaust all options for dialogue and negotiation before undertaking a war; war is only legitimate as a last resort. Under this doctrine, expansionist wars, wars of pillage, wars to convert infidels or pagans, and wars for glory are all inherently unjust.   === Nature of God === Thomas believed that the existence of God is self-evident in itself, but not to us. "Therefore I say that this proposition, "God exists", of itself is self-evident, for the predicate is the same as the subject.... Now because we do not know the essence of God, the proposition is not self-evident to us; but needs to be demonstrated by things that are more known to us, though less known in their nature—namely, by effects." Thomas believed that the existence of God can be demonstrated. Briefly in the Summa theologiae and more extensively in the Summa contra Gentiles, he considered in great detail five arguments for the existence of God, widely known as the quinque viae (Five Ways).  Motion: Some things undoubtedly move, though cannot cause their own motion. Since, as Thomas believed, there can be no infinite chain of causes of motion, there must be a First Mover not moved by anything else, and this is what everyone understands by God.  Causation: As in the case of motion, nothing can cause itself, and an infinite chain of causation is impossible, so there must be a First Cause, called God.  Existence of necessary and the unnecessary: Our experience includes things certainly existing but apparently unnecessary. Not everything can be unnecessary, for then once there was nothing and there would still be nothing. Therefore, we are compelled to suppose something that exists necessarily, having this necessity only from itself; in fact itself the cause for other things to exist.  Gradation: If we can notice a gradation in things in the sense that some things are more hot, good, etc., there must be a superlative that is the truest and noblest thing, and so most fully existing. This then, we call God -->note Thomas does not ascribe actual qualities to God Himself.  Ordered tendencies of nature: A direction of actions to an end is noticed in all bodies following natural laws. Anything without awareness tends to a goal under the guidance of one who is aware. This we call God --> Note that even when we guide objects, in Thomas's view the source of all our knowledge comes from God as well. Concerning the nature of God, Thomas felt the best approach, commonly called the via negativa, is to consider what God is not. This led him to propose five statements about the divine qualities: God is simple, without composition of parts, such as body and soul, or matter and form. God is perfect, lacking nothing. That is, God is distinguished from other beings on account of God's complete actuality. Thomas defined God as the ‘Ipse Actus Essendi subsistens,’ subsisting act of being. God is infinite. That is, God is not finite in the ways that created beings are physically, intellectually, and emotionally limited. This infinity is to be distinguished from infinity of size and infinity of number. God is immutable, incapable of change on the levels of God's essence and character. God is one, without diversification within God's self. The unity of God is such that God's essence is the same as God's existence. In Thomas's words, "in itself the proposition 'God exists' is necessarily true, for in it subject and predicate are the same."   === Nature of Sin === Following St. Augustine of Hippo, Thomas defines sin as "a word, deed, or desire, contrary to the eternal law." It is important to note the analogous nature of law in Thomas's legal philosophy. Natural law is an instance or instantiation of eternal law. Because natural law is what human beings determine according to their own nature (as rational beings), disobeying reason is disobeying natural law and eternal law. Thus eternal law is logically prior to reception of either "natural law" (that determined by reason) or "divine law" (that found in the Old and New Testaments). In other words, God's will extends to both reason and revelation. Sin is abrogating either one's own reason, on the one hand, or revelation on the other, and is synonymous with "evil" (privation of good, or privatio boni). Thomas, like all Scholastics, generally argued that the findings of reason and data of revelation cannot conflict, so both are a guide to God's will for human beings.   === Nature of the Trinity === Thomas argued that God, while perfectly united, also is perfectly described by Three Interrelated Persons. These three persons (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit) are constituted by their relations within the essence of God. Thomas wrote that the term "Trinity" "does not mean the relations themselves of the Persons, but rather the number of persons related to each other; and hence it is that the word in itself does not express regard to another." The Father generates the Son (or the Word) by the relation of self-awareness. This eternal generation then produces an eternal Spirit "who enjoys the divine nature as the Love of God, the Love of the Father for the Word." This Trinity exists independently from the world. It transcends the created world, but the Trinity also decided to give grace to human beings. This takes place through the Incarnation of the Word in the person of Jesus Christ and through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within those who have experienced salvation by God; according to Aidan Nichols.   === Prima causa – first cause === Thomas's five proofs for the existence of God take some of Aristotle's assertions concerning principles of being. For God as prima causa ("first cause") comes from Aristotle's concept of the unmoved mover and asserts that God is the ultimate cause of all things.   === Nature of Jesus Christ === In the Summa Theologica Thomas begins his discussion of Jesus Christ by recounting the biblical story of Adam and Eve and by describing the negative effects of original sin. The purpose of Christ's Incarnation was to restore human nature by removing the contamination of sin, which humans cannot do by themselves. "Divine Wisdom judged it fitting that God should become man, so that thus one and the same person would be able both to restore man and to offer satisfaction." Thomas argued in favor of the satisfaction view of atonement; that is, that Jesus Christ died "to satisfy for the whole human race, which was sentenced to die on account of sin." Thomas argued against several specific contemporary and historical theologians who held differing views about Christ. In response to Photinus, Thomas stated that Jesus was truly divine and not simply a human being. Against Nestorius, who suggested that Son of God was merely conjoined to the man Christ, Thomas argued that the fullness of God was an integral part of Christ's existence. However, countering Apollinaris's views, Thomas held that Christ had a truly human (rational) soul, as well. This produced a duality of natures in Christ. Thomas argued against Eutyches that this duality persisted after the Incarnation. Thomas stated that these two natures existed simultaneously yet distinguishably in one real human body, unlike the teachings of Manichaeus and Valentinus. With respect to Saint Paul's assertion that Christ, "though he was in the form of God... emptied himself" (Philippians 2:6–7) in becoming human, Thomas offered an articulation of divine kenosis that has informed much subsequent Catholic Christology. Following the Council of Nicaea, Saint Augustine of Hippo, as well as the assertions of Scripture, Aquinas held the doctrine of divine immutability. Hence, in becoming human, there could be no change in the divine person of Christ. For Thomas “The mystery of Incarnation was not completed through God being changed in any way from the state in which He had been from eternity, but through His having united Himself to the creature in a new way, or rather through having united it to Himself.” Similarly, Thomas explained that Christ "emptied Himself, not by putting off His divine nature, but by assuming a human nature." For Thomas, "the divine nature is sufficiently full, because every perfection of goodness is there. But human nature and the soul are not full, but capable of fulness, because it was made as a slate not written upon. Therefore, human nature is empty." Thus, when Paul indicates that Christ "emptied himself" this is to be understood in light of his assumption of a human nature. In short "Christ had a real body of the same nature of ours, a true rational soul, and, together with these, perfect Deity." Thus, there is both unity (in his one hypostasis) and composition (in his two natures, human and Divine) in Christ.  I answer that, The Person or hypostasis of Christ may be viewed in two ways. First as it is in itself, and thus it is altogether simple, even as the Nature of the Word. Secondly, in the aspect of person or hypostasis to which it belongs to subsist in a nature; and thus the Person of Christ subsists in two natures. Hence though there is one subsisting being in Him, yet there are different aspects of subsistence, and hence He is said to be a composite person, insomuch as one being subsists in two.  Echoing Athanasius of Alexandria, he said that "The only begotten Son of God...assumed our nature, so that he, made man, might make men gods."   === Goal of human life === Thomas identified the goal of human existence as union and eternal fellowship with God. This goal is achieved through the beatific vision, in which a person experiences perfect, unending happiness by seeing the essence of God. The vision occurs after death as a gift from God to those who in life experienced salvation and redemption through Christ. The goal of union with God has implications for the individual's life on earth. Thomas stated that an individual's will must be ordered toward right things, such as charity, peace, and holiness. He saw this orientation as also the way to happiness. Indeed, Thomas ordered his treatment of the moral life around the idea of happiness. The relationship between will and goal is antecedent in nature "because rectitude of the will consists in being duly ordered to the last end [that is, the beatific vision]." Those who truly seek to understand and see God will necessarily love what God loves. Such love requires morality and bears fruit in everyday human choices.   === Treatment of heretics === Thomas Aquinas belonged to the Dominican Order (formally Ordo Praedicatorum, the Order of Preachers) who began as an order dedicated to the conversion of the Albigensians and other heterodox factions, at first by peaceful means; later the Albigensians were dealt with by means of the Albigensian Crusade. In the Summa theologiae, he wrote:  With regard to heretics two points must be observed: one, on their own side; the other, on the side of the Church. On their own side there is the sin, whereby they deserve not only to be separated from the Church by excommunication, but also to be severed from the world by death. For it is a much graver matter to corrupt the faith that quickens the soul, than to forge money, which supports temporal life. Wherefore if forgers of money and other evil-doers are forthwith condemned to death by the secular authority, much more reason is there for heretics, as soon as they are convicted of heresy, to be not only excommunicated but even put to death. On the part of the Church, however, there is mercy, which looks to the conversion of the wanderer, wherefore she condemns not at once, but "after the first and second admonition", as the Apostle directs: after that, if he is yet stubborn, the Church no longer hoping for his conversion, looks to the salvation of others, by excommunicating him and separating him from the Church, and furthermore delivers him to the secular tribunal to be exterminated thereby from the world by death.(Summa, II–II, Q.11, art.3.)  Heresy was a capital offense against the secular law of most European countries of the 13th century, which had a limited prison capacity. Kings and emperors, even those at war with the papacy, listed heresy first among the crimes against the state. Kings claimed power from God according to the Christian faith. Often enough, especially in that age of papal claims to universal worldly power, the rulers' power was tangibly and visibly legitimated directly through coronation by the pope. Simple theft, forgery, fraud, and other such crimes were also capital offenses; Thomas's point seems to be that the gravity of this offense, which touches not only the material goods but also the spiritual goods of others, is at least the same as forgery. Thomas's suggestion specifically demands that heretics be handed to a "secular tribunal" rather than magisterial authority. That Thomas specifically says that heretics "deserve... death" is related to his theology, according to which all sinners have no intrinsic right to life ("For the wages of sin is death; but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord"). Nevertheless, his point is clear: heretics should be executed by the state. He elaborates on his opinion regarding heresy in the next article, when he says:  In God's tribunal, those who return are always received, because God is a searcher of hearts, and knows those who return in sincerity. But the Church cannot imitate God in this, for she presumes that those who relapse after being once received, are not sincere in their return; hence she does not debar them from the way of salvation, but neither does she protect them from the sentence of death. (Summa, op. cit., art.4.)  For Jews and Muslims, Aquinas argues for toleration, not only of their persons but also of their public rites.   === Thoughts on afterlife and resurrection === A grasp of Aquinas's psychology is essential for understanding his beliefs around the afterlife and resurrection. Thomas, following Church doctrine, accepts that the soul continues to exist after the death of the body. Because he accepts that the soul is the form of the body, then he also must believe that the human being, like all material things, is form-matter composite. Substantial form (the human soul) configures prime matter (the physical body) and is the form by which a material composite belongs to that species it does; in the case of human beings, that species is rational animal. So, a human being is a matter-form composite that is organized to be a rational animal. Matter cannot exist without being configured by form, but form can exist without matter—which allows for the separation of soul from body. Aquinas says that the soul shares in the material and spiritual worlds, and so has some features of matter and other, immaterial, features (such as access to universals). The human soul is different from other material and spiritual things; it is created by God, but also only comes into existence in the material body. Human beings are material, but the human person can survive the death of the body through continued existence of the soul, which persists. The human soul straddles the spiritual and material worlds, and is both a configured subsistent form as well as a configurer of matter into that of a living, bodily human. Because it is spiritual, the human soul does not depend on matter and may exist separately. Because the human being is a soul-matter composite, the body has a part in what it is to be human. Perfected human nature consists in the human dual nature, embodied and intellecting. Resurrection appears to require dualism, which Thomas rejects. Yet, Aquinas believes the soul persists after the death and corruption of the body, and is capable of existence, separated from the body between the time of death and the resurrection. Aquinas believes in a different sort of dualism, one guided by Christian scripture. Aquinas knows that human beings are essentially physical, but physicality has a spirit capable of returning to God after life. For Aquinas, the rewards and punishment of the afterlife are not only spiritual. Because of this, resurrection is an important part of his philosophy on the soul. The human is fulfilled and complete in the body, so the hereafter must take place with souls enmattered in resurrected bodies. In addition to spiritual reward, humans can expect to enjoy material and physical blessings. Because Aquinas's soul requires a body for its actions, during the afterlife, the soul will also be punished or rewarded in corporeal existence. Aquinas states clearly his stance on resurrection, and uses it to back up his philosophy of justice; that is, the promise of resurrection compensates Christians who suffered in this world through a heavenly union with the divine. He says, "If there is no resurrection of the dead, it follows that there is no good for human beings other than in this life." Resurrection provides the impetus for people on earth to give up pleasures in this life. Thomas believes the human who has prepared for the afterlife both morally and intellectually will be rewarded more greatly; however, all reward is through the grace of God. Aquinas insists beatitude will be conferred according to merit, and will render the person better able to conceive the divine. Aquinas accordingly believes punishment is directly related to earthly, living preparation and activity as well. Aquinas's account of the soul focuses on epistemology and metaphysics, and because of this he believes it gives a clear account of the immaterial nature of the soul. Aquinas conservatively guards Christian doctrine, and thus maintains physical and spiritual reward and punishment after death. By accepting the essentiality of both body and soul, he allows for a heaven and hell described in scripture and church dogma.   == Modern influence == Many modern ethicists both within and outside the Catholic Church (notably Philippa Foot and Alasdair MacIntyre) have recently commented on the possible use of Thomas's virtue ethics as a way of avoiding utilitarianism or Kantian "sense of duty" (called deontology). Through the work of twentieth-century philosophers such as Elizabeth Anscombe (especially in her book Intention), Thomas's principle of double effect specifically and his theory of intentional activity generally have been influential. In recent years the cognitive neuroscientist Walter Freeman proposes that Thomism is the philosophical system explaining cognition that is most compatible with neurodynamics, in a 2008 article in the journal Mind and Matter entitled "Nonlinear Brain Dynamics and Intention According to Aquinas." Thomas's aesthetic theories, especially the concept of claritas, deeply influenced the literary practice of modernist writer James Joyce, who used to extol Thomas as being second only to Aristotle among Western philosophers. Joyce refers to Aquinas's doctrines in Elementa philosophiae ad mentem D. Thomae Aquinatis doctoris angelici (1898) of Girolamo Maria Mancini, professor of theology at the Collegium Divi Thomae de Urbe. For example, Mancini's Elementa is referred to in Joyce's Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. The influence of Thomas's aesthetics also can be found in the works of the Italian semiotician Umberto Eco, who wrote an essay on aesthetic ideas in Thomas (published in 1956 and republished in 1988 in a revised edition).   == Criticism of Aquinas as philosopher == Bertrand Russell criticized Aquinas's philosophy on the ground that  He does not, like the Platonic Socrates, set out to follow wherever the argument may lead. He is not engaged in an inquiry, the result of which it is impossible to know in advance. Before he begins to philosophize, he already knows the truth; it is declared in the Catholic faith. If he can find apparently rational arguments for some parts of the faith, so much the better; if he cannot, he need only fall back on revelation. The finding of arguments for a conclusion given in advance is not philosophy, but special pleading. I cannot, therefore, feel that he deserves to be put on a level with the best philosophers either of Greece or of modern times.  This critique is illustrated on the following examples: According to Russell, Aquinas advocates the indissolubility of marriage "on the ground that the father is useful in the education of the children, (a) because he is more rational than the mother, (b) because, being stronger, he is better able to inflict physical punishment." Even though modern approaches to education do not support these views, "No follower of Saint Thomas would, on that account, cease to believe in lifelong monogamy, because the real grounds of belief are not those which are alleged." It may be countered that the treatment of matrimony in the Summa Theologica is in the Supplements volume, which was not written by Aquinas. Moreover, as noted above, Aquinas's introduction of arguments and concepts from the pagan Aristotle and Muslim Averroes was controversial within the Catholic Church of his day. Aquinas's views of God as first cause, cf. quinque viae, "depend upon the supposed impossibility of a series having no first term. Every mathematician knows that there is no such impossibility; the series of negative integers ending with minus one is an instance to the contrary." Moreover, according to Russell, statements regarding God's essence and existence that are reached within the Aristotelian logic are based on "some kind of syntactical confusion, without which much of the argumentation about God would lose its plausibility."   == See also ==   == Notes ==   == References == Aquinas, Thomas (2000). Mary T. Clark, ed. An Aquinas Reader: Selections from the Writings of Thomas Aquinas. Fordham University Press. ISBN 0-8232-2029-X.  ——— (2002). Aquinas's Shorter Summa. Manchester, New Hampshire: Sophia Institute Press. ISBN 1-928832-43-1.  Davies, Brian (1993). The Thought of Thomas Aquinas. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-826753-3.  ——— (2004). Aquinas: An Introduction. Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-7095-5.  Geisler, Norman, ed. (1999). Baker Encyclopedia of Christian Apologetics. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Academic.  Gordon, Barry (2009) [1987], "Aquinas, St Thomas", The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics 1 . Hampden, Renn Dickson (1848). "The Life of Thomas Aquinas: A Dissertation of the Scholastic Philosophy of the Middle Ages". Encyclopædia Metropolitana (London: John J. Griffin & Co.).  Healy, Nicholas M. (2003). Thomas Aquinas: Theologian of the Christian Life. Ashgate. ISBN 0-7546-1472-7.  Kreeft, Peter (1990). Summa of the Summa. Ignatius Press. ISBN 0-89870-300-X.  Kung, Hans (1994). Great Christian Thinkers. New York: Continuum Books. ISBN 0-8264-0848-6.  McInerny, Ralph M. (1993). Aquinas Against the Averroists: On There Being Only One Intellect. Purdue University Press. ISBN 1-55753-029-7.  Nichols, Aidan (2003). Discovering Aquinas: An Introduction to His Life, Work, and Influence. Wm. B. Eerdmans. ISBN 0-8028-0514-0.  Russell, Bertrand (1967), A History of Western Philosophy, Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-67120158-1  Schaff, Philip (1953). "Thomas Aquinas". The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge 126 (3190). Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Book House. pp. 422–23. Bibcode:1930Natur.126..951G. doi:10.1038/126951c0.  Stump, Eleonore (2003). Aquinas. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-02960-0.  Attribution  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Seeburg, Reinhold (1914). "Thomas Aquinas". In Jackson, Samuel Macauley. New Schaff–Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge XI (third ed.). London and New York: Funk and Wagnalls. pp. 422–27.   This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Thomas Aquinas". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.    == Further reading == Copleston, Frederick (1991). Aquinas: An Introduction to the Life and Work of the Great Medieval Thinker. Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-013674-6.  Faitanin, Paulo (2008). A Sabedoria do Amor: iniciação à filosofia de Santo Tomás de Aquino [Love's philosophy: initiation to Saint Thomas Aquinas's philosophy] (in Portuguese). Instituto Aquinate. ISSN 1982-8845.  ——— (2008). O Ofício do Sábio: o modo de estudar e ensinar segundo Santo Tomás de Aquino [The wise's profession: the way of studying & learning after Saint Thomas Aquinas] (in Portuguese). Instituto Aquinate. ISSN 1982-8845.  Paterson, Craig & Matthew S. Pugh (eds.), Analytical Thomism: Traditions in Dialogue. Ashgate, 2006. Introduction to Thomism Schmitz, Kenneth (2007). St. Thomas Aquinas (audiobook). Narrated by Charlton Heston. Ashland, Oregon; Boulder, Colorado: Knowledge Products; Blackstone Audiobooks; NetLibrary. ISBN 0-7861-6932-X. OCLC 78235338.  Strathern, Paul (1998). Thomas Aquinas in 90 Minutes. Chicago: I.R. Dee. 90 p. ISBN 1-56663-194-7. Thomas Aquinas (1952), edd. Walter Farrell, OP, and Martin J. Healy, My Way of Life: Pocket Edition of St. Thomas—The Summa Simplified for Everyone, Brooklyn: Confraternity of the Precious Blood. Torrell, Jean-Pierre (2005). Saint Thomas Aquinas (Rev. ed.). Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 978-0-8132-1423-8. OCLC 456104266.  Wallace, William A (1970). "Thomas Aquinas, Saint". In Gillispie, Charles. Dictionary of Scientific Biography 1. New York: Scribner & American Council of Learned Societies. pp. 196–200. ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9.  Weisheipl, James (1974). Friar Thomas D'Aquino: his life, thought, and work (1st ed.). Garden City, New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-01299-7.    == External links ==   === Biographies === St. Thomas Aquinas (pdf) biography from Fr. Alban Butler's Lives of the Saints  "St. Thomas Aquinas". Catholic Encyclopedia. 1913.  St. Thomas Aquinas article by Daniel Kennedy in Catholic Encyclopedia (1912), at NewAdvent.org St. Thomas Aquinas biography by Jacques Maritain St. Thomas Aquinas biography by G. K. Chesterton protected by copyright outside Australia Vita D. Thomae Aquinatis, a pictorial life of Aquinas from a manuscript by Otto van Veen (1610) Colonnade Statue St Peter's Square   === On his thought === "Introductory Guide to Reading the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas." Actus Essendi: An Electronic Journal on Aquinas's Doctrine of the Act of Being. Brown, Paterson. "Infinite Causal Regression", Philosophical Review, 1966. Brown, Paterson. "St. Thomas's Doctrine of Necessary Being", Philosophical Review, 1964. Instituto Teológico São Tomás de Aquino (Portuguese) On the legend of St. Albert's automaton Aquinas on Intelligent Extra-Terrestrial Life Poetry of St. Thomas Aquinas Biography and ideas at SWIF/University of Bari/Italy (Italian) Postilla in Job From the Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress Thomas Aquinas, by R. McInerny and J. O'Callaghan (2014), in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aquinas' Moral, Political and Legal Philosophy, by J. Finnis (2011), in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Thomas Aquinas entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aquinas: Metaphysics entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aquinas: Moral Philosophy entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aquinas: Political Philosophy entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aquinas: Theology entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Thomas Aquinas at Find a Grave Thomistic Philosophy Inspired by the enduring thought of Saint Thomas Aquinas Article on Thomism by the Jacques Maritain Center of Notre Dame University Thomistica.net news and newsletter devoted to the academic study of Aquinas Aquinas the Scholar from The Thirteenth, the Greatest of Centuries, ch. XVII. by James Joseph Walsh A discussion of Aquinas on BBC Radio 4's In Our Time series 2009   === By Thomas === Corpus Thomisticum – his complete works in (Latin) De Rationibus Fidei/Reasons for the Faith against Muslim Objections... Documenta Catholica Omnia – his complete works in PDF files, in (Latin), (Italian), (English), (German), (Spanish), (French), (Portuguese) Summa contra Gentiles Summa Theologica The Principles of Nature On Being and Essence (De Ente et Essentia) Catena Aurea (partial) Works by Thomas Aquinas at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Thomas Aquinas at Internet Archive Works by Thomas Aquinas at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Bibliotheca Thomistica IntraText: texts, concordances and frequency lists An Aquinas Bibliography Thomas Aquinas in English De Magistro (On the teacher q. 11, a.1 of de Veritate) Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by Thomas Aquinas in .jpg and .tiff format.

Thomas Bradwardine (c. 1290 – 26 August 1349) was an English cleric, scholar, mathematician, physicist, courtier and, very briefly, Archbishop of Canterbury. As a celebrated scholastic philosopher and doctor of theology, he is often called Doctor Profundus, (medieval epithet, meaning "the Profound Doctor").   == Life == Bradwardine was born in Sussex either at Hartfield or at Chichester, where his family were settled, members of the smaller gentry or burghers. Bradwardine was a precocious student, educated at Balliol College, Oxford where he was a fellow by 1321; he took the degree of doctor of divinity, and acquired the reputation of a profound scholar, a skillful mathematician and an able theologian. He was also a gifted logician with theories on the insolubles and in particular the liar paradox. Bradwardine subsequently moved to Merton College, Oxford on a fellowship. He was afterwards raised to the high offices of chancellor of the university and professor of divinity. Bradwardine (like his contemporary William of Occam) was a culminating figure of the great intellectual movement at Oxford that had begun in the 1240s. Bradwardine was an ordinary secular cleric, which gave him intellectual freedom but deprived him of the security and wherewithal that the Preaching Orders would have afforded; instead he turned to royal patronage. From being chancellor of the diocese of London as Dean of St Paul's, he became chaplain and confessor to Edward III, whom he attended during his wars in France at the Battle of Crécy, where he preached at the victory Mass, and at the subsequent siege of Calais. Edward repeatedly entrusted him with diplomatic missions. On his return to England, he was successively appointed prebendary of Lincoln and dean (1348). In 1349 the canons of the chapter at Canterbury elected him Archbishop following the death of Archbishop John Stratford, but Edward III withheld his consent, preferring his chancellor John de Ufford, perhaps loth to lose his trusted confessor. After Ufford died of the Black Death, 2 May, Bradwardine went to receive confirmation from Pope Clement VI at Avignon, but on his return he died of the plague at Rochester on 26 August 1349, forty days after his consecration. He was buried at Canterbury. Chaucer in The Nun's Priest's Tale (line 476) ranks Bradwardine with Augustine and Boethius. His great theological work, to modern eyes, is a treatise against the Pelagians, entitled De causa Dei contra Pelagium et de virtute causarum. Bradwardine's major treatise argued that space was an infinite void in which God could have created other worlds, which he would rule as he ruled this one. The "causes of virtue" include the influences of the planets, not as predestining a human career, but influencing a subject's essential nature. This astrophysical treatise was not published until it was edited by Sir Henry Savile and printed in London, 1618; its circulation in manuscript was very limited. The implications of the infinite void were revolutionary; to have pursued them would have threatened the singular relationship of man and this natural world to God (Cantor 2001); in it he treated theology mathematically. He wrote also De Geometria speculativa (printed at Paris, 1530); De Arithmetica practica (printed at Paris, 1502); De proportionibus velocitatum in motibus (1328) (printed at Paris, 1495; Venice, 1505); De Quadratura Circuli (Paris, 1495); and an Ars Memorative, Sloane manuscripts. No. 3974 in the British Museum—earning from the Pope the title of the Profound Doctor. Another text, De Continuo is more tenuously credited to him and thought to be written sometime between 1328 and 1325.   == Science ==  Merton College sheltered a group of dons devoted to natural science, mainly physics, astronomy and mathematics, rivals of the intellectuals at the University of Paris. Bradwardine was one of these Oxford Calculators, studying mechanics with William Heytesbury, Richard Swineshead, and John Dumbleton. The Oxford Calculators distinguished kinematics from dynamics, emphasising kinematics, and investigating instantaneous velocity. They first formulated the mean speed theorem: a body moving with constant velocity travels the same distance as an accelerated body in the same time if its velocity is half the final speed of the accelerated body. They also demonstrated this theorem — the foundation of "The Law of Falling Bodies" — long before Galileo, who is generally credited with it. The mathematical physicist and historian of science Clifford Truesdell, wrote:  The now published sources prove to us, beyond contention, that the main kinematical properties of uniformly accelerated motions, still attributed to Galileo by the physics texts, were discovered and proved by scholars of Merton college.... In principle, the qualities of Greek physics were replaced, at least for motions, by the numerical quantities that have ruled Western science ever since. The work was quickly diffused into France, Italy, and other parts of Europe. Almost immediately, Giovanni di Casale and Nicole Oresme found how to represent the results by geometrical graphs, introducing the connection between geometry and the physical world that became a second characteristic habit of Western thought ...  In Tractatus de proportionibus (1328), Bradwardine extended the theory of proportions of Eudoxus of Cnidus to anticipate the concept of exponential growth, later developed by the Bernoulli and Euler, with compound interest as a special case. Arguments for the mean speed theorem (above) require the modern mathematical concept of limit, so Bradwardine had to use arguments of his day. Mathematician and mathematical historian Carl Benjamin Boyer writes, "Bradwardine developed the Boethian theory of double or triple or, more generally, what we would call 'n-tuple' proportion". Boyer also writes that "the works of Bradwardine had contained some fundamentals of trigonometry gleaned from Muslim sources". Yet "Bradwardine and his Oxford colleagues did not quite make the breakthrough to modern science" (Cantor 2001, p. 122). The most essential missing tool was calculus.   == The Art of Memory == Bradwardine was also a practitioner and exponent of the art of memory, a loosely associated group of mnemonic principles and techniques used to organise memory impressions, improve recall, and assist in the combination and 'invention' of ideas. His De Memoria Artificiali (c. 1335) discusses memory training current during his time.   == Influenced == Bradwardine's theories on the insolubles including the liar paradox were a great influence on the work of Jean Buridan and therefore in turn of the more recent philosopher A. N. Prior. His De Causa Dei influenced the theology of John Wycliffe on grace and predestination.   == Latin works and English translations == Insolubilia (Insolubles), Latin text and English translation by Stephen Read, Leuven, Peeters Editions (Dallas Medieval Texts and Translations, 10), 2010. De insolubilibus (On Insolubles), edited by Marie Louise Roure in 'La problématique des propositions insolubles du XIIIe siècle et du début du XIVe, suivie de l'édition des traités de William Shyreswood, Walter Burleigh et Thomas Bradwardine', Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen Age 37, 1970: 205–326. De incipit et desinit (On 'It Begins' and 'It Ceases'), ed. Lauge O. Nielsen, Cahiers de l'Institut du moyen Age grec et Latin 42, 1982: 1-83. Geometria speculativa (Speculative Geometry), Latin text and English translation with an introduction and a commentary by George Molland, Stuttgart: Steiner Verlag, 1989. Arithmetica speculativa (Speculative Arithmetic) Parisiis: G. Marchant, 1495 De proportionibus velocitatum in motibus (On the Ratios of Velocities in Motions) Latin text and English translation by H. Lamar Crosby, Jr. in: 'Thomas of Bradwardine: His Tractatus de Proportionibus: Its Significance for the Development of Mathematical Physics', Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1955. De continuo (On the Continuum), edited by John Emery Murdoch in 'Geometry and the Continuum in the Fourteenth Century: A Philosophical Analysis of Thomas Bradwardine's Tractatus de continuo', Ph.D. thesis, University of Wisconsin, 1957. De futuris contingentibus (On Future Contingents), edited by Jean-François Genest, Recherches augustiniennes 14, 1979: 249-336. De causa Dei contra Pelagium et de virtute causarum ad suos Mertonenses, libri tres (In Defense of God Against the Pelagians and On the Power of Causes, in three books), edited by Henry Savile, London: 1618; reprinted at Frankfurt: Minerva, 1964. Commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard: some questions found in a manuscript at the Bibliothèque Nationale de Paris are published in: J.-F. Genest and Katherine Tachau, 'La lecture de Thomas Bradwardine sur les Sentences', Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Age 57, 1990: 301-6. De memoria artificiali adquirenda (On Acquiring a Trained Memory), ed. Mary Carruthers, Journal of Medieval Latin, 2, (1992): 25–43; translated in Carruthers M., The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture, New York: Cambridge Univ. Press. 1990, p. 281-8; Carruthers M. and Ziolkowski J., The Medieval Craft of Memory, Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, 2002, pp. 205-14. Gillmeister H. (ed.), An intriguing fourteenth-century document: Thomas Bradwardine’s De arte memorativa. Archiv fur das Studium der neueren Sprachen und Literaturen 220, 1983, pp. 111-114. Green-Pedersen N.-J. (ed.), Bradwardine (?) on Ockham’s doctrine of consequences: an edition. Cahiers de l’Institute de moyen age grec et latin, 42, 1982, pp. 85-150. Lamar Crosby H. (ed.), Thomas of Bradwardine: his Tractatus de Proportionibus: its significance for the development of mathematical physics. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press, 1955.   == See also == List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics   == Citations ==   == References == A History of Mathematics (pp. 288, 302), Carl O. Boyer, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1984. The Science of Mechanics in the Middle Ages, Marshall Claggett, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1960. Tractatus de Proportionibus, Its Significance for the Development of Mathematical Physics, H. L. Crosby, University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1955. Fryde, E. B.; Greenway, D. E.; Porter, S.; Roy, I. (1996). Handbook of British Chronology (Third revised ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-56350-X.  Essays in The History of Mechanics, Clifford Truesdell, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1968, QC122.T7. See Quétif–Échard, Script. Praedic. (1719), i. 744 W. F. Hook, Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury, vol. iv. In the Wake of the Plague, Norman F. Cantor, Simon & Schuster, 2001. "Death comes to the Archbishop": a chapter sets Bradwardine's political and intellectual career in his Oxford milieu, in the context of the Black Death.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Cousin, John William (1910). A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature. London: J. M. Dent & Sons. Wikisource    == Further reading == Heiko Oberman, Archbishop Thomas Bradwardine, a Fourteenth Century Augustinian: A Study of His Theology in Its Historical Perspective, Utrecht: Kemink & Zoon, 1957. Gordon Leff, Bradwardine and the Pelagians: A Study of His "De Causa Dei" and Its Opponents, Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1957. Read, Stephen, "Paradox, Closure and Indirect Speech Reports", Logica Universalis, 2015. doi:10.1007/s11787-014-0115-3   == External links == Thomas Bradwardine at The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive Thomas Bradwardine. Geometria speculativa at Somni

Thoralf Albert Skolem (23 May 1887 – 23 March 1963) (Norwegian pronunciation: [ˈtuːɾɑlf ˈskuːləm]) was a Norwegian mathematician who worked in mathematical logic and set theory.   == Life == Although Skolem's father was a primary school teacher, most of his extended family were farmers. Skolem attended secondary school in Kristiania (later renamed Oslo), passing the university entrance examinations in 1905. He then entered Det Kongelige Frederiks Universitet to study mathematics, also taking courses in physics, chemistry, zoology and botany. In 1909, he began working as an assistant to the physicist Kristian Birkeland, known for bombarding magnetized spheres with electrons and obtaining aurora-like effects; thus Skolem's first publications were physics papers written jointly with Birkeland. In 1913, Skolem passed the state examinations with distinction, and completed a dissertation titled Investigations on the Algebra of Logic. He also traveled with Birkeland to the Sudan to observe the zodiacal light. He spent the winter semester of 1915 at the University of Göttingen, at the time the leading research center in mathematical logic, metamathematics, and abstract algebra, fields in which Skolem eventually excelled. In 1916 he was appointed a research fellow at Det Kongelige Frederiks Universitet. In 1918, he became a Docent in Mathematics and was elected to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters. Skolem did not at first formally enroll as a Ph.D. candidate, believing that the Ph.D. was unnecessary in Norway. He later changed his mind and submitted a thesis in 1926, titled Some theorems about integral solutions to certain algebraic equations and inequalities. His notional thesis advisor was Axel Thue, even though Thue had died in 1922. In 1927, he married Edith Wilhelmine Hasvold. Skolem continued to teach at Det kongelige Frederiks Universitet (renamed the University of Oslo in 1939) until 1930 when he became a Research Associate in Chr. Michelsen Institute in Bergen. This senior post allowed Skolem to conduct research free of administrative and teaching duties. However, the position also required that he reside in Bergen, a city which then lacked a university and hence had no research library, so that he was unable to keep abreast of the mathematical literature. In 1938, he returned to Oslo to assume the Professorship of Mathematics at the university. There he taught the graduate courses in algebra and number theory, and only occasionally on mathematical logic. Skolem's Ph.D. student Øystein Ore went on to a career in the USA. Skolem served as president of the Norwegian Mathematical Society, and edited the Norsk Matematisk Tidsskrift ("The Norwegian Mathematical Journal") for many years. He was also the founding editor of Mathematica Scandinavica. After his 1957 retirement, he made several trips to the United States, speaking and teaching at universities there. He remained intellectually active until his sudden and unexpected death. For more on Skolem's academic life, see Fenstad (1970).   == Mathematics == Skolem published around 180 papers on Diophantine equations, group theory, lattice theory, and most of all, set theory and mathematical logic. He mostly published in Norwegian journals with limited international circulation, so that his results were occasionally rediscovered by others. An example is the Skolem–Noether theorem, characterizing the automorphisms of simple algebras. Skolem published a proof in 1927, but Emmy Noether independently rediscovered it a few years later. Skolem was among the first to write on lattices. In 1912, he was the first to describe a free distributive lattice generated by n elements. In 1919, he showed that every implicative lattice (now also called a Skolem lattice) is distributive and, as a partial converse, that every finite distributive lattice is implicative. After these results were rediscovered by others, Skolem published a 1936 paper in German, "Über gewisse 'Verbände' oder 'Lattices'", surveying his earlier work in lattice theory. Skolem was a pioneer model theorist. In 1920, he greatly simplified the proof of a theorem Leopold Löwenheim first proved in 1915, resulting in the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem, which states that if a first-order theory has an infinite model, then it has a countable model. His 1920 proof employed the axiom of choice, but he later (1922 and 1928) gave proofs using König's lemma in place of that axiom. It is notable that Skolem, like Löwenheim, wrote on mathematical logic and set theory employing the notation of his fellow pioneering model theorists Charles Sanders Peirce and Ernst Schröder, including ∏, ∑ as variable-binding quantifiers, in contrast to the notations of Peano, Principia Mathematica, and Principles of Mathematical Logic. Skolem (1934) pioneered the construction of non-standard models of arithmetic and set theory. Skolem (1922) refined Zermelo's axioms for set theory by replacing Zermelo's vague notion of a "definite" property with any property that can be coded in first-order logic. The resulting axiom is now part of the standard axioms of set theory. Skolem also pointed out that a consequence of the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem is what is now known as Skolem's paradox: If Zermelo's axioms are consistent, then they must be satisfiable within a countable domain, even though they prove the existence of uncountable sets.   == Completeness == The completeness of first-order logic is an easy corollary of results Skolem proved in the early 1920s and discussed in Skolem (1928), but he failed to note this fact, perhaps because mathematicians and logicians did not become fully aware of completeness as a fundamental metamathematical problem until the 1928 first edition of Hilbert and Ackermann's Principles of Mathematical Logic clearly articulated it. In any event, Kurt Gödel first proved this completeness in 1930. Skolem distrusted the completed infinite and was one of the founders of finitism in mathematics. Skolem (1923) sets out his primitive recursive arithmetic, a very early contribution to the theory of computable functions, as a means of avoiding the so-called paradoxes of the infinite. Here he developed the arithmetic of the natural numbers by first defining objects by primitive recursion, then devising another system to prove properties of the objects defined by the first system. These two systems enabled him to define prime numbers and to set out a considerable amount of number theory. If the first of these systems can be considered as a programming language for defining objects, and the second as a programming logic for proving properties about the objects, Skolem can be seen as an unwitting pioneer of theoretical computer science. In 1929, Presburger proved that Peano arithmetic without multiplication was consistent, complete, and decidable. The following year, Skolem proved that the same was true of Peano arithmetic without addition, a system named Skolem arithmetic in his honor. Gödel's famous 1931 result is that Peano arithmetic itself (with both addition and multiplication) is incompletable and hence a posteriori undecidable. Hao Wang praised Skolem's work as follows:  "Skolem tends to treat general problems by concrete examples. He often seemed to present proofs in the same order as he came to discover them. This results in a fresh informality as well as a certain inconclusiveness. Many of his papers strike one as progress reports. Yet his ideas are often pregnant and potentially capable of wide application. He was very much a 'free spirit': he did not belong to any school, he did not found a school of his own, he did not usually make heavy use of known results... he was very much an innovator and most of his papers can be read and understood by those without much specialized knowledge. It seems quite likely that if he were young today, logic... would not have appealed to him." (Skolem 1970: 17-18)  For more on Skolem's accomplishments, see Hao Wang (1970).   == See also ==  Leopold Löwenheim Model theory Skolem normal form Skolem's paradox Skolem problem Skolem sequence Skolem–Mahler–Lech theorem   == References ==   === Primary === Skolem, Th. (1934) Über die Nicht-charakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich oder abzählbar unendlich vieler Aussagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvariablen. Fundam. Math. 23, 150-161. Skolem, T. A., 1970. Selected works in logic, Fenstad, J. E., ed. Oslo: Scandinavian University Books. Contains 22 articles in German, 26 in English, 2 in French, 1 English translation of an article originally published in Norwegian, and a complete bibliography.   === Writings in English translation === Jean van Heijenoort, 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. Harvard Univ. Press. 1920. "Logico-combinatorial investigations on the satisfiability or provability of mathematical propositions: A simplified proof of a theorem by Loewenheim," 252–263. 1922. "Some remarks on axiomatized set theory," 290-301. 1923. "The foundations of elementary arithmetic," 302-33. 1928. "On mathematical logic," 508–524.   === Secondary === Brady, Geraldine, 2000. From Peirce to Skolem. North Holland. Fenstad, Jens Erik, 1970, "Thoralf Albert Skolem in Memoriam" in Skolem (1970: 9–16). Hao Wang, 1970, "A survey of Skolem's work in logic" in Skolem (1970: 17–52).   == External links == MacTutor: Thoralf Skolem. Thoralf Skolem at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Fenstad, Jens Erik, 1996, "Thoralf Albert Skolem 1887-1963: A Biographical Sketch," Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic 1: 99-106.

Udayana also known as Udayanācārya (Udyanacharya, or Master Udayana) was a very important Hindu logician of the tenth century who attempted to reconcile the views held by the two major schools of logic (Nyaya and Vaisheshika). This became the root of the Navya-Nyāya school of the thirteenth century, established by Gangesha Upadhyaya ("New Nyāya") school of "right" reasoning, which is still recognized and followed in some regions of India. He lived in Kariyan village in Mithila, near present-day Darbhanga, Bihar state, India. Udayana wrote a sub-gloss on Vachaspati's work called the Nyaya-vaartika-taatparya-tiikaa-parishuddhi. He wrote several other works such as the Kusumanjali, Atma-tattva-viveka, Kiranaavali and Nyaya-parishishhta (also called Bodha siddhi or Bodha shuddhi). He it is to whom credit is given by Naiyâyikas for having demolished in final fashion the claims of the Buddhist logicians. All his works, or at least all of which we know, have been preserved, which attests to the respect in which he was held from the beginning.   == PhilosophyEdit == Two schools of thought for logical proof for the existence of God in Hindu philosophy, the old Nyaya system was concerned with the critical examination of the objects of knowledge by means of logical proof, while the earlier Vaiseshika system dealt with particulars—objects that can be thought of and named. Udayana assumed, with the Vaiseshika, that the world was formed by atoms, from which physical bodies also derived. But he was equally concerned with the mind and its right apprehension of objects in nature. His vigorous thinking was set forth in the Nyāya-Kusumānjali and the Bauddhadhikkāra, the latter an attack on the atheistic thesis of Buddhism. Living in a period of lively controversy with the Buddhists, Udayana defended his belief in a personal God by resorting to the two natures of the world: cause and effect. The presence of the world is an effect that cannot be explained by the activity of atoms alone. A supreme being had to cause the effect and regulate the activity of the atoms; hence, according to Udayana, God exists. In a debate with Buddhists in India he was the final victor. After him no Buddhist philosopher undertook again a debate with Nyāya. Thus the nine-centuries long debate ended.   == Nyayakusumanjali and the existence of GodEdit == Udyan tried to prove the existence of God on the basis of inference. They made this question a challenge to their own existence. Udayana's Nyayakusumanjali gave the following nine arguments to prove the existence of creative God 1) Kāryāt (lit. "from effect"): An effect is produced by a cause, and similarly, the universe must also have a cause. Causes (according to Naiyayikas) are of three kinds: Samavayi (in case of the universe, the atoms), Asamavayi (the association of atoms) and Nimitta (which is Ishvara). The active cause of the world must have an absolute knowledge of all the material of creation, and hence it must be God. Hence from the creation, the existence of the Creator is proved. 2) Āyojanāt (lit., from combination): Atoms are inactive and properties are unphysical. So it must be God who creates the world with his will by causing the atoms to join. Self-combination of inanimate and lifeless things is not possible, otherwise atoms would only combine at random, creating chaos. There is to be seen the hand of a wise organizer behind the systematic grouping of the ultimate atoms into dyads and molecules. That final organizer is God. 3) Dhŗtyādéḥ(lit., from support): Just as a material thing falls off without a support, similarly, God is the supporter and bearer of this world, without which the world would not have remained integrated. This universe is hence superintended within God, which proves his existence. 4) Padāt (lit., from word): Every word has the capability to represent a certain object. It is the will of God that a thing should be represented by a certain word. Similarly, no knowledge can come to us of the different things here unless there is a source of this knowledge. The origin of all knowledge should be omniscient and, consequently, omnipotent. Such a being is not to be seen in this universe, and so it must be outside it. This being is God. 5) Pratyayataḥ (lit, from faith): the Hindu holy scriptures, the Vedas, are regarded as the source of eternal knowledge. Their knowledge is free from fallacies and are widely believed as a source of proof. Their authors cannot be human beings because human knowledge is limited. They cannot obtain knowledge of past, present, and future, and in depth knowledge of mind. Hence, only God can be the creator of the Vedas. Hence, his existence is proved from his being the author of the Vedas, which he revealed to various sages over a period of time. 6) Shrutéḥ (lit., from scriptures): The Shrutis, e.g., the Vedas extol God and talk about his existence. "He is the lord of all subjects, omniscient, and knower of one's internal feelings; He is the creator, cause and destroyer of the world", say the Shrutis. The Shrutis are regarded as a source of proofs by Naiyanikas. Hence, the existence of God is proved. 7) Vākyāt (lit., from precepts): World is governed by moral laws that are objective and universal. These are again manifested by Shrutis. Hence there exists God, the promulgator of these laws. 8) Samkhyāviśeşāt (lit., from the speciality of numbers):According to the Nyaya, the magnitude of a dyad is produced by the number of two atoms. The number "one" is directly perceived but other numbers are created by perceptions, which is related to the mind of the perceiver. Since at the time of creation, souls, atoms, Adŗşţa (Unseen Power), space, timeand minds are all unconscious, hence it depends on divine consciousness. So God must exist. 9) Adŗşţāt (lit., from the unforeseen): Everybody reaps the fruits of his own actions. Merits and demerits accrue from his own actions and the stock of merit and demerit is known as Adŗşţa, the Unseen Power. But since this unseen power is unintelligent, it needs the guidance from a supremely intelligent god.   == ReferencesEdit ==


William Hugh Woodin (born April 23, 1955) is an American mathematician and set theorist at Harvard University. He has made many notable contributions to the theory of inner models and determinacy. A type of large cardinal, the Woodin cardinal, bears his name.   == Biography == Born in Tucson, Arizona, Woodin earned his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in 1984 under Robert M. Solovay. His dissertation title was Discontinuous Homomorphisms of C(Omega) and Set Theory. He served as chair of the Berkeley mathematics department for the 2002-2003 academic year. Woodin is a managing editor of the Journal of Mathematical Logic. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2000. He is the great-grandson of William Hartman Woodin, former Secretary of the Treasury.   == Work == He has done work on the theory of generic multiverses and related concept of Ω-logic which suggested an argument that the Continuum Hypothesis is either undecidable or false in the sense of Mathematical Platonism. Woodin criticizes this view arguing that it leads to a counterintuitive reduction in which all truths in the set theoretical universe can be decided from a small part of it. He claims that these and related mathematical results lead (intuitively) to the conclusion that Continuum Hypothesis has a truth value and the Platonistic approach is reasonable. Woodin now predicts that there should be a way of constructing an inner model for almost all known large cardinals which he calls the Ultimate L and which would have similar properties as Gödel's constructible universe. In particular, the Continuum Hypothesis would be true in this universe.   == See also == AD+   == References ==   == External links == W. Hugh Woodin at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Woodin, W. Hugh (2010). The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonstationary Ideal. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-019702-0. OCLC 605013810.  Home page at University of California, Berkeley Woodin's plenary talk at the 2010 International Congress of Mathematicians Incompatible Ω-Complete Theories (with Peter Koellner), Journal of Symbolic Logic, Volume 74, Issue 4 (2009), 1155-1170.[1].

Walter Burley (or Burleigh) (c. 1275–1344/5) was a medieval English scholastic philosopher and logician with at least 50 works attributed to him. He received his Master of Arts degree in 1301, and was a fellow of Merton College Oxford until about 1310. He then spent sixteen years in Paris, becoming a fellow of the Sorbonne by 1324, before spending 17 years as a clerical courtier in England and Avignon. Burley disagreed with William of Ockham on a number of points concerning logic and natural philosophy. He died in about 1344.   == Early life == Burley was born in 1274 or 1275, possibly in Burley-in-Wharfedale, Yorkshire, or in Burley near Leeds. Little is known of his early life. He was made rector of Welbury in Yorkshire in 1309, probably through the influence of Sir John de Lisle, a friend of William Greenfield. As throughout his career, he did not act as rector, employing a substitute and using the income from the living to finance his study in Paris, where he completed his lectures on Peter Lombard's Sentences, and probably encountered the work of his contemporary William of Ockham. Burley's commentary on the Sentences has not survived.   == Political career == Burley became a courtier during the political events that followed the deposition of Edward II of England in 1327. His first assignment was to try and obtain the canonisation of Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster, who had been one of the leaders of the baronial opposition to Edward II; Thomas had become venerated as a martyr within a few months of his death. Burley was sent to the papal court at Avignon to appeal directly to Pope John XXII. By coincidence, William of Ockham was also staying at Avignon, having been summoned there in 1324 to answer charges of possibly heretical statements (by 1326 there was a list of 51 charges against him). Burley's associates were all closely involved in these attempts at canonisation (none of which was successful). One was Richard de Bury, a bibliophile and patron of the arts and sciences, who became Burley's patron and at whose request Bury translated some works of Aristotle into English.   == Ecclesiastical career == Burley had become a master of theology by 1324. In May 1327 he became canon of Chichester by the provision of the pope, but exchanged the position in 1332 to become canon at Wells, where de Bury was dean. Bury had been involved in the coup d'etat of 1330 that resulted in the execution of Mortimer, and the de facto accession of Edward III to the throne. In 1333 de Bury was consecrated Bishop of Durham by the king, over-ruling the choice of the monks, who had elected and actually installed their sub-prior, Robert de Graynes. In February 1334 de Bury was made Lord Treasurer, an appointment he exchanged later in the year for that of Lord Chancellor. He gathered together a group of intellectuals including Thomas Fitzralph, Richard de Kilvington, Robert Holcott, Thomas Bradwardine and Burley himself.   == Works == Burley was one of the first logicians to recognise the priority of the propositional calculus over the predicate calculus, despite the fact that the latter had been the main focus of logicians until then. Burley also seems to have been the only 14th-century logician to have taken the position that, in line with modern views on the material conditional, the principle that "from the impossible anything follows" ("ex impossibili sequitur quidlibet") is both a necessary and sufficient condition for explaining the logical relationship between antecedent and consequent. He was also known for his commentaries on Aristotle's Physics, which include the quodlibet De Primo et ultimo instanti (around 1320) and the longer work Expositio in libros octo de physico auditu. Burley wrote 39 Commentaries on Aristotle and 32 Treatises and Questions (many unedited)  De Puritate Artis Logicae, in two versions: Tractatus brevior (before 1324) Tractatus longior (1325-28)  This is Burley's main work, in which he covers such topics as the truth conditions for complex sentences, both truth-functional and modal, as well as providing rules of inferences for different types of inferences. This book is known to have been written after Ockham's Summa Logicae (c. 1323), possibly partly in response to it. Other works include: In Aristotelis Perihermenias (Questions on Aristotle's Perihermenias, 1301) De consequentiis (1302) De exclusivis (1302) De exceptivis (1302) De Suppositions (1302) De ente (ca. 1310) De qualitatibus (ca. 1310) Expositio super libros De Anima (after 1310) Tractatus de formis (1324-1326) Tractatus de universalibus (after 1337)   == References == Notes  Citations   == Bibliography ==   == External links == Walter Burley entry by Alessandro Conti in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Walter Burley, Commentarium in Aristotelis De Anima L.III Critical Edition and Palaeography transcription by Mario Tonelotto

Walter Harry Pitts, Jr. (23 April 1923 – 14 May 1969) was a logician who worked in the field of computational neuroscience. He proposed landmark theoretical formulations of neural activity and generative processes that influenced diverse fields such as cognitive sciences and psychology, philosophy, neurosciences, computer science, artificial neural networks, cybernetics and artificial intelligence, together with what has come to be known as the generative sciences. He is best remembered for having written along with Warren McCulloch, a seminal paper entitled "A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity" (1943). This paper proposed the first mathematical model of a neural network. The unit of this model, a simple formalized neuron, is still the standard of reference in the field of neural networks. It is often called a McCulloch–Pitts neuron.   == Early life == Walter Pitts was born in Detroit. Michigan on April 23, 1923, the son of Walter and Marie (née Welsia). He was an autodidact who taught himself logic and mathematics and was able to read several languages including Greek and Latin. At the age of 12 he spent three days in a library reading Principia Mathematica and sent a letter to Bertrand Russell pointing out what he considered serious problems with the first half of the first volume. Russell was appreciative and invited him to study in the United Kingdom. Although this offer was not taken up, Pitts decided to become a logician.   == Academic career == Pitts probably continued to correspond with Bertrand Russell; and at the age of 15 he attended Russell's lectures at the University of Chicago. He stayed there, without registering as a student. While there, in 1938 he met Jerome Lettvin, a pre-medical student, and the two became close friends. Bertrand Russell was a visiting professor at the University of Chicago in the Fall of 1938, and he directed Pitts to go study there with the logician Rudolf Carnap. Pitts met Carnap at Chicago by walking into his office during office hours, and presenting him with an annotated version of Carnap's recent book on logic, The Logical Syntax of Language. Since Pitts did not introduce himself, Carnap spent months searching for him, and, when he found him, he obtained for him a menial job at the university and had Pitts study with him. Pitts at the time was homeless and without income. He mastered Carnap's abstract logic, then met with and was intrigued by the work of the Ukrainian mathematical physicist Nicolas Rashevsky, who was also at Chicago and was the founder of mathematical biophysics, remodeling biology on the structure of the physical sciences and mathematical logic. Pitts also worked closely with the mathematician Alston Householder who was a member of Rashevsky's group. Later Warren McCulloch also arrived at the University of Chicago, and in early 1942 invited Pitts, who was still homeless, together with Lettvin to live with his family. In the evenings McCulloch and Pitts collaborated. Pitts was familiar with the work of Gottfried Leibniz on computing and they considered the question of whether the nervous system could be considered a kind of universal computing device as described by Leibniz. This led to their seminal neural networks paper A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity. In 1943 Lettvin introduced Pitts to Norbert Wiener at MIT, who had recently lost his "right-hand man". Their first meeting, where they discussed Wiener's proof of the ergodic theorem, went so well that Pitts moved to Boston to work with Wiener. Pitts was a special student of Wiener's at MIT. In 1944 Pitts was hired by Kellex Corporation (later acquired in 1950 by Vitro Corporation) in New York City, part of the Atomic Energy Project. From 1946, Pitts was a core member and involved with the Macy conferences whose principal purpose was to set the foundations for a general science of the workings of the human mind. In 1951 Wiener convinced Jerry Wiesner to hire some physiologists of the nervous system. A group was established with Pitts, Lettvin, McCulloch, and Pat Wall. Pitts wrote a large thesis on the properties of neural nets connected in three dimensions. Lettvin described him as "in no uncertain sense the genius of the group … when you asked him a question, you would get back a whole textbook". Pitts was also described as an eccentric, refusing to allow his name to be made publicly available. He refused all offers of advanced degrees or official positions at MIT as he would have to sign his name. Pitts was a member of the Research Laboratory of Electronics at MIT from 1952 to 1969.   == Emotional trauma and decline == Wiener suddenly turned against McCulloch, on account of his wife Margaret Wiener, who hated McCulloch, and broke off relations with anyone connected to him, including Pitts. This sent Walter Pitts into a decline into social isolation from which he never recovered. He burned the manuscript on three-dimensional networks and took little further interest in work. The only exception was a collaboration with Robert Gesteland which produced a paper on olfaction. Pitts died in 1969 of bleeding esophageal varices, a condition usually associated with cirrhosis.   == Publications == Walter Pitts, "Some observations on the simple neuron circuit", Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, Volume 4, Number 3, 121–129, 1942. Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, "A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity", 1943, Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5:115–133. reprint in Neurocomputing: Foundations of Research. Edited by James A. Anderson and Edward Rosenfeld. MIT Press, 1988. pages 15–27 Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts, "On how we know universals: The perception of auditory and visual forms", 1947, Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 9:127–147. Howland, R., Jerome Lettvin, Warren McCulloch, Walter Pitts, and P. D. Wall, "Reflex inhibition by dorsal root interaction", 1955, Journal of Neurophysiology 18:1–17. Wall, P. D., Warren McCulloch, Jerome Lettvin and Walter Pitts, "Effects of strychnine with special reference to spinal afferent fibres", 1955, Epilepsia Series 3, 4:29–40. Jerome Lettvin, Humberto Maturana, Warren McCulloch, and Walter Pitts, "What the Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain", 1959, Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers 47: 1940–1951. Humberto Maturana, Jerome Lettvin, Warren McCulloch, and Walter Pitts, "Anatomy and physiology of vision in the frog", 1960, Journal of General Physiology, 43:129—175. Robert Gesteland, Jerome Lettvin and Walter Pitts, "Chemical Transmission in the Nose of the Frog", 1965, J.Physiol. 181, 525–529.   == See also == Cognitive science Warren McCulloch Jerome Lettvin Kayla Pitts   == References == Aizawa, Kenneth, "Connectionism and artificial intelligence: history and philosophical interpretation", Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, Volume 4, Issue 4, 1992, pages 295–313 Aizawa, Kenneth; Schlatter, Mark, "Walter Pitts and 'A Logical Calculus'", Synthese (2008) 162:235–250. Aizawa, Kenneth; Schlatter, Mark, "Another Look at McCulloch and Pitts's 'Logical Calculus'", Centenary College of Louisiana, Shreveport, Louisiana Anderson, James A.; Rosenfeld, Edward (editors), Talking Nets: An Oral History of Neural Networks, 1998. The interview with Jerome Lettvin discusses Walter Pitts. Conway, Flo; Siegelman, Jim, Dark hero of the information age: in search of Norbert Wiener, the father of Cybernetics, Basic Books, 2005. Cf. p.138 & various. Easterling, Keller, "Walter Pitts", Cabinet, Issue 5 Winter 2001/02 ^ a b c Smalheiser, Neil R. "Walter Pitts", Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, Volume 43, Number 2, Winter 2000, pp. 217–226, The Johns Hopkins University Press ^ a b Cf. Anderson (1998) p.218 conversation with Michael A. Arbib ^ a b Cf. Conway, Flo; Siegelman, Jim (2005), p.138 ^ Singer, Milton, "A Tale of Two Amateurs Who Crossed Cultural Frontiers with Boole's Symbolical Algebra", Semiotica. Volume 105, Issue 1-2, 1995. Cf. pp. 134–138 ^ "Pitts, Walter", MIT Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science (Archived August 14, 2007 at the Wayback Machine) ^ Cf. Conway, Flo; Siegelman, Jim (2005), p.139 ^ Cf. Aizawa & Schlatter ^ Cf. Anderson (1998) p.105 conversation with Jack D. Cowan ^ Cf. Aizawa 1992 ^ Cf. Conway, Flo; Siegelman, Jim (2005), pp. 141–2 ^ Cf. Anderson (1998) p.4 conversation with Jerome Y. Lettvin   == Further reading == Piccinini, Gualtiero, "The First Computational Theory of Mind and Brain: A Close Look at McCulloch and Pitts's 'Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity'", Synthese 141: 175–215, 2004. Kluwer Academic Publishers   == External links == "Walter Pitts", website of Professor Charles Wallis, Department of Cognitive Science, California State University at Long Beach, accessed 30 Jan. 2009 (archived 2009) "The Man who Tried to Redeem the World with Logic", Nautilus Magazine issue 21, 5 February 2015

Wilhelm Friedrich Ackermann (29 March 1896 – 24 December 1962) was a German mathematician best known for the Ackermann function, an important example in the theory of computation. Ackermann was born in Herscheid municipality, Germany, and was awarded a Ph.D. by the University of Göttingen in 1925 for his thesis Begründung des "tertium non datur" mittels der Hilbertschen Theorie der Widerspruchsfreiheit, which was a consistency proof of arithmetic apparently without full Peano induction (although it did use e.g. induction over the length of proofs). From 1929 until 1948, he taught at the Arnoldinum Gymnasium in Burgsteinfurt, and then at Lüdenscheid until 1961. He was also a corresponding member of the Akademie der Wissenschaften (Academy of Sciences) in Göttingen, and was an honorary professor at the University of Münster. In 1928, Ackermann helped David Hilbert turn his 1917 – 22 lectures on introductory mathematical logic into a text, Principles of Mathematical Logic. This text contained the first exposition ever of first-order logic, and posed the problem of its completeness and decidability (Entscheidungsproblem). Ackermann went on to construct consistency proofs for set theory (1937), full arithmetic (1940), type-free logic (1952), and a new axiomatization of set theory (1956). Although Ackermann did not choose a university career and rather continued as a high school teacher, he was continually engaged in research and published many contributions to the foundations of mathematics until the end of his life. He died in Lüdenscheid, Germany.   == See also == Ackermann coding Ackermann ordinal Ackermann set theory Ackermann function Inverse Ackermann function   == Bibliography == 1928. "On Hilbert's construction of the real numbers" in Jean van Heijenoort, ed., 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879-1931. Harvard Univ. Press: 493-507. 1940. Zur Widerspruchtfreisheit der Zahlentheorie, Mathematische Annalen, vol. 117, pp 162–194. 1950 (1928). (with David Hilbert) Principles of Mathematical Logic. Chelsea. Translation of 1938 German edition. 1954. Solvable cases of the decision problem. North Holland.   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Wilhelm Ackermann", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Wilhelm Ackermann at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Erich Friedman's page on Ackermann at Stetson University Hermes, In memoriam WILHELM ACKERMANN 1896-1962 (pdf 945 KB) Author profile in the database zbMATH

Willard Van Orman Quine (/kwaɪn/; June 25, 1908 – December 25, 2000) (known to intimates as "Van") was an American philosopher and logician in the analytic tradition, recognized as "one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century." From 1930 until his death 70 years later, Quine was continually affiliated with Harvard University in one way or another, first as a student, then as a professor of philosophy and a teacher of logic and set theory, and finally as a professor emeritus who published or revised several books in retirement. He filled the Edgar Pierce Chair of Philosophy at Harvard from 1956 to 1978. A recent poll conducted among analytic philosophers named Quine as the fifth most important philosopher of the past two centuries. He won the first Schock Prize in Logic and Philosophy in 1993 for "his systematical and penetrating discussions of how learning of language and communication are based on socially available evidence and of the consequences of this for theories on knowledge and linguistic meaning." In 1996 he was awarded the Kyoto Prize in Arts and Philosophy for his "outstanding contributions to the progress of philosophy in the 20th century by proposing numerous theories based on keen insights in logic, epistemology, philosophy of science and philosophy of language." Quine falls squarely into the analytic philosophy tradition while also being the main proponent of the view that philosophy is not conceptual analysis but the abstract branch of the empirical sciences. His major writings include "Two Dogmas of Empiricism" (1951), which attacked the distinction between analytic and synthetic propositions and advocated a form of semantic holism, and Word and Object (1960), which further developed these positions and introduced Quine's famous indeterminacy of translation thesis, advocating a behaviorist theory of meaning. He also developed an influential naturalized epistemology that tried to provide "an improved scientific explanation of how we have developed elaborate scientific theories on the basis of meager sensory input." He is also important in philosophy of science for his "systematic attempt to understand science from within the resources of science itself" and for his conception of philosophy as continuous with science. This led to his famous quip that "philosophy of science is philosophy enough." In philosophy of mathematics, he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the "Quine–Putnam indispensability thesis," an argument for the reality of mathematical entities.   == BiographyEdit == According to his autobiography, The Time of My Life (1986), Quine grew up in Akron, Ohio, where he lived with his parents and older brother Robert C. His father, Cloyd R., was a manufacturing entrepreneur and his mother, Harriett E. (also known as "Hattie" according to the 1920 census), was a schoolteacher and later a housewife. He received his B.A. in mathematics from Oberlin College in 1930, and his Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University in 1932. His thesis supervisor was Alfred North Whitehead. He was then appointed a Harvard Junior Fellow, which excused him from having to teach for four years. During the academic year 1932–33, he travelled in Europe thanks to a Sheldon fellowship, meeting Polish logicians (including Alfred Tarski) and members of the Vienna Circle (including Rudolf Carnap), as well as the logical positivist A.J. Ayer. It was through Quine's good offices that Alfred Tarski was invited to attend the September 1939 Unity of Science Congress in Cambridge. To attend that Congress, Tarski sailed for the USA on the last ship to leave Danzig before the Third Reich invaded Poland. Tarski survived the war and worked another 44 years in the USA. During World War II, Quine lectured on logic in Brazil, in Portuguese, and served in the United States Navy in a military intelligence role, deciphering messages from German submarines, and reaching the rank of Lieutenant Commander. At Harvard, Quine helped supervise the Harvard theses of, among others, Donald Davidson, Hubert Dreyfus, David Lewis, Daniel Dennett, Gilbert Harman, Dagfinn Føllesdal, Hao Wang, Hugues LeBlanc and Henry Hiz. For the academic year 1964–1965, Quine was a Fellow on the faculty in the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University. Quine was an atheist. He had four children by two marriages. Guitarist Robert Quine was his nephew.   === Political beliefsEdit === Quine was politically conservative, but the bulk of his writing was in technical areas of philosophy removed from direct political issues. He did, however, write in defense of several conservative positions: for example, in Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary, he wrote a defense of moral censorship; while, in his autobiography, he made some criticisms of American postwar academic culture.   == WorkEdit == Quine's Ph.D. thesis and early publications were on formal logic and set theory. Only after World War II did he, by virtue of seminal papers on ontology, epistemology and language, emerge as a major philosopher. By the 1960s, he had worked out his "naturalized epistemology" whose aim was to answer all substantive questions of knowledge and meaning using the methods and tools of the natural sciences. Quine roundly rejected the notion that there should be a "first philosophy", a theoretical standpoint somehow prior to natural science and capable of justifying it. These views are intrinsic to his naturalism. Quine could lecture in French, Spanish, Portuguese and German, as well as his native English. But like the logical positivists, he evinced little interest in the philosophical canon: only once did he teach a course in the history of philosophy, on Hume.   === Rejection of the analytic–synthetic distinctionEdit ===  In the 1930s and 1940s, discussions with Rudolf Carnap, Nelson Goodman and Alfred Tarski, among others, led Quine to doubt the tenability of the distinction between "analytic" statements—those true simply by the meanings of their words, such as "All bachelors are unmarried"—and "synthetic" statements, those true or false by virtue of facts about the world, such as "There is a cat on the mat." This distinction was central to logical positivism. Although Quine is not normally associated with verificationism, some philosophers believe the tenet is not incompatible with his general philosophy of language, citing his Harvard colleague B. F. Skinner, and his analysis of language in Verbal Behavior. Like other Analytic philosophers before him, Quine accepted the definition of "analytic" as "true in virtue of meaning alone". Unlike them, however, he concluded that ultimately the definition was circular. In other words, Quine accepted that analytic statements are those that are true by definition, then argued that the notion of truth by definition was unsatisfactory. This criticism of Kant's epistemology was similar to that of the 18th century writer Johann Gottfried Herder, as both individuals found fault in the Kantian system for not sufficiently accounting for the dependence of reasoning on language. Quine's chief objection to analyticity is with the notion of synonymy (sameness of meaning), a sentence being analytic, just in case it substitutes a synonym for one "black" in a proposition like "All black things are black" (or any other logical truth). The objection to synonymy hinges upon the problem of collateral information. We intuitively feel that there is a distinction between "All unmarried men are bachelors" and "There have been black dogs", but a competent English speaker will assent to both sentences under all conditions since such speakers also have access to collateral information bearing on the historical existence of black dogs. Quine maintains that there is no distinction between universally known collateral information and conceptual or analytic truths. Another approach to Quine's objection to analyticity and synonymy emerges from the modal notion of logical possibility. A traditional Wittgensteinian view of meaning held that each meaningful sentence was associated with a region in the space of possible worlds. Quine finds the notion of such a space problematic, arguing that there is no distinction between those truths which are universally and confidently believed and those which are necessarily true.   === Confirmation holism and ontological relativityEdit === The central theses underlying the indeterminacy of translation and other extensions of Quine's work are ontological relativity and the related doctrine of confirmation holism. The premise of confirmation holism is that all theories (and the propositions derived from them) are under-determined by empirical data (data, sensory-data, evidence); although some theories are not justifiable, failing to fit with the data or being unworkably complex, there are many equally justifiable alternatives. While the Greeks' assumption that (unobservable) Homeric gods exist is false, and our supposition of (unobservable) electromagnetic waves is true, both are to be justified solely by their ability to explain our observations. Quine concluded his "Two Dogmas of Empiricism" as follows:  As an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a tool, ultimately, for predicting future experience in the light of past experience. Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient intermediaries not by definition in terms of experience, but simply as irreducible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer . . . For my part I do, qua lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in Homer's gods; and I consider it a scientific error to believe otherwise. But in point of epistemological footing, the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind. Both sorts of entities enter our conceptions only as cultural posits.  Quine's ontological relativism (evident in the passage above) led him to agree with Pierre Duhem that for any collection of empirical evidence, there would always be many theories able to account for it. However, Duhem's holism is much more restricted and limited than Quine's. For Duhem, underdetermination applies only to physics or possibly to natural science, while for Quine it applies to all of human knowledge. Thus, while it is possible to verify or falsify whole theories, it is not possible to verify or falsify individual statements. Almost any particular statement can be saved, given sufficiently radical modifications of the containing theory. For Quine, scientific thought forms a coherent web in which any part could be altered in the light of empirical evidence, and in which no empirical evidence could force the revision of a given part. Quine's writings have led to the wide acceptance of instrumentalism in the philosophy of science.   === Existence and Its contraryEdit === The problem of non-referring names is an old puzzle in philosophy, which Quine captured when he wrote, "A curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicity. It can be put into three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables: 'What is there?' It can be answered, moreover, in a word—'Everything'—and everyone will accept this answer as true." More directly, the controversy goes, "How can we talk about Pegasus? To what does the word 'Pegasus' refer? If our answer is, 'Something,' then we seem to believe in mystical entities; if our answer is, 'nothing', then we seem to talk about nothing and what sense can be made of this? Certainly when we said that Pegasus was a mythological winged horse we make sense, and moreover we speak the truth! If we speak the truth, this must be truth about something. So we cannot be speaking of nothing." Quine resists the temptation to say that non-referring terms are meaningless for reasons made clear above. Instead he tells us that we must first determine whether our terms refer or not before we know the proper way to understand them. However, Czesław Lejewski criticizes this belief for reducing the matter to empirical discovery when it seems we should have a formal distinction between referring and non-referring terms or elements of our domain. Lejewski writes further, "This state of affairs does not seem to be very satisfactory. The idea that some of our rules of inference should depend on empirical information, which may not be forthcoming, is so foreign to the character of logical inquiry that a thorough re-examination of the two inferences [existential generalization and universal instantiation] may prove worth our while." Lejewski then goes on to offer a description of free logic, which he claims accommodates an answer to the problem. Lejewski also points out that free logic additionally can handle the problem of the empty set for statements like . Quine had considered the problem of the empty set unrealistic, which left Lejewski unsatisfied.   === LogicEdit === Over the course of his career, Quine published numerous technical and expository papers on formal logic, some of which are reprinted in his Selected Logic Papers and in The Ways of Paradox. Quine confined logic to classical bivalent first-order logic, hence to truth and falsity under any (nonempty) universe of discourse. Hence the following were not logic for Quine: Higher order logic and set theory. He referred to higher order logic as "set theory in disguise"; Much of what Principia Mathematica included in logic was not logic for Quine. Formal systems involving intensional notions, especially modality. Quine was especially hostile to modal logic with quantification, a battle he largely lost when Saul Kripke's relational semantics became canonical for modal logics. Quine wrote three undergraduate texts on formal logic: Elementary Logic. While teaching an introductory course in 1940, Quine discovered that extant texts for philosophy students did not do justice to quantification theory or first-order predicate logic. Quine wrote this book in 6 weeks as an ad hoc solution to his teaching needs. Methods of Logic. The four editions of this book resulted from a more advanced undergraduate course in logic Quine taught from the end of World War II until his 1978 retirement. Philosophy of Logic. A concise and witty undergraduate treatment of a number of Quinian themes, such as the prevalence of use-mention confusions, the dubiousness of quantified modal logic, and the non-logical character of higher-order logic. Mathematical Logic is based on Quine's graduate teaching during the 1930s and 40s. It shows that much of what Principia Mathematica took more than 1000 pages to say can be said in 250 pages. The proofs are concise, even cryptic. The last chapter, on Gödel's incompleteness theorem and Tarski's indefinability theorem, along with the article Quine (1946), became a launching point for Raymond Smullyan's later lucid exposition of these and related results. Quine's work in logic gradually became dated in some respects. Techniques he did not teach and discuss include analytic tableaux, recursive functions, and model theory. His treatment of metalogic left something to be desired. For example, Mathematical Logic does not include any proofs of soundness and completeness. Early in his career, the notation of his writings on logic was often idiosyncratic. His later writings nearly always employed the now-dated notation of Principia Mathematica. Set against all this are the simplicity of his preferred method (as exposited in his Methods of Logic) for determining the satisfiability of quantified formulas, the richness of his philosophical and linguistic insights, and the fine prose in which he expressed them. Most of Quine's original work in formal logic from 1960 onwards was on variants of his predicate functor logic, one of several ways that have been proposed for doing logic without quantifiers. For a comprehensive treatment of predicate functor logic and its history, see Quine (1976). For an introduction, see chpt. 45 of his Methods of Logic. Quine was very warm to the possibility that formal logic would eventually be applied outside of philosophy and mathematics. He wrote several papers on the sort of Boolean algebra employed in electrical engineering, and with Edward J. McCluskey, devised the Quine–McCluskey algorithm of reducing Boolean equations to a minimum covering sum of prime implicants.   === Set theoryEdit === While his contributions to logic include elegant expositions and a number of technical results, it is in set theory that Quine was most innovative. He always maintained that mathematics required set theory and that set theory was quite distinct from logic. He flirted with Nelson Goodman's nominalism for a while, but backed away when he failed to find a nominalist grounding of mathematics. Over the course of his career, Quine proposed three variants of axiomatic set theory, each including the axiom of extensionality: New Foundations, NF, creates and manipulates sets using a single axiom schema for set admissibility, namely an axiom schema of stratified comprehension, whereby all individuals satisfying a stratified formula compose a set. A stratified formula is one that type theory would allow, were the ontology to include types. However, Quine's set theory does not feature types. The metamathematics of NF are curious. NF allows many "large" sets the now-canonical ZFC set theory does not allow, even sets for which the axiom of choice does not hold. Since the axiom of choice holds for all finite sets, the failure of this axiom in NF proves that NF includes infinite sets. The (relative) consistency of NF is an open question. A modification of NF, NFU, due to R. B. Jensen and admitting urelements (entities that can be members of sets but that lack elements), turns out to be consistent relative to Peano arithmetic, thus vindicating the intuition behind NF. NF and NFU are the only Quinian set theories with a following. For a derivation of foundational mathematics in NF, see Rosser (1952); The set theory of Mathematical Logic is NF augmented by the proper classes of Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory, except axiomatized in a much simpler way; The set theory of Set Theory and Its Logic does away with stratification and is almost entirely derived from a single axiom schema. Quine derived the foundations of mathematics once again. This book includes the definitive exposition of Quine's theory of virtual sets and relations, and surveyed axiomatic set theory as it stood circa 1960. However, Fraenkel, Bar-Hillel and Levy (1973) do a better job of surveying set theory as it stood at mid-century. All three set theories admit a universal class, but since they are free of any hierarchy of types, they have no need for a distinct universal class at each type level. Quine's set theory and its background logic were driven by a desire to minimize posits; each innovation is pushed as far as it can be pushed before further innovations are introduced. For Quine, there is but one connective, the Sheffer stroke, and one quantifier, the universal quantifier. All polyadic predicates can be reduced to one dyadic predicate, interpretable as set membership. His rules of proof were limited to modus ponens and substitution. He preferred conjunction to either disjunction or the conditional, because conjunction has the least semantic ambiguity. He was delighted to discover early in his career that all of first order logic and set theory could be grounded in a mere two primitive notions: abstraction and inclusion. For an elegant introduction to the parsimony of Quine's approach to logic, see his "New Foundations for Mathematical Logic," ch. 5 in his From a Logical Point of View.   === Quine's epistemologyEdit === Just as he challenged the dominant analytic–synthetic distinction, Quine also took aim at traditional normative epistemology. According to Quine, traditional epistemology tried to justify the sciences, but this effort (as exemplified by Rudolf Carnap) failed, and so we should replace traditional epistemology with an empirical study of what sensory inputs produce what theoretical outputs.: "Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psychology and hence of natural science. It studies a natural phenomenon, viz., a physical human subject. This human subject is accorded a certain experimentally controlled input — certain patterns of irradiation in assorted frequencies, for instance — and in the fullness of time the subject delivers as output a description of the three-dimensional external world and its history. The relation between the meager input and the torrential output is a relation that we are prompted to study for somewhat the same reasons that always prompted epistemology: namely, in order to see how evidence relates to theory, and in what ways one's theory of nature transcends any available evidence...But a conspicuous difference between old epistemology and the epistemological enterprise in this new psychological setting is that we can now make free use of empirical psychology." (Quine, 1969: 82–3) Quine's proposal is extremely controversial among contemporary philosophers and has several important critics, with Jaegwon Kim the most prominent among them.   == In popular cultureEdit == A computer program whose output is its own source code is called a "quine" after W.V. Quine. This usage was introduced by Douglas Hofstadter in his 1979 book, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid. Quine is a recurring character in the webcomic "Existential Comics".   == BibliographyEdit ==   === Selected booksEdit === 1934 A System of Logistic. Harvard Univ. Press. 1951 (1940). Mathematical Logic. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 0-674-55451-5. 1966. Selected Logic Papers. New York: Random House. 1970 (2nd ed., 1978). With J. S. Ullian. The Web of Belief. New York: Random House. 1980 (1941). Elementary Logic. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 0-674-24451-6. 1982 (1950). Methods of Logic. Harvard Univ. Press. 1980 (1953). From a Logical Point of View. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 0-674-32351-3. Contains "Two dogmas of Empiricism." 1960 Word and Object. MIT Press; ISBN 0-262-67001-1. The closest thing Quine wrote to a philosophical treatise. Chpt. 2 sets out the indeterminacy of translation thesis. 1974 (1971) The Roots of Reference. Open Court Publishing Company ISBN 0-8126-9101-6 (developed from Quine's Carus Lectures) 1976 (1966). The Ways of Paradox. Harvard Univ. Press. 1969 Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. Columbia Univ. Press. ISBN 0-231-08357-2. Contains chapters on ontological relativity, naturalized epistemology, and natural kinds. 1969 (1963). Set Theory and Its Logic. Harvard Univ. Press. 1985 The Time of My Life – An Autobiography. Cambridge, The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-17003-5. 1986: Harvard Univ. Press. 1986 (1970). The Philosophy of Logic. Harvard Univ. Press. 1987 Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 0-14-012522-1. A work of essays, many subtly humorous, for lay readers, very revealing of the breadth of his interests. 1992 (1990). Pursuit of Truth. Harvard Univ. Press. A short, lively synthesis of his thought for advanced students and general readers not fooled by its simplicity. ISBN 0-674-73951-5. 1995, From Stimulus to Science. Harvard Univ. Press. ISBN 0-674-32635-0.   === Important articlesEdit === 1946, "Concatenation as a basis for arithmetic." Reprinted in his Selected Logic Papers. Harvard Univ. Press. 1948, "On What There Is", Review of Metaphysics. Reprinted in his 1953 From a Logical Point of View. Harvard University Press. 1951, "Two Dogmas of Empiricism", The Philosophical Review 60: 20–43. Reprinted in his 1953 From a Logical Point of View. Harvard University Press. 1956, "Quantifiers and Propositional Attitudes," Journal of Philosophy 53. Reprinted in his 1976 Ways of Paradox. Harvard Univ. Press: 185–96. 1969, "Epistemology Naturalized" in Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia University Press: 69–90. "Truth by Convention," first published in 1936. Reprinted in the book, Readings in Philosophical Analysis, edited by Herbert Feigl and Wilfrid Sellars, pp. 250–273, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1949.   == See alsoEdit ==  Eureka: A Prose Poem Hold come what may List of American philosophers Plato's beard   == NotesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit == Roger F Gibson, ed. (2004). The Cambridge companion to Quine. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521639492.  ————, 1988. The Philosophy of W.V. Quine: An Expository Essay. Tampa: University of South Florida. ————, 1988. Enlightened Empiricism: An Examination of W. V. Quine's Theory of Knowledge Tampa: University of South Florida. ————, 2004. Quintessence: Basic Readings from the Philosophy of W. V. Quine. Harvard Univ. Press. ———— and Barrett, R., eds., 1990. Perspectives on Quine. Oxford: Blackwell. Gochet, Paul, 1978. Quine en perspective, Paris, Flammarion. Godfrey-Smith, Peter, 2003. Theory and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science. Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Grice, Paul and Peter Strawson. "In Defense of a Dogma". The Philosophical Review 65 (1965). Hahn, L. E., and Schilpp, P. A., eds., 1986. The Philosophy of W. V. O. Quine (The Library of Living Philosophers). Open Court. Köhler, Dieter, 1999/2003. Sinnesreize, Sprache und Erfahrung: eine Studie zur Quineschen Erkenntnistheorie. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. of Heidelberg. MacFarlane, Alistair (Mar–Apr 2013). "W.V.O. Quine (1908-2000)". Philosophy Now 95: 35–36.  Murray Murphey, The Development of Quine's Philosophy (Heidelberg, Springer, 2012) (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 291). Orenstein, Alex (2002). W.V. Quine. Princeton University Press.  Putnam, Hilary. "The Greatest Logical Positivist." Reprinted in Realism with a Human Face, ed. James Conant. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990. Rosser, John Barkley, "The axiom of infinity in Quine's new foundations," Journal of Symbolic Logic 17 (4):238–242, 1952. Valore, Paolo, 2001. Questioni di ontologia quineana, Milano: Cusi.   == External linksEdit == Willard Van Orman Quine—Philosopher and Mathematician Willard Van Orman Quine at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Quine's Rejection of the Analytic/Synthetic Distinction entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Quine's Philosophy of Science at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Quine's New Foundations at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Willard Van Orman Quine at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Obituary from The Guardian "On What There Is" "Two Dogmas of Empiricism" "On Simple Theories Of A Complex World" What is Quine's Ontology?

William Alvin Howard (born 1926) is a proof theorist best known for his work demonstrating formal similarity between intuitionistic logic and the simply typed lambda calculus that has come to be known as the Curry–Howard correspondence. He has also been active in the theory of proof-theoretic ordinals. He earned his Ph.D. at the University of Chicago in 1956 for a dissertation entitled "k-fold recursion and well-ordering". He was a student of Saunders Mac Lane. The Howard ordinal (also known as the Bachmann–Howard ordinal) was named after him.   == References ==   == External links == Entry for William Alvin Howard at the Mathematics Genealogy Project. Howard, W. A.; Kreisel, G. (September 1966). "Transfinite Induction and Bar Induction of Types Zero and One, and the Role of Continuity in Intuitionistic Analysis". The Journal of Symbolic Logic (Association for Symbolic Logic) 3 (3): 325–358. doi:10.2307/2270450. JSTOR 2270450.


William Ernest Johnson (23 June 1858 – 14 January 1931) was a British logician mainly remembered for his Logic (1921–1924), in 3 volumes. In 1924, in volume III he introduced the important concept of exchangeability.   == Biography == Johnson graduated MA and was Sidgwick lecturer in Moral Sciences. He was elected a Fellow of King's College, Cambridge in March 1902, and taught there for nearly thirty years. He wrote a bit on economics, and John Maynard Keynes was one of his students. Johnson was a colleague of Keynes's father, John Neville Keynes. He was a Cambridge Apostle. Logic was dated at the time of its publication, and Johnson can be seen as a member of the British logic "old guard" pushed aside by the Principia Mathematica of Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell. Yet an article entitled "The Logical Calculus" (Johnson 1892) reveals that he had nontrivial technical capabilities in his youth, and that he was significantly influenced by the formal logical work of Charles Sanders Peirce. The article begins as follows:  "As a material machine economises the exertion of force, so a symbolic calculus economises the exertion of intelligence ... the more perfect the calculus, the smaller the intelligence compared to the results."  A.N. Prior's Formal Logic cites this article several times. John Passmore tells us:  "His neologisms, as rarely happens, have won wide acceptance: such phrases as “ostensive definition”, such contrasts as those between ... “determinates” and “determinables”, “continuants” and “occurrents”, are now familiar in philosophical literature" (Passmore 1966, p. 344).   == References ==   == Bibliography == Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (2000), The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Johnson, W. E. (1892), "The Logical Calculus", Mind 1 (New Series), 3–30, 235–250, 340–357. Passmore, John (1966). A Hundred Years of Philosophy (2nd ed.). London: Penguin (1957).  Sanford, David H. (2011), "Determinates vs. Determinables" in the online Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Zabell, S. L. (1992). "Predicting the unpredictable". Synthese 90: 205. doi:10.1007/bf00485351.

William of Ockham (/ˈɒkəm/; also Occam, from Latin: Gulielmus Occamus; c. 1287 – 1347) was an English Franciscan friar and scholastic philosopher and theologian, who is believed to have been born in Ockham, a small village in Surrey. He is considered to be one of the major figures of medieval thought and was at the centre of the major intellectual and political controversies of the fourteenth century. He is commonly known for Occam's razor, the methodological principle that bears his name, and also produced significant works on logic, physics, and theology. In the Church of England, his day of commemoration is 10 April.   == LifeEdit == William of Ockham was born in Ockham, Surrey in 1285 and joined the Franciscan order at an early age. It is believed that he studied theology at the University of Oxford from 1309 to 1321, but while he completed all the requirements for a master's degree in theology (the 14th century equivalent of a doctorate) he was never made regent master. Because of this, he acquired the honorific title Venerabilis Inceptor, or "Venerable Beginner" (an inceptor was a student formally admitted to the ranks of teachers by the university authorities). During the Middle Ages, theologian Peter Lombard's Sentences (1150) had become a standard work of theology, and many ambitious theological scholars wrote commentaries on it. William of Ockham was among these scholarly commentators. However, Ockham's commentary was not well received by his colleagues, or by the Church authorities. In 1324, his commentary was condemned as unorthodox by a synod of bishops, and he was ordered to Avignon, France, to defend himself before a papal court. An alternative understanding, recently proposed by George Knysh, suggests that he was initially appointed in Avignon as a professor of philosophy in the Franciscan school, and that his disciplinary difficulties did not begin until 1327. It is generally believed that these charges were levied by Oxford chancellor John Lutterell. The Franciscan Minister General, Michael of Cesena, had been summoned to Avignon, to answer charges of heresy. A theological commission had been asked to review his Commentary on the Sentences, and it was during this that Ockham found himself involved in a different debate. Michael of Cesena had asked Ockham to review arguments surrounding Apostolic poverty. The Franciscans believed that Jesus and his apostles owned no property either individually or in common, and The Rule of Saint Francis commanded members of the order to follow this practice. This brought them into conflict with Pope John XXII. Because of the pope's attack on the Rule of Saint Francis, Ockham, Michael of Cesena and other leading Franciscans fled Avignon on 26 May 1328, and eventually took refuge in the court of the Holy Roman Emperor Louis IV of Bavaria, who was also engaged in dispute with the papacy, and became Ockham's patron. After studying the works of John XXII and previous papal statements, Ockham agreed with the Minister General. In return for protection and patronage Ockham wrote treatises that argued for emperor Louis to have supreme control over church and state in the Holy Roman Empire. "On June 6, 1328, Ockham was officially excommunicated for leaving Avignon without permission," and Ockham argued that John XXII was a heretic for attacking the doctrine of Apostolic poverty and the Rule of Saint Francis, which had been endorsed by previous popes. However it should be noted that Ockham's philosophy was never officially condemned as heretical. He spent much of the remainder of his life writing about political issues, including the relative authority and rights of the spiritual and temporal powers. After Michael of Cesena's death in 1342, William became the leader of the small band of Franciscan dissidents living in exile with Louis IV. Ockham died (prior to the outbreak of the plague, or Black Death) on 9 April 1347. He was officially rehabilitated by Innocent VI in 1359.   == Faith and reasonEdit == William of Ockham believed "only faith gives us access to theological truths. The ways of God are not open to reason, for God has freely chosen to create a world and establish a way of salvation within it apart from any necessary laws that human logic or rationality can uncover." Ockham's theism was based solely on private revelation and faith(fideism). He believed that science was a matter of discovery and saw God as the only ontological necessity. His importance is as a theologian with a strongly developed interest in logical method, and whose approach was critical rather than system building.   == Philosophical thoughtEdit ==  In scholasticism, Ockham advocated for a reform both in method and in content, the aim of which was simplification. Ockham incorporated much of the work of some previous theologians, especially John Duns Scotus. From Scotus, Ockham derived his view of divine omnipotence, his view of grace and justification, much of his epistemology and ethical convictions. However, he also reacted to and against Scotus in the areas of predestination, penance, his understanding of universals, his formal distinction ex parte rei (that is, "as applied to created things"), and his view of parsimony which became known as Occam's Razor.   === NominalismEdit === Ockham was a pioneer of nominalism, and some consider him the father of modern epistemology, because of his strongly argued position that only individuals exist, rather than supra-individual universals, essences, or forms, and that universals are the products of abstraction from individuals by the human mind and have no extra-mental existence. He denied the real existence of metaphysical universals and advocated the reduction of ontology. Ockham is sometimes considered an advocate of conceptualism rather than nominalism, for whereas nominalists held that universals were merely names, i.e. words rather than existing realities, conceptualists held that they were mental concepts, i.e. the names were names of concepts, which do exist, although only in the mind. Therefore, the universal concept has for its object, not a reality existing in the world outside us, but an internal representation which is a product of the understanding itself and which "supposes" in the mind the things to which the mind attributes it; that is, it holds, for the time being, the place of the things which it represents. It is the term of the reflective act of the mind. Hence the universal is not a mere word, as Roscelin taught, nor a sermo, as Abelard held, namely the word as used in the sentence, but the mental substitute for real things, and the term of the reflective process. For this reason Ockham has sometimes also been called a "terminist", to distinguish him from a nominalist or a conceptualist. Ockham was a theological voluntarist who believed that if God had wanted to, he could have become incarnate as a donkey or an ox, or even as both a donkey and a man at the same time. He was criticized for this belief by his fellow theologians and philosophers.   === Efficient reasoningEdit === One important contribution that he made to modern science and modern intellectual culture was efficient reasoning with the principle of parsimony in explanation and theory building that came to be known as Occam's Razor. This maxim, as interpreted by Bertrand Russell, states that if one can explain a phenomenon without assuming this or that hypothetical entity, there is no ground for assuming it, i.e. that one should always opt for an explanation in terms of the fewest possible causes, factors, or variables. He turned this into a concern for ontological parsimony; the principle says that one should not multiply entities beyond necessity – Entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate – although this well-known formulation of the principle is not to be found in any of Ockham's extant writings. He formulates it as: "For nothing ought to be posited without a reason given, unless it is self-evident (literally, known through itself) or known by experience or proved by the authority of Sacred Scripture." For Ockham, the only truly necessary entity is God; everything else is contingent. He thus does not accept the principle of sufficient reason, rejects the distinction between essence and existence, and advocates against the Thomistic doctrine of active and passive intellect. His scepticism to which his ontological parsimony request leads appears in his doctrine that human reason can prove neither the immortality of the soul nor the existence, unity, and infinity of God. These truths, he teaches, are known to us by revelation alone.   === Natural philosophyEdit === Ockham wrote a great deal on natural philosophy, including a long commentary on Aristotle's Physics. According to the principle of ontological parsimony, he holds that we do not need to allow entities in all ten of Aristotle's categories; we thus do not need the category of quantity, as the mathematical entities are not "real". Mathematics must be applied to other categories, such as the categories of substance or qualities, thus anticipating modern scientific renaissance while violating Aristotelian prohibition of metabasis.   === Theory of knowledgeEdit === In the theory of knowledge, Ockham rejected the scholastic theory of species, as unnecessary and not supported by experience, in favour of a theory of abstraction. This was an important development in late medieval epistemology. He also distinguished between intuitive and abstract cognition; intuitive cognition depends on the existence or non existence of the object, whereas abstractive cognition "abstracts" the object from the existence predicate. Interpreters are, as yet, undecided about the roles of these two types of cognitive activities.   === Political theoryEdit === Ockham is also increasingly being recognized as an important contributor to the development of Western constitutional ideas, especially those of government with limited responsibility. He was one of the first medieval authors to advocate a form of church/state separation, and was important for the early development of the notion of property rights. His political ideas are regarded as "natural" or "secular", holding for a secular absolutism. The views on monarchical accountability espoused in his Dialogus (written between 1332 and 1347) greatly influenced the Conciliar movement and assisted in the emergence of liberal democratic ideologies. Ockham was for complete separation of spiritual rule and earthly rule. He thought that the pope and churchmen have no right or grounds at all for secular rule like having property, citing 2 Tim. 2:4. That belongs solely to earthly rulers, who may also accuse the pope of crimes, if need be. After the Fall the God had given men, also non-Christians, two powers: private ownership and the right to set their rulers, who should serve the interest of the people, not some special interests. Thus he preceded Thomas Hobbes in formulating social contract theory along with earlier scholars. Ockham said that the Franciscans avoided both private and common ownership by using commodities, including food and clothes, without any rights, with mere usus facti, the ownership still belonging to the donor of the item or to the pope. Their opponents such as pope John XXII wrote that use without any ownership cannot be justified: "It is impossible that an external deed could be just if the person has no right to do it."  Thus the disputes on the heresy of Franciscans lead Ockham and others formulate some fundamentals of economic theory and the theory of ownership.   === LogicEdit === In logic, Ockham wrote down in words the formulae that would later be called De Morgan's Laws, and he pondered ternary logic, that is, a logical system with three truth values; a concept that would be taken up again in the mathematical logic of the 19th and 20th centuries. His contributions to semantics, especially to the maturing theory of supposition, are still studied by logicians. Ockham was probably the first logician to treat empty terms in Aristotelian syllogistic effectively; he devised an empty term semantics that exactly fit the syllogistic. Specifically, an argument is valid according to Ockham's semantics if and only if it is valid according to Prior Analytics.   == Literary Ockhamism/nominalismEdit == Ockham and his works have been discussed as a possible influence on several late medieval literary figures and works, especially Geoffrey Chaucer, but also Jean Molinet, the Gawain poet, François Rabelais, John Skelton, Julian of Norwich, the York and Townely Plays, and Renaissance romances. Only in very few of these cases is it possible to demonstrate direct links to Ockham or his texts. Correspondences between Ockhamist and Nominalist philosophy/theology and literary texts from medieval to postmodern times have been discussed within the scholarly paradigm of literary nominalism. Erasmus criticized him together with Duns Scot as fuelling unnessary controversies inside the Church in his Praise of Folly.   == WorksEdit == The standard edition of the philosophical and theological works is: William of Ockham: Opera philosophica et theologica, Gedeon Gál, et al., eds. 17 vols. St. Bonaventure, N. Y.: The Franciscan Institute, 1967–88. The seventh volume of the Opera Philosophica contains the doubtful and spurious works. The political works, all but the Dialogus, have been edited in H. S. Offler, et al., eds. Guilelmi de Ockham Opera Politica, 4 vols., 1940–97, Manchester: Manchester University Press [vols. 1–3]; Oxford: Oxford University Press [vol. 4]. Abbreviations: OT = Opera Theologica voll. 1-10; OP = Opera Philosophica voll. 1-7.   === Philosophical writingsEdit === Summa logicae (Sum of Logic) (c. 1323, OP 1). Expositionis in Libros artis logicae prooemium, 1321–24, OP 2). Expositio in librum Porphyrii de Praedicabilibus, 1321–24, OP 2). Expositio in librum Praedicamentorum Aristotelis, 1321–24, OP 2). Expositio in librum in librum Perihermenias Aristotelis, 1321–24, OP 2). Tractatus de praedestinatione et de prescientia dei respectu futurorum contingentium (Treatise on Predestination and God’s Foreknowledge with respect to Future Contingents, 1322–24, OP 2). Expositio super libros Elenchorum (Exposition of Aristotle’s Sophistic refutations, 1322–24, OP 3). Expositio in libros Physicorum Aristotelis. Prologus et Libri I-III (Exposition of Aristole’s Physics) (1322–24, OP 4). Expositio in libros Physicorum Aristotelis. Prologus et Libri IV-VIII (Exposition of Aristole’s Physics) (1322–24, OP 5). Brevis summa libri Physicorum (Brief Summa of the Physics, 1322–23, OP 6). Summula philosophiae naturalis (Little Summa of Natural Philosophy, 1319–21, OP 6). Quaestiones in libros Physicorum Aristotelis (Questions on Aristotle’s Books of the Physics, before 1324, OP 6).   === Theological writingsEdit === In libros Sententiarum (Commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard). Book I (Ordinatio) completed shortly after July 1318 (OT 1-4). Books II–IV (Reportatio) 1317-18 (transcription of the lectures; OT 5-7).  Quaestione variae (OT 8). Quodlibeta septem (before 1327), (OT 9). Tractatus de quantitate (1323–24. OT 10). Tractatus de corpore Christi (1323–24, OT 10).   === Political writingsEdit === Opus nonaginta dierum (1332–34). Epistola ad fratres minores (1334). Dialogus (before 1335). Tractatus contra Johannem [XXII] (1335). Tractatus contra benedictum [XII] (1337–38). Octo quaestiones de potestate papae (1340–41). Consultatio de causa matrimoniali (1341–42). Breviloquium (1341–42). De imperatorum et pontifcum potestate [also known as 'Defensorium'] (1346–47).   === Doubtful writingsEdit === Tractatus minor logicae (Lesser Treatise on logic) (1340–47?, OP 7). Elementarium logicae (Primer of logic) (1340–47?, OP 7).   === Spurious writingsEdit === Tractatus de praedicamentis (OP 7). Quaestio de relatione (OP 7). Centiloquium (OP 7). Tractatus de principiis theologiae (OP 7).   == See alsoEdit == Gabriel Biel Philotheus Boehner History of science in the Middle Ages List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics List of scholastic philosophers Ernest Addison Moody Occam programming language Ockham algebra Oxford Franciscan school Rule according to higher law Terminism Voluntarism (theology) Adam de Wodeham   == NotesEdit ==   == ReferencesEdit ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "William of Ockham". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company.    == TranslationsEdit == Philosophical works Philosophical Writings, tr. P Boehner, rev. S Brown, (Indianapolis, IN, 1990) Ockham's Theory of Terms: Part I of the Summa logicae, translated by Michael J. Loux, (Notre Dame; London: University of Notre Dame Press, 1974) [translation of Summa logicae, part 1] Ockham's Theory of Propositions: Part II of the Summa logicae, translated by Alfred J. Freddoso and Henry Schuurman, (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1980) [translation of Summa logicae, part 2] Demonstration and Scientific Knowledge in William of Ockham: a Translation of Summa logicae III-II, De syllogismo demonstrativo, and Selections from the Prologue to the Ordinatio, translated by John Lee Longeway, (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame, 2007) Ockham on Aristotle's Physics: A Translation of Ockham's Brevis Summa Libri Physicorum, translated by Julian Davies, (St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute, 1989) Kluge, Eike-Henner W., William of Ockham's Commentary on Porphyry: Introduction and English Translation, Franciscan Studies 33, pp. 171–254, and 34, pp. 306–82, (1973-4) Predestination, God's Foreknowledge, and Future Contingents, translated by Marilyn McCord Adams and Norman Kretzmann, (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1969) [translation of Tractatus de praedestinatione et de praescientia Dei et de futuris contigentibus] Quodlibetal Questions, translated by Alfred J Freddoso and Francis E Kelley, 2 vols, (New Haven; London: Yale University Press, 1991) (translation of Quodlibeta septem) Paul Spade, Five Texts on the Mediaeval Problem of Universals: Porphyry, Boethius, Abelard, Duns Scotus, Ockham, (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1994) [Five questions on Universals from His Ordinatio d. 2 qq. 4-8] Theological works An princeps pro suo uccursu, scilicet guerrae, possit recipere bona ecclesiarum, etiam invito papa, translated in Political thought in early fourteenth-century England: treatises by Walter of Milemete, William of Pagula, and William of Ockham, translated by Cary J. Nederman, (Tempe, AZ: Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 2002) A translation of William of Ockham's Work of Ninety Days, translated by John Kilcullen and John Scott, (Lewiston, NY: E. Mellen Press, 2001) [translation of Opus nonaginta dierum] Tractatus de principiis theologiae, translated in A compendium of Ockham's teachings: a translation of the Tractatus de principiis theologiae, translated by Julian Davies, (St. Bonaventure, NY: Franciscan Institute, St. Bonaventure University, 1998) On the Power of Emperors and Popes, translated by Annabel S. Brett, (Bristol, 1998) Rega Wood, Ockham on the Virtues, (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 1997) [includes translation of On the Connection of the Virtues] A Letter to the Friars Minor, and Other Writings, translated by John Kilcullen, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995) [includes translation of Epistola ad Fratres Minores] A Short Discourse on the Tyrannical Government, translated by John Kilcullen, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992) [translation of Breviloquium de principatu tyrannico] The De sacramento altaris of William of Ockham, translated by T Bruce Birch, (Burlington, Iowa: Lutheran Literary Board, 1930) [translation of Treatise on Quantity and On the Body of Christ] William of Ockham, [Question One of] Eight Questions on the Power of the Pope, translated by Jonathan Robinson, available online: http://individual.utoronto.ca/jwrobinson/#Translations   == Further readingEdit == Adams, Marilyn (1987). William Ockham. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. ISBN 0-268-01940-1.  Beckmann, Jan (1992). Ockham-Bibliographie, 1900–1990. Hamburg: F. Meiner Verlag. ISBN 978-3-7873-1103-3.  Freppert, Lucan (1988). The Basis of Morality According to William Ockham. Franciscan Herald Press. ISBN 978-0-8199-0918-3.  Keele, Rondo (2010), Ockham Explained: From Razor to Rebellion, Chicago and La Salle, Illinois: Open Court, ISBN 978-08126-965-09, retrieved 19 November 2012  Knysh, George (1996). Political Ockhamism. Winnipeg: WCU Council of Learned Societies. ISBN 978-1-896637-00-6.  Lenzen, Wolfgang (2015), "Ockham’s Calculus of Strict Implication", Logica Universalis, 2015. doi:10.1007/s11787-014-0114-4 Panaccio, Claude (2004). Ockham on Concepts. Aldershot: Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-3228-3.  Pelletier, Jenny (2012). William Ockham on Metaphysics. The Science of Being and God. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-9-0042-3015-6.  Robinson, Jonathan (2012). William of Ockham's Early Theory of Property Rights in Context. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-9-0042-4346-0.  McGrade, Arthur Stephen (2002). The Political Thought of William Ockham. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-52224-3.  Schierbaum, Sonja (2014). Ockham's Assumption of Mental Speech: Thinking in a World of Particulars. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-9-0042-7734-2.  Spade, Paul (1999). The Cambridge Companion to Ockham. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-58244-X.  Wood, Rega (1997). Ockham on the Virtues. Purdue University Press. ISBN 978-1-55753-097-4.    == External linksEdit == Mediaeval Logic and Philosophy, maintained by Paul Vincent Spade William of Ockham entry by Paul Vincent Spade and Claude Panaccio in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy William of Ockham at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy William of Ockham biography at University of St Andrews, Scotland Dialogus, text translation and studies at British Academy, UK The Nominalist Ontology of William of Ockham, with an annotated bibliography  William Turner (1913). "William of Ockham". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.  Richard Utz and Terry Barakat, "Medieval Nominalism and the Literary Questions: Selected Studies." Perspicuitas The Myth of Occam's Razor by William M. Thorburn (1918) BBC Radio 4 'In Our Time' programme on Ockham Download and listen

William of Sherwood or William Sherwood (c. 1200 – c. 1272), with numerous variant spellings, was a medieval English Scholastic philosopher, logician, and teacher. Little is known of his life, but he is thought to have studied in Paris, as a master at Oxford in 1252, treasurer of Lincoln from 1254/8 onwards, and a rector of Aylesbury. He was the author of two books which were an important influence on the development of Scholastic logic: Introductiones in Logicam (Introduction to Logic), and Syncategoremata. These are the first known works to deal in a systematic way with what is now called supposition theory, known in William's time as the logica moderna.   == Life == William was probably born in Nottinghamshire, between 1200 and 1210. In common with many educated English men of that time, he may have studied at Oxford university or the University of Paris, or both. There are examples in his logical work which suggest he was a master at Paris. (For example 'No man lectures at Paris unless he is a smart person' / 'Whatever runs has feet, the Seine runs, ergo the Seine has feet'). Further evidence that he lectured in Paris is that those logicians who were influenced by his work also worked there, including Peter of Spain (c. 1245) and Lambert of Auxerre (c. 1250). He is thought to have become treasurer of Lincoln Cathedral some time in the 1250s. The treasurer was one of the four principal officers of the English cathedrals whose duty was to keep the treasures of the church, the gold and silver vessels, ornaments, relics, jewels, and altar cloths. He would have had a personal residence in the Cathedral close, would have employed a deputy and a large staff, and therefore could be absent as long as he performed those duties that could not be delegated (source: Edwards). He probably died there in or before 1272. He is mentioned by Roger Bacon, also a Master at Paris, as one of 'the more famous wise men of Christendom' one of whom is Albertus Magnus, another of whom is master William of Sherwood, 'the treasurer of the church of Lincoln in England, who is much wiser than Albert' (Brewer, transl. Kretzmann).   == The Introduction to Logic == William's main work is a small logic manual, Introductiones in logicam. It survives in a single manuscript probably written in the late thirteenth century, headed 'Introductiones Magistri Guilli. De Shyreswode in Logicam', (Bibliothèque Nationale, Cod. Lat. 16617, formerly Codex Sorbonnensis 1797). It did not appear fully in print until 1937, in Grabman's Latin edition, and was not translated into English until 1966, by Kretzmann. No other works that are definitely by him have ever been printed. The book consists of Six Chapters. Five of these are expositions of Aristotle's main logical works, as follows: 1. 'Statements', corresponding to De Interpretatione, 2. 'The Predicables', corresponding to Categories, 3. 'Syllogism', corresponding to Prior Analytics, 4. 'Dialectical Reasoning' corresponding to Topics, and 6. 'Sophistical Reasoning' corresponding to Sophistical Refutations. However, Chapter 5, 'Properties of Terms', contains material that is not in Aristotle, but is a distinctively medieval development, (Supposition theory) that deals with the semantics of propositions. The theory attempts to explain how the truth of simple sentences, expressed schematically, depend on how the terms 'supposit' or stand for certain extra-linguistic items, and tries to address the problem of sentential forms, like 'I promise you a horse', which do not appear to fit the standard syllogistic forms. In this chapter William introduces what was to become a standard division of supposition into 'material', 'formal' and 'personal'. In material supposition, a term stands for itself, as when we say that 'Socrates' is a name (note that medieval Latin did not use quotation marks as in modern English). In formal supposition, the word signifies its meaning, as in man is a species. Formal supposition is similar to what is indicated in modern philosophical logic by italicising a common noun, as when we refer to the concept horse. Personal supposition is approximately the relation we now call 'satisfied by', or 'denotes', as in 'the term 'man' denotes Socrates, Aristotle, &c'. He discusses a number of problem cases. For example, the sentence 'every man sees a man' is true when there is a single man that every man sees (for example if 'every man sees Socrates' is true). But the sentence is also true when every man sees a different man, or when some men see a single man (such as Socrates), other men see another man, and innumerable cases in between. This is called 'confused' supposition. This instance of the problem of multiple generality, is now thought to be insoluble using the fixed schema of Aristotle's semantics. William's work spurred a development of logic in the thirteenth century under the general designation De Proprietibus Terminorum. Those who engaged in this part of logic were called the Moderni, or Terministae. Its most detailed treatment is found in Ockham, and in the works of those who followed him.   == Legacy == Now, William is perhaps best known for a mnemonic poem to help students remember the names of the valid syllogistic forms:  Barbara celarent darii ferio baralipton Celantes dabitis fapesmo frisesomorum; Cesare campestres festino baroco; darapti Felapton disamis datisi bocardo ferison  This verse might not have originated with him, but it is the oldest known surviving version. Peter Hispanus later gives an account of the verses which is more detailed, and also one which lacks mistakes in William's version. According to Kretzmann, this strongly suggests their source is a single earlier version, now lost.   == Latin Works == Introductiones in logicam (Introduction to Logic), edited by Martin Grabmann, Munich: Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1937 William of Sherwood, Introductiones in logicam, Critical edition edited by Charles H. Lohr with P. Kunze and B. Mussler, Traditio 39, 1983: 219-99. William of Sherwood. Introductiones in logicam: Einfuhrung in die Logik, edited and translated in German by H. Brands and C. Kann Hamburg: Meiner, 1995 (this critical edition supersedes the two earlier editions). Syncategoremata (Treatise on Categorization Words), edited by R. O'Donnell, Medieval Studies, 3, 1941: 46-93. William of Sherwood. Syncategoremata, edited and translated in German by C. Kann and R. Kirchhoff. Hamburg: Meiner, 2012 (this critical edition supersedes the previous edition). Insolubilia (Insolubles), edited by Marie Louise Roure in 'La problématique des propositions insolubles du XIIIe siècle et du début du XIVe, suivie de l'édition des traités de William Shyreswood, Walter Burleigh et Thomas Bradwardine', Archives d'histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen Age 37, 1970: 205-326.   == English translations == William of Sherwood's Introduction to Logic, translated (from the edition of Grabmann) by Nicolas Kretzmann, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1966. Treatise on Syncategorematic Words, translated by Nicolas Kretzmann,Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1968.   == Bibliography == Brewer, J.S. Preface to his edition of Fr. Rogeri Bacon Opera quædam hactenus inedita, Vol. I, London, 1859, pp. IX-LXXXIV. Edwards, K., The English Secular Cathedrals in the Middle Ages, Manchester 1949. Kneale, William & Martha Kneale. Development of Logic (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962) Kretzmann, Norman, Anthony Kenny & Jan Pinborg. Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982). contains a good bibliography on p. 892. Raina Kirchhoff, Die Syncategoremata des Wilhelm von Sherwood: Kommentierung und historische Einordnung (Leiden, Brill, 2008).   == External links == Medieval Theories: Properties of Terms entry by Stephen Read in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy   == Notes ==   == References ==

William Stanley Jevons, LL.D., MA, FRS (/ˈdʒɛvənz/; 1 September 1835 – 13 August 1882) was an English economist and logician. Irving Fisher described Jevons' book A General Mathematical Theory of Political Economy (1862) as the start of the mathematical method in economics. It made the case that economics as a science concerned with quantities is necessarily mathematical. In so doing, it expounded upon the "final" (marginal) utility theory of value. Jevons' work, along with similar discoveries made by Carl Menger in Vienna (1871) and by Léon Walras in Switzerland (1874), marked the opening of a new period in the history of economic thought. Jevons' contribution to the marginal revolution in economics in the late 19th century established his reputation as a leading political economist and logician of the time. Jevons broke off his studies of the natural sciences in London in 1854 to work as an assayer in Sydney, where he acquired an interest in political economy. Returning to the UK in 1859, he published General Mathematical Theory of Political Economy in 1862, outlining the marginal utility theory of value, and A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold in 1863. For Jevons, the utility or value to a consumer of an additional unit of a product is inversely related to the number of units of that product he already owns, at least beyond some critical quantity. It was for The Coal Question (1865), in which he called attention to the gradual exhaustion of the UK's coal supplies, that he received public recognition, in which he put forth what is now known as the Jevons paradox, i.e. that increases in energy production efficiency leads to more not less consumption. The most important of his works on logic and scientific methods is his Principles of Science (1874), as well as The Theory of Political Economy (1871) and The State in Relation to Labour (1882). Among his inventions was the logic piano, a mechanical computer.   == Background == Jevons was born in Liverpool, Lancashire, England. His father, Thomas Jevons, a man of strong scientific tastes and a writer on legal and economic subjects, was an iron merchant. His mother Mary Anne Jevons was the daughter of William Roscoe. At the age of fifteen he was sent to London to attend the University College School. He appears at this time to have already formed the belief that important achievements as a thinker were possible to him, and at more than one critical period in his career this belief was the decisive factor in determining his conduct. Towards the end of 1853, after having spent two years at University College, where his favourite subjects were chemistry and botany, he unexpectedly received the offer of the assayership to the new mint in Australia. The idea of leaving the UK was distasteful, but pecuniary considerations had, in consequence of the failure of his father's firm in 1847, become of vital importance, and he accepted the post. He left the UK for Sydney in June 1854, and remained there for five years. At the end of that period he resigned his appointment, and in the autumn of 1859 entered again as a student at the University College London, proceeding in due course to the B.A. and M.A. degrees of the University of London. He now gave his principal attention to the moral sciences, but his interest in natural science was by no means exhausted: throughout his life he continued to write occasional papers on scientific subjects, and his intimate knowledge of the physical sciences greatly contributed to the success of his chief logical work, The Principles of Science. Not long after taking his M.A. degree Jevons obtained a post as tutor at Owens College, Manchester. In 1866 he was elected professor of logic and mental and moral philosophy and Cobden professor of political economy in Owens College. Next year he married Harriet Ann Taylor, whose father, John Edward Taylor, had been the founder and proprietor of the Manchester Guardian. Jevons suffered a good deal from ill health and sleeplessness, and found the delivery of lectures covering so wide a range of subjects very burdensome. In 1876 he was glad to exchange the Owens professorship for the professorship of political economy in University College, London. Travelling and music were the principal recreations of his life; but his health continued to be bad, and he suffered from depression. He found his professorial duties increasingly irksome, and feeling that the pressure of literary work left him no spare energy, he decided in 1880 to resign the post. On 13 August 1882 he drowned whilst bathing near Hastings. Jevons was a prolific writer, and at the time of his death was a leader in the UK both as a logician and as an economist. Alfred Marshall said of his work in economics that it "will probably be found to have more constructive force than any, save that of Ricardo, that has been done during the last hundred years." Stanley Jevons was brought up a Christian Unitarian, and excerpts from his journals indicate he remained committed to his Christian beliefs until death. He is buried in the Hampstead Cemetery.   == Theory of utility ==  Jevons arrived quite early in his career at the doctrines that constituted his most characteristic and original contributions to economics and logic. The theory of utility, which became the keynote of his general theory of political economy, was practically formulated in a letter written in 1860; and the germ of his logical principles of the substitution of similars may be found in the view which he propounded in another letter written in 1861, that "philosophy would be found to consist solely in pointing out the likeness of things." The theory of utility above referred to, namely, that the degree of utility of a commodity is some continuous mathematical function of the quantity of the commodity available, together with the implied doctrine that economics is essentially a mathematical science, took more definite form in a paper on "A General Mathematical Theory of Political Economy", written for the British Association in 1862. This paper does not appear to have attracted much attention either in 1862 or on its publication four years later in the Journal of the Statistical Society; and it was not till 1871, when the Theory of Political Economy appeared, that Jevons set forth his doctrines in a fully developed form. It was not till after the publication of this work that Jevons became acquainted with the applications of mathematics to political economy made by earlier writers, notably Antoine Augustin Cournot and H.H. Gossen. The theory of utility was at about 1870 being independently developed on somewhat similar lines by Carl Menger in Austria and Léon Walras in Switzerland. As regards the discovery of the connection between value in exchange and final (or marginal) utility, the priority belongs to Gossen, but this in no way detracts from the great importance of the service which Jevons rendered to British economics by his fresh discovery of the principle, and by the way in which he ultimately forced it into notice. In his reaction from the prevailing view he sometimes expressed himself without due qualification: the declaration, for instance, made at the commencement of the Theory of Political Economy, that value depends entirely upon utility, lent itself to misinterpretation. But a certain exaggeration of emphasis may be pardoned in a writer seeking to attract the attention of an indifferent public. The Neoclassical Revolution, which would reshape economics, had been started. Jevons did not explicitly distinguish between the concepts of ordinal and cardinal utility. Cardinal utility allows the relative magnitude of utilities to be discussed, while ordinal utility only implies that goods can be compared and ranked according to which good provided the most utility. Although Jevons predated the debate about ordinality or cardinality of utility, his mathematics required the use of cardinal utility functions. For example, in "The Theory of Political Economy", Chapter II, the subsection on "Theory of Dimensions of Economic Quantities", Jevons makes the statement that "In the first place, pleasure and pain must be regarded as measured upon the same scale, and as having, therefore, the same dimensions, being quantities of the same kind, which can be added and subtracted...." Speaking of measurement, addition and subtraction requires cardinality, as does Jevons' heavy use of integral calculus. Note that cardinality does not imply direct measurability, in which Jevons did not believe.   == Practical economics ==  It was not, however, as a theorist dealing with the fundamental data of economic science, but as a brilliant writer on practical economic questions, that Jevons first received general recognition. A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold (1863) and The Coal Question (1865) placed him in the front rank as a writer on applied economics and statistics; and he would be remembered as one of the leading economists of the 19th century even had his Theory of Political Economy never been written. Amongst his economic works may be mentioned Money and the Mechanism of Exchange (1875), written in a popular style, and descriptive rather than theoretical, but wonderfully fresh and original in treatment and full of suggestiveness, a Primer on Political Economy (1878), The State in Relation to Labour (1882), and two works published after his death, namely, Methods of Social Reform and Investigations in Currency and Finance, containing papers that had appeared separately during his lifetime. The last-named volume contains Jevons' speculations on the connection between commercial crises and sunspots. He was engaged at the time of his death upon the preparation of a large treatise on economics and had drawn up a table of contents and completed some chapters and parts of chapters. This fragment was published in 1905 under the title of The Principles of Economics: a fragment of a treatise on the industrial mechanism of society, and other papers. In The Coal Question, Jevons covered a breadth of concepts on energy depletion that have recently been revisited by writers covering the subject of peak oil. For example, Jevons explained that improving energy efficiency typically reduced energy costs and thereby increased rather than decreased energy use, an effect now known as the Jevons paradox. The Coal Question remains a paradigmatic study of resource depletion theory. Jevons's son, H. Stanley Jevons, published an 800-page follow-up study in 1915 in which the difficulties of estimating recoverable reserves of a theoretically finite resource are discussed in detail. In a relatively minor work, "Commercial Crises and Sun-Spots", Jevons analyzed business cycles, proposing that crises in the economy might not be random events, but might be based on discernible prior causes. To clarify the concept, he presented a statistical study relating business cycles with sunspots. His reasoning was that sunspots affected the weather, which, in turn, affected crops. Crop changes could then be expected to cause economic changes. Subsequent studies have found that sunny weather has a small but significant positive impact on stock returns, probably due to its impact on traders' moods.   == Logic ==  In 1864 Jevons published a Pure Logic; or, the Logic of Quality apart from Quantity, which was based on Boole's system of logic, but freed from what he considered the false mathematical dress of that system. In the years immediately following he devoted considerable attention to the construction of a logical machine, exhibited before the Royal Society in 1870, by means of which the conclusion derivable from any given set of premises could be mechanically obtained. In 1866 what he regarded as the great and universal principle of all reasoning dawned upon him; and in 1869 he published a sketch of this fundamental doctrine under the title of The Substitution of Similars. He expressed the principle in its simplest form as follows: "Whatever is true of a thing is true of its like", and he worked out in detail its various applications including the "Logic Piano", a mechanical computer he designed and had built in 1869.  In the following year appeared the Elementary Lessons on Logic, which soon became the most widely read elementary textbook on logic in the English language. In the meantime he was engaged upon a much more important logical treatise, which appeared in 1874 under the title of The Principles of Science. In this work Jevons embodied the substance of his earlier works on pure logic and the substitution of similars; he also enunciated and developed the view that induction is simply an inverse employment of deduction; he treated in a luminous manner the general theory of probability, and the relation between probability and induction; and his knowledge of the various natural sciences enabled him throughout to relieve the abstract character of logical doctrine by concrete scientific illustrations, often worked out in great detail. An example is his discussion of the use of one-way functions in cryptography, including remarks on the integer factorization problem that foreshadowed its use in public key cryptography. Jevons' general theory of induction was a revival of the theory laid down by Whewell and criticised by John Stuart Mill; but it was put in a new form, and was free from some of the non-essential adjuncts which rendered Whewell's exposition open to attack. The work as a whole was one of the most notable contributions to logical doctrine that appeared in the UK in the 19th century. "Though less attractively written than Mill's System of Logic, Principles of Science is a book that keeps much closer to the facts of scientific practice." His Studies in Deductive Logic, consisting mainly of exercises and problems for the use of students, was published in 1880. In 1877 and the following years Jevons contributed to the Contemporary Review some articles on Mill, which he had intended to supplement by further articles, and eventually publish in a volume as a criticism of Mill's philosophy. These articles and one other were republished after Jevons' death, together with his earlier logical treatises, in a volume, entitled Pure Logic, and other Minor Works. The criticisms on Mill contain much that is ingenious and much that is forcible, but on the whole they cannot be regarded as taking rank with Jevons's other work. His strength lay in his power as an original thinker rather than as a critic; and he will be remembered by his constructive work as logician, economist and statistician. On Jevons as logician, see Grattan-Guinness (2000).   == Jevons' number == Jevons wrote in his Principles of Science: "Can the reader say what two numbers multiplied together will produce the number 8616460799 ? I think it unlikely that anyone but myself will ever know." This became known as Jevons' number and was factored by Derrick Norman Lehmer in 1903 and later on a pocket calculator by Solomon W. Golomb.   == Geometry == One of Jevons' contemporaries, Hermann von Helmholtz, who was interested in non-Euclidean geometry, discussed two groups of two-dimensional creatures with one group living in the plane while the other living in the surface of a sphere. He asserted that since these creatures were embedded in two dimensions, they would develop a planar version of Euclidean geometry, but that since the nature of these surfaces were different, they would arrive at very different versions of this geometry. He then extended this argument into three dimensions, noting that this raises fundamental questions of the relationship of spatial perception to mathematical truth.  Jevons made an almost immediate response to this article. While Helmholtz focused on how humans perceived space, Jevons focused on the question of truth in geometry. Jevons agreed that while Helmholtz's argument was compelling in constructing a situation where the Euclidean axioms of geometry would not apply, he believed that they had no effect on the truth of these axioms. Jevons hence makes the distinction between truth and applicability or perception, suggesting that these concepts were independent in the domain of geometry. Jevons did not claim that geometry was developed without any consideration for spatial reality. Instead, he suggested that his geometric systems were representations of reality but in a more fundamental way that transcends what one can perceive about reality. Jevons claimed that there was a flaw in Helmholtz's argument relating to the concept of infinitesimally small. This concept involves how these creatures reason about geometry and space at a very small scale, which is not necessarily the same as the reasoning that Helmholtz assumed on a more global scale. Jevons claimed that the Euclidean relations could be reduced locally in the different scenarios that Helmholtz created and hence the creatures should have been able to experience the Euclidean properties, just in a different representation. For example, Jevons claimed that the two-dimensional creatures living on the surface of a sphere should be able to construct the plane and even construct systems of higher dimensions and that although they may not be able to perceive such situations in reality, it would reveal fundamental mathematical truths in their theoretical existence. In 1872, Helmholtz gave a response to Jevons, who claimed that Helmholtz failed to show why geometric truth should be separate from the reality of spatial perception. Helmholtz criticized Jevons' definition of truth and in particular, experiential truth. Helmholtz asserts that there should be a difference between experiential truth and mathematical truth and that these versions of truth are not necessarily consistent. This conversation between Helmholtz and Jevons was a microcosm of an ongoing debate between truth and perception in the wake of the introduction of non-Euclidean geometry in the late 19th century.   == Legacy == Jevons' theory of induction has continued to be influential: "Jevons' general view of induction has received a powerful and original formulation in the work of a present-day philosopher, Professor K. R. Popper."   == Works == 1862. A General Mathematical Theory of Political Economy 1863. A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold, Edward Stanford. 1864. Pure Logic; or, the Logic of Quality apart from Quantity, Edward Stanford, London 1865. The Coal Question, Macmillan and Co. 1869. The Substitution of Similars, The True Principle of Reasoning, Macmillan & Co. 1870. Elementary Lessons on Logic, Macmillan & Co., London 1871. The Match Tax: A Problem in Finance, Edward Stanford. 1871. The Theory of Political Economy, Macmillan & Co. "Theory of Political Economy." In James R. Newman, ed., The World of Mathematics, Vol. 2, Part IV, 1956.  1874. Principles of Science, Macmillan & Co. 1875. Money and the Mechanism of Exchange, D. Appleton and Co. 1878. A Primer on Political Economy 1880. Studies in Deductive Logic — 1884 edition (Macmillan & Co., London) 1882. The State in Relation to Labour 1883. Methods of Social Reform and Other Papers, Macmillan and Co. Methods of Social Reform, and Other Papers, Kelley, 1965.  1886. Letters and Journal of W. Stanley Jevons, Ed. by Harriet A. Jevons, Macmillan & Co. 1972–81. Papers and Correspondence, edited by R. D. Collison Black, Macmillan & the Royal Economic Society (7 vol.)   === Articles === "On the Variation of Prices and the Value of the Currency since 1782," Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 28, No. 2, Jun., 1865. "On the Frequent Autumnal Pressure in the Money Market, and the Action of the Bank of England," Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 29, No. 2, Jun., 1866. "On the Condition of the Metallic Currency of the United Kingdom, with Reference to the Question of International Coinage," Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 31, No. 4, Dec., 1868. "Who Discovered the Quantification of the Predicate?," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXI, December 1872/May 1873. "The Philosophy of Inductive Inference," Fortnightly Review, Vol. XIV, New Series, 1873. "The Use of Hypothesis," Fortnightly Review, Vol. XIV, New Series, 1873. "The Railways and the State." In: Essays and Addresses, Macmillan & Co., 1874. "The Future of Political Economy," Fortnightly Review, Vol. XX, New Series, 1876. "Cruelty to Animals: A Study in Sociology," Fortnightly Review, Vol. XIX, New Series, 1876. "The Silver Question," Journal of Social Science, No. IX, January 1878. "John Stuart Mill's Philosophy Tested," Part II, The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXI, December 1877/January 1878; Part III, Vol. XXXII, April 1878. "Methods of Social Reform, I: Amusements of the People," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXIII, October 1878. "Methods of Social Reform, II: A State Parcel Post," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXIV, January 1879. "The Periodicity of Commercial Crises, and its Physical Explanation,” Journal of The Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, Vol. VII, Part 54, 1878/1879. "Experimental Legislation and the Drink Traffic," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXVII, January/June 1880. "Recent Mathematico-Logical Memoirs," Nature, Vol. XXIII, March 24, 1881. "Richard Cantillon and the Nationality of Political Economy," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXIX, January/June 1881. "The Rationale of Free Public Libraries," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXIX, January/June 1881. "Bimetallism," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XXXIX, January/June 1881. "Married Women in Factories," The Contemporary Review, Vol. XLI, January/June 1882.   === Miscellany === Luigi Cossa, Guide to the Study of Political Economy, with a Preface by W. Stanley Jevons, Macmillan & Co., 1880.   == See also == Jevons Paradox   == Notes ==   == References ==  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.  R.D. Collison Black (1987). "Jevons, William Stanley", The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 1008–1014. Ivor Grattan-Guinness, 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Princeton University Press. Terry Peach (1987). "Jevons as an economic theorist", The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, v. 2, pp. 1014–1019. The first part of this article was based on an article in the Encyclopedia of Marxism at www.marxists.org.   == Further reading ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "William Stanley Jevons", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . New School: William Stanley Jevons Royal Society certificate of election 1872 Jevons and the Logic 'Piano' at The Rutherford Journal The Coal Question – Encyclopedia of Earth Letters and Journal of W. Stanley Jevons, edited by his wife (1886). This work contains a bibliography of Jevons' writings. Powerhouse Museum, Sydney. "The curious economist: William Stanley Jevons in Sydney". Retrieved 2007-05-09.  William Stanley Jevons (1835–1833). The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics. Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.) (Liberty Fund). 2008.  Works available online Works by William Stanley Jevons at Project Gutenberg Works by or about William Stanley Jevons at Internet Archive Works by W. Stanley Jevons at Hathi Trust Works by W. Stanley Jevons at Europeana The Coal Question (also available here) The Theory of Political Economy Money and the Mechanism of Exchange Richard Cantillon and the Nationality of Political Economy Elementary Lessons in Logic Money and the Mechanism of Exchange The Theory of Political Economy William Stanley Jevons Brief Account of a General Mathematical Theory of Political Economy The Principles of Political Economy, 1871, The Theory of Political Economy, 1879, 2nd ed. The Theory of Political Economy, 1888, 3rd ed. (1879 ed. + 3rd Preface by Harriet A. Jevons & adds to bibliographic 1st Appendix).

Yehoshua Bar-Hillel (Hebrew: יהושע בר-הלל‎; 8 September 1915, Vienna – 25 September 1975, Jerusalem) was an Israeli philosopher, mathematician, and linguist. He is perhaps best known for his pioneering work in machine translation and formal linguistics.   == BiographyEdit == Born Oscar Westreich in Vienna, Austria-Hungary, he was raised in Berlin. In 1933 he emigrated to Palestine with the Bnei Akiva youth movement, and briefly joined the kibbutz Tirat Zvi before settling in Jerusalem and marrying Shulamith. During World War II, he served in the Jewish Brigade of the British Army. He fought with the Haganah during the Israeli War of Independence, losing an eye. Bar-Hillel received his PhD in Philosophy from the Hebrew University where he also studied mathematics under Abraham Fraenkel, with whom he eventually coauthored Foundations of Set Theory (1958, 1973). Bar-Hillel was a major disciple of Rudolf Carnap, whose Logical Syntax of Language much influenced him. He began a correspondence with Carnap in the 1940s, which led to a 1950 postdoc under Carnap at the University of Chicago, and to his collaborating on Carnap's 1952 An Outline of the Theory of Semantic Information. Bar-Hillel then took up a position at MIT, where he was the first academic to work full-time in the field of Machine Translation Bar-Hillel organised the first International Conference on Machine Translation in 1952. Later he expressed doubts that general-purpose fully automatic high-quality machine translation would ever be feasible.[1][2] He was also a pioneer in the field of information retrieval. In 1953, Bar-Hillel joined the philosophy department at the Hebrew University, where he taught until his death at age 60. His teachings and writings strongly influenced an entire generation of Israeli philosophers and linguists, including Asa Kasher and Avishai Margalit. In 1953, he founded a pioneering algebraic-computational linguistic group, and in 1961 he contributed to the proof of the pumping lemma for context-free languages (sometimes called the Bar-Hillel lemma). Bar-Hillel helped found the Hebrew University's department of Philosophy of Science. From 1966 to 1968 Bar-Hillel presided over the Division for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science of the International Union of History and Philosophy of Science. Bar-Hillel's daughter Maya Bar-Hillel is a cognitive psychologist at the Hebrew University, known for her collaborations with Amos Tversky and for her role in critiquing Bible code study. His other daughter, Mira Bar-Hillel, is the property and planning correspondent for the London Evening Standard. His granddaughter, Gili Bar-Hillel, is the Hebrew translator of the Harry Potter series.   == Related termsEdit == Categorial grammar Indexical expression   == NotesEdit == ^ Melby, Alan. The Possibility of Language (Amsterdam:Benjamins, 1995, 27-41) ^ Appendix III of 'The present status of automatic translation of languages', Advances in Computers, vol.1 (1960), p.158-163. Reprinted in Y.Bar-Hillel: Language and information (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1964), p.174-179.   == Select bibliographyEdit == 1954 - Indexical Expressions, in: Mind, Vol. 63, Pp. 359–379. 1958 - (with Abraham Fraenkel) Foundations of Set Theory. 2nd ed. (also with Azriel Levy and Dirk van Dalen), 1973. 1964 - Language and Information 1970 - Aspects of Language: Essays and Lectures on Philosophy of Language, Linguistic Philosophy and Methodology of Linguistics 1970 - Mathematical Logic and Foundations of Set Theory (Editor) 1972 - Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science (Editor) 1975 - Pragmatics of Natural Languages (Editor)   == External linksEdit == "Yehoshua Bar-Hillel: A Philosopher's Contribution to Machine Translation" "Bar-Hillel and Machine Translation: Then and Now." Bar-Hillel Colloquium. Translation Trouble: Time Magazine article from 1954.

Yiannis Nicholas Moschovakis (Greek: Γιάννης Μοσχοβάκης; born January 18, 1938) is a set theorist, descriptive set theorist, and recursion (computability) theorist, at UCLA. For many years he has split his time between UCLA and University of Athens . His book Descriptive Set Theory (North-Holland) is the primary reference for the subject. He is especially associated with the development of the effective, or lightface, version of descriptive set theory. Moschovakis earned his Ph.D. from University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1963 under the direction of Stephen Kleene, with a dissertation entitled Recursive Analysis. In 2015 he was elected as a fellow of the American Mathematical Society "for contributions to mathematical logic, especially set theory and computability theory, and for exposition". Moschovakis is married to Joan Moschovakis, with whom he gave the 2014 Lindström Lectures at the University of Gothenburg.   == Publications == Elementary induction on abstract structures. North-Holland. 1974.  2nd edn. Dover. 2008.  Descriptive set theory. North-Holland. 1980.  2nd edn. 2005.  Second edition available online Notes on set theory. North-Holland. 1994.  2nd edn. 2005.    == References ==   == External links == Home page Yiannis N. Moschovakis at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Yuri Vladimirovich Matiyasevich, (Russian: Ю́рий Влади́мирович Матиясе́вич; born March 2, 1947, in Leningrad) is a Russian mathematician and computer scientist. He is best known for his negative solution of Hilbert's tenth problem (Matiyasevich's Theorem), presented in his doctoral thesis, at LOMI (the Leningrad Department of the Steklov Institute of Mathematics).   == Biography == In 1962–1963, Matiyasevich studied at Saint Petersburg Lyceum 239; In 1963–1964, he studied at Kolmogorov School; In 1964–1969, Matiyasevich studied at Mathematics & Mechanics Faculty of Leningrad State University. As a winner of IMO Yuri Matiyasevich was accepted without exams to LSU, skipping the last year of high school studies. In 1966, he presented a talk at International Congress of Mathematicians held in Moscow. He was a second-year undergraduate student at that time. In 1969–1970, he pursued Ph.D. studies at Leningrad Department of Steklov Institute of Mathematics under supervision of Sergey Maslov. In 1970, he received his Ph.D. degree at LOMI. In 1970–1974, he was a researcher at LOMI. In 1972, he obtained a second doctoral degree (called "doktor nauk" in Soviet Union). In 1974–1980, he was a senior researcher at LOMI. Since 1980, Yuri Matiyasevich has been the head of Laboratory of mathematical logic at LOMI. Since 1995, he has been a professor of Saint-Petersburg State University, initially at the chair of software engineering, later at the chair of algebra and number theory. In 1997, he was elected as a corresponding member of Russian Academy of Sciences. Since 1998, Yuri Matiyasevich has been a vice-president of St. Petersburg Mathematical Society. Since 2002, he has been a head of St.Petersburg City Mathematical Olympiad. Since 2003, Matiyasevich has been a co-director of annual German–Russian student school JASS. In 2008, he was elected as a full member of Russian Academy of Sciences.   == Awards and honors == In 1964, Yuri Matiyasevich won a gold medal at the International Mathematical Olympiad held in Moscow. In 1970, he was awarded the "Young mathematician" prize of the Leningrad Mathematical Society. In 1980, he received a Markov Prize of Academy of Sciences of the USSR. In 1996, he received his Docteur Honoris Causa de l'Université d'Auvergne. In 1998, he received Humboldt Research Award to Outstanding Scholars. In 2003, he was granted his Docteur Honoris Causa de l'Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris-6). In 2007, he was elected to Bayern Academy of Sciences.   == Notable facts == A polynomial related to colorings of triangulation of sphere was named after Matiyasevich; see The Matiyasevich polynomial, four colour theorem and weight systems. He was a member of the American Mathematical Society and the Association for Symbolic Logic; and also of the editorial boards for the journals Discrete Mathematics and Applications and Computer Instruments in Education. Notable students include: Eldar Musayev, Maxim Vsemirnov, Alexei Pastor, Dmitri Karpov.   == Selected works ==   === Book === Yuri Matiyasevich Hilbert's 10th Problem, Foreword by Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam, The MIT Press, 1993. ISBN 0-262-13295-8.   === Papers === Yuri Matiyasevich (1973). "Real-time recognition of the inclusion relation" (PDF). Journal of Sovjet Mathematics 1 (1): 64–70. doi:10.1007/bf01117471. ISSN 0090-4104.  Yuri Matiyasevich, Julia Robinson (1975). "Reduction of an arbitrary Diophantine equation to one in 13 unknowns". Acta Arithmetica. XXVII: 521–549.  Yuri Matiyasevich, Géraud Sénizergues (1996). "Decision Problems for Semi-Thue Systems with a Few Rules". LICS.  Yuri Matiyasevich, Proof Procedures as Bases for Metamathematical Proofs in Discrete Mathematics, Personal Journal of Yury Matiyasevich. Yuri Matiyasevich, Elimination of bounded universal quantifiers standing in front of a quantifier-free arithmetical formula, Personal Journal of Yuri Matiyasevich. Yuri Matiyasevich, A Polynomial related to Colourings of Triangulation of Sphere, Personal Journal of Yuri Matiyasevich. Yuri Matiyasevich (2004). "Some Probabilistic Restatements of the Four Color Conjecture". Journal of Graph Theory 46 (3): 167–179. doi:10.1002/jgt.10178.    == See also == Matiyasevich's theorem   == External links == Yuri Matiyasevich's home page. Yuri Matiyasevich at DBLP. Yuri Matiyasevich at the Mathematics Genealogy Project. Hilbert's Tenth Problem: a History of Mathematical Discovery. Yuri Matiyasevich's results at the International Mathematical Olympiad Matiyasevich theorem on Scholarpedia. Vita and collaboration with France (French). O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Yuri Matiyasevich", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Supercomputing for a Superproblem: A Computational Journey Into Pure Mathematics

