Abram Samoilovitch Besicovitch (or Besikovitch) (Russian: Абра́м Само́йлович Безико́вич; 23 January 1891 – 2 November 1970) was a Russian mathematician, who worked mainly in England. He was born in Berdyansk on the Sea of Azov (now in Ukraine) to a Karaite family.   == Life and career == Besicovitch studied under the supervision of Andrey Markov at the St. Petersburg University, graduating with a PhD in 1912. He then began research in probability theory. He converted to Eastern Orthodoxy, joining the Russian Orthodox Church, on marrying in 1916. He was appointed professor at the University of Perm in 1917, and was caught up in the Russian Civil War over the next two years. In 1920 he took a position at the Petrograd University. In 1924 he went to Copenhagen and Harald Bohr, on a Rockefeller Fellowship, where he worked on almost periodic functions, which now bear his name. After a visit to G.H. Hardy at the University of Oxford, he had appointments at the University of Liverpool in 1926, and the University of Cambridge in 1927. After moving to Cambridge in 1927, and by 1950 he had been appointed to the Rouse Ball Chair of Mathematics, which he held until his retirement in 1958, he then toured the USA for eight years before returning to Trinity College Cambridge until probably his death in 1970. He was appointed Lecturer in the Faculty of Mathematics, and therefore received recognition as a Cambridge MA by 'Special Grace' on 24 November 1928. He worked mainly on combinatorial methods and questions in real analysis, such as the Kakeya needle problem and the Hausdorff-Besicovitch dimension. These two particular areas have proved increasingly important as the years have gone by. He was also a major influence on the economist Piero Sraffa, after 1940, when they were both Fellows of Trinity College, Cambridge, and on Dennis Lindley, one of the founders of the Bayesian movement in the United Kingdom. He was J.E. Littlewood's successor in 1950 in the Rouse Ball chair at the University of Cambridge, retiring in 1958. He died in Cambridge.   == Awards and honours == Besicovitch was in 1934 made FRS and in 1952 won the Sylvester Medal from the Royal Society. He received in 1950 the De Morgan Medal of the London Mathematical Society. He was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study in the fall of 1954. Besicovtich's candidacy for the Royal Society reads:  "Distinguished as a pure mathematician, particularly for his researches in the theory of functions of a real variable, the theory of analytic functions, and the theory of almost periodic functions. "  The asteroid 16953 Besicovitch is named in his honor. A portrait of Besicovitch by Eve Goldsmith Coxeter is in the collection of Trinity College, Cambridge.   == Quotation == ''A mathematician´s reputation rests on the number of bad proofs he has given.''   == See also == Svoy Koziry   == References ==

Albert Nikolayevich Shiryaev (Russian: Альбе́рт Никола́евич Ширя́ев; born October 12, 1934) is a Soviet and Russian mathematician. He is known for his work in probability theory, statistics and financial mathematics. He graduated from Moscow State University in 1957. From that time till now he has been working in Steklov Mathematical Institute. He earned his candidate degree in 1961 (Andrey Kolmogorov was his advisor) and a doctoral degree in 1967 for his work "On statistical sequential analysis". He is a professor of the department of mechanics and mathematics of Moscow State University, since 1971. He was elected a corresponding member of the Russian Academy of Sciences in 1997 and a full member in 2011. As of 2007 Shiryaev holds a 20% permanent professorial position at the School of Mathematics, University of Manchester.   == Contributions == His scientific work concerns different aspects of probability theory, statistics and its applications. He has contributions to: Nonlinear theory of stationary stochastic processes Problems of fast detection of random effects (A.N. Kolmogorov Prize of Russian Academy of Sciences, 1994) Problems of optimal nonlinear filtration, stochastic differential equations (A.N. Markov Prize of USSR Academy of Sciences, 1974) Problems of stochastic optimization, including "Optimal stopping rules" Problems of general stochastic theory and martingale theory Problems of stochastic finance (monograph "The Essentials of Stochastic Finance", English and Russian editions)   == Publications == Change of Time and Change of Measure (2nd Edition) - World Scientific Publishing    == References ==   == External links == Albert Shiryaev at the Mathematics Genealogy Project A.N. Shiryaev at MSU (Russian). A.N. Shiryaev at RAS.


This is a redirect from a page name that does not have diacritical marks (accents, umlauts, etc.) to essentially the same page name with diacritical marks. For more information follow the bold category link. Apply this redirect (without piping) when the subject page concerns language translation or foreign language equivalents. Other pages that use this redirect should be updated with a direct link to the redirect target (again, without piping).

Blaise Pascal (/pæˈskæl, pɑːˈskɑːl/; French: [blɛz paskal]; 19 June 1623 – 19 August 1662) was a French mathematician, physicist, inventor, writer and Christian philosopher. He was a child prodigy who was educated by his father, a tax collector in Rouen. Pascal's earliest work was in the natural and applied sciences where he made important contributions to the study of fluids, and clarified the concepts of pressure and vacuum by generalizing the work of Evangelista Torricelli. Pascal also wrote in defense of the scientific method. In 1642, while still a teenager, he started some pioneering work on calculating machines. After three years of effort and fifty prototypes, he built 20 finished machines (called Pascal's calculators and later Pascalines) over the following ten years, establishing him as one of the first two inventors of the mechanical calculator. Pascal was an important mathematician, helping create two major new areas of research: he wrote a significant treatise on the subject of projective geometry at the age of 16, and later corresponded with Pierre de Fermat on probability theory, strongly influencing the development of modern economics and social science. Following Galileo and Torricelli, in 1646, he refuted Aristotle's followers who insisted that nature abhors a vacuum. Pascal's results caused many disputes before being accepted. In 1646, he and his sister Jacqueline identified with the religious movement within Catholicism known by its detractors as Jansenism. His father died in 1651. Following a religious experience in late 1654, he began writing influential works on philosophy and theology. His two most famous works date from this period: the Lettres provinciales and the Pensées, the former set in the conflict between Jansenists and Jesuits. In that year, he also wrote an important treatise on the arithmetical triangle. Between 1658 and 1659 he wrote on the cycloid and its use in calculating the volume of solids. Pascal had poor health, especially after his 18th year, and his death came just two months after his 39th birthday.   == Early life and educationEdit == Pascal was born in Clermont-Ferrand, which is in France's Auvergne region. He lost his mother, Antoinette Begon, at the age of three. His father, Étienne Pascal (1588–1651), who also had an interest in science and mathematics, was a local judge and member of the "Noblesse de Robe". Pascal had two sisters, the younger Jacqueline and the elder Gilberte. In 1631, five years after the death of his wife, Étienne Pascal moved with his children to Paris. The newly arrived family soon hired Louise Delfault, a maid who eventually became an instrumental member of the family. Étienne, who never remarried, decided that he alone would educate his children, for they all showed extraordinary intellectual ability, particularly his son Blaise. The young Pascal showed an amazing aptitude for mathematics and science. Particularly of interest to Pascal was a work of Desargues on conic sections. Following Desargues' thinking, the 16-year-old Pascal produced, as a means of proof, a short treatise on what was called the "Mystic Hexagram", Essai pour les coniques ("Essay on Conics") and sent it—his first serious work of mathematics—to Père Mersenne in Paris; it is known still today as Pascal's theorem. It states that if a hexagon is inscribed in a circle (or conic) then the three intersection points of opposite sides lie on a line (called the Pascal line). Pascal's work was so precocious that Descartes was convinced that Pascal's father had written it. When assured by Mersenne that it was, indeed, the product of the son and not the father, Descartes dismissed it with a sniff: "I do not find it strange that he has offered demonstrations about conics more appropriate than those of the ancients," adding, "but other matters related to this subject can be proposed that would scarcely occur to a 16-year-old child." In France at that time offices and positions could be—and were—bought and sold. In 1631 Étienne sold his position as second president of the Cour des Aides for 65,665 livres. The money was invested in a government bond which provided, if not a lavish, then certainly a comfortable income which allowed the Pascal family to move to, and enjoy, Paris. But in 1638 Richelieu, desperate for money to carry on the Thirty Years' War, defaulted on the government's bonds. Suddenly Étienne Pascal's worth had dropped from nearly 66,000 livres to less than 7,300.  Like so many others, Étienne was eventually forced to flee Paris because of his opposition to the fiscal policies of Cardinal Richelieu, leaving his three children in the care of his neighbor Madame Sainctot, a great beauty with an infamous past who kept one of the most glittering and intellectual salons in all France. It was only when Jacqueline performed well in a children's play with Richelieu in attendance that Étienne was pardoned. In time, Étienne was back in good graces with the cardinal and in 1639 had been appointed the king's commissioner of taxes in the city of Rouen—a city whose tax records, thanks to uprisings, were in utter chaos. In 1642, in an effort to ease his father's endless, exhausting calculations, and recalculations, of taxes owed and paid (into which work the young Pascal had been recruited), Pascal, not yet 19, constructed a mechanical calculator capable of addition and subtraction, called Pascal's calculator or the Pascaline. Of the eight Pascalines known to have survived, four are held by the Musée des Arts et Métiers in Paris and one more by the Zwinger museum in Dresden, Germany, exhibit two of his original mechanical calculators. Though these machines are pioneering forerunners to a further 400 years of development of mechanical methods of calculation, and in a sense to the later field of computer engineering, the calculator failed to be a great commercial success. Partly because it was still quite cumbersome to use in practice, but probably primarily because it was extraordinarily expensive, the Pascaline became little more than a toy, and a status symbol, for the very rich both in France and elsewhere in Europe. Pascal continued to make improvements to his design through the next decade, and he refers to some 50 machines that were built to his design.   == Contributions to mathematicsEdit ==  Pascal continued to influence mathematics throughout his life. His Traité du triangle arithmétique ("Treatise on the Arithmetical Triangle") of 1653 described a convenient tabular presentation for binomial coefficients, now called Pascal's triangle. The triangle can also be represented: He defines the numbers in the triangle by recursion: Call the number in the (m + 1)th row and (n + 1)th column tmn. Then tmn = tm–1,n + tm,n–1, for m = 0, 1, 2, ... and n = 0, 1, 2, ... The boundary conditions are tm,−1 = 0, t−1,n = 0 for m = 1, 2, 3, ... and n = 1, 2, 3, ... The generator t00 = 1. Pascal concludes with the proof,  In 1654 he proved Pascal's identity relating the sums of the p-th powers of the first n positive integers for p = 0, 1, 2, …, k. In 1654, prompted by his friend the Chevalier de Méré, he corresponded with Pierre de Fermat on the subject of gambling problems, and from that collaboration was born the mathematical theory of probabilities. The specific problem was that of two players who want to finish a game early and, given the current circumstances of the game, want to divide the stakes fairly, based on the chance each has of winning the game from that point. From this discussion, the notion of expected value was introduced. Pascal later (in the Pensées) used a probabilistic argument, Pascal's Wager, to justify belief in God and a virtuous life. The work done by Fermat and Pascal into the calculus of probabilities laid important groundwork for Leibniz' formulation of the calculus. After a religious experience in 1654, Pascal mostly gave up work in mathematics.   === Philosophy of mathematicsEdit === Pascal's major contribution to the philosophy of mathematics came with his De l'Esprit géométrique ("Of the Geometrical Spirit"), originally written as a preface to a geometry textbook for one of the famous "Petites-Ecoles de Port-Royal" ("Little Schools of Port-Royal"). The work was unpublished until over a century after his death. Here, Pascal looked into the issue of discovering truths, arguing that the ideal of such a method would be to found all propositions on already established truths. At the same time, however, he claimed this was impossible because such established truths would require other truths to back them up—first principles, therefore, cannot be reached. Based on this, Pascal argued that the procedure used in geometry was as perfect as possible, with certain principles assumed and other propositions developed from them. Nevertheless, there was no way to know the assumed principles to be true. Pascal also used De l'Esprit géométrique to develop a theory of definition. He distinguished between definitions which are conventional labels defined by the writer and definitions which are within the language and understood by everyone because they naturally designate their referent. The second type would be characteristic of the philosophy of essentialism. Pascal claimed that only definitions of the first type were important to science and mathematics, arguing that those fields should adopt the philosophy of formalism as formulated by Descartes. In De l'Art de persuader ("On the Art of Persuasion"), Pascal looked deeper into geometry's axiomatic method, specifically the question of how people come to be convinced of the axioms upon which later conclusions are based. Pascal agreed with Montaigne that achieving certainty in these axioms and conclusions through human methods is impossible. He asserted that these principles can be grasped only through intuition, and that this fact underscored the necessity for submission to God in searching out truths.   == Contributions to the physical sciencesEdit ==  Pascal's work in the fields of the study of hydrodynamics and hydrostatics centered on the principles of hydraulic fluids. His inventions include the hydraulic press (using hydraulic pressure to multiply force) and the syringe. He proved that hydrostatic pressure depends not on the weight of the fluid but on the elevation difference. He demonstrated this principle by attaching a thin tube to a barrel full of water and filling the tube with water up to the level of the third floor of a building. This caused the barrel to leak, in what became known as Pascal's barrel experiment. By 1646, Pascal had learned of Evangelista Torricelli's experimentation with barometers. Having replicated an experiment that involved placing a tube filled with mercury upside down in a bowl of mercury, Pascal questioned what force kept some mercury in the tube and what filled the space above the mercury in the tube. At the time, most scientists contended that, rather than a vacuum, some invisible matter was present. This was based on the Aristotelian notion that creation was a thing of substance, whether visible or invisible; and that this substance was forever in motion. Furthermore, "Everything that is in motion must be moved by something," Aristotle declared. Therefore, to the Aristotelian trained scientists of Pascal's time, a vacuum was an impossibility. How so? As proof it was pointed out: Light passed through the so-called "vacuum" in the glass tube. Aristotle wrote how everything moved, and must be moved by something. Therefore, since there had to be an invisible "something" to move the light through the glass tube, there was no vacuum in the tube. Not in the glass tube or anywhere else. Vacuums – the absence of any and everything – were simply an impossibility. Following more experimentation in this vein, in 1647 Pascal produced Experiences nouvelles touchant le vide ("New Experiments with the Vacuum"), which detailed basic rules describing to what degree various liquids could be supported by air pressure. It also provided reasons why it was indeed a vacuum above the column of liquid in a barometer tube. On 19 September 1648, after many months of Pascal's friendly but insistent prodding, Florin Périer, husband of Pascal's elder sister Gilberte, was finally able to carry out the fact-finding mission vital to Pascal's theory. The account, written by Périer, reads:  "The weather was chancy last Saturday...[but] around five o'clock that morning...the Puy-de-Dôme was visible...so I decided to give it a try. Several important people of the city of Clermont had asked me to let them know when I would make the ascent...I was delighted to have them with me in this great work... "...at eight o'clock we met in the gardens of the Minim Fathers, which has the lowest elevation in town....First I poured 16 pounds of quicksilver...into a vessel...then took several glass tubes...each four feet long and hermetically sealed at one end and opened at the other...then placed them in the vessel [of quicksilver]...I found the quick silver stood at 26" and 3½ lines above the quicksilver in the vessel...I repeated the experiment two more times while standing in the same spot...[they] produced the same result each time... "I attached one of the tubes to the vessel and marked the height of the quicksilver and...asked Father Chastin, one of the Minim Brothers...to watch if any changes should occur through the day...Taking the other tube and a portion of the quick silver...I walked to the top of Puy-de-Dôme, about 500 fathoms higher than the monastery, where upon experiment...found that the quicksilver reached a height of only 23" and 2 lines...I repeated the experiment five times with care...each at different points on the summit...found the same height of quicksilver...in each case..."  Pascal replicated the experiment in Paris by carrying a barometer up to the top of the bell tower at the church of Saint-Jacques-de-la-Boucherie, a height of about fifty meters. The mercury dropped two lines. In the face of criticism that some invisible matter must exist in Pascal's empty space, Pascal, in his reply to Estienne Noel, gave one of the 17th century's major statements on the scientific method, which is a striking anticipation of the idea popularised by Karl Popper that scientific theories are characterised by their falsifiability: "In order to show that a hypothesis is evident, it does not suffice that all the phenomena follow from it; instead, if it leads to something contrary to a single one of the phenomena, that suffices to establish its falsity." His insistence on the existence of the vacuum also led to conflict with other prominent scientists, including Descartes. Pascal introduced a primitive form of roulette and the roulette wheel in his search for a perpetual motion machine.   == Adult life, religion, philosophy, and literatureEdit ==  For after all what is man in nature? A nothing in relation to infinity, all in relation to nothing, a central point between nothing and all and infinitely far from understanding either. The ends of things and their beginnings are impregnably concealed from him in an impenetrable secret. He is equally incapable of seeing the nothingness out of which he was drawn and the infinite in which he is engulfed.  Blaise Pascal, Pensées No. 72   === Religious conversionEdit ===  In the winter of 1646, Pascal's 58-year-old father broke his hip when he slipped and fell on an icy street of Rouen; given the man's age and the state of medicine in the 17th century, a broken hip could be a very serious condition, perhaps even fatal. Rouen was home to two of the finest doctors in France: Monsieur Doctor Deslandes and Monsieur Doctor de La Bouteillerie. The elder Pascal "would not let anyone other than these men attend him...It was a good choice, for the old man survived and was able to walk again..." But treatment and rehabilitation took three months, during which time La Bouteillerie and Deslandes had become household guests. Both men were followers of Jean Guillebert, proponent of a splinter group from Catholic teaching known as Jansenism. This still fairly small sect was making surprising inroads into the French Catholic community at that time. It espoused rigorous Augustinism. Blaise spoke with the doctors frequently, and upon his successful treatment of Étienne, borrowed from them works by Jansenist authors. In this period, Pascal experienced a sort of "first conversion" and began to write on theological subjects in the course of the following year. Pascal fell away from this initial religious engagement and experienced a few years of what some biographers have called his "worldly period" (1648–54). His father died in 1651 and left his inheritance to Pascal and Jacqueline, for whom Pascal acted as her conservator. Jacqueline announced that she would soon become a postulant in the Jansenist convent of Port-Royal. Pascal was deeply affected and very sad, not because of her choice, but because of his chronic poor health; he too needed her.  "Suddenly there was war in the Pascal household. Blaise pleaded with Jacqueline not to leave, but she was adamant. He commanded her to stay, but that didn't work, either. At the heart of this was...Blaise's fear of abandonment...if Jacqueline entered Port-Royal, she would have to leave her inheritance behind...[but] nothing would change her mind."  By the end of October in 1651, a truce had been reached between brother and sister. In return for a healthy annual stipend, Jacqueline signed over her part of the inheritance to her brother. Gilberte had already been given her inheritance in the form of a dowry. In early January, Jacqueline left for Port-Royal. On that day, according to Gilberte concerning her brother, "He retired very sadly to his rooms without seeing Jacqueline, who was waiting in the little parlor..." In early June 1653, after what must have seemed like endless badgering from Jacqueline, Pascal formally signed over the whole of his sister's inheritance to Port-Royal, which, to him, "had begun to smell like a cult." With two thirds of his father's estate now gone, the 29-year-old Pascal was now consigned to genteel poverty. For a while, Pascal pursued the life of a bachelor. During visits to his sister at Port-Royal in 1654, he displayed contempt for affairs of the world but was not drawn to God.   === Brush with deathEdit ===  On 23 November 1654, between 10:30 and 12:30 at night, Pascal had an intense religious vision and immediately recorded the experience in a brief note to himself which began: "Fire. God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, not of the philosophers and the scholars..." and concluded by quoting Psalm 119:16: "I will not forget thy word. Amen." He seems to have carefully sewn this document into his coat and always transferred it when he changed clothes; a servant discovered it only by chance after his death. This piece is now known as the Memorial. The story of the carriage accident as having led to the experience described in the Memorial is disputed by some scholars. His belief and religious commitment revitalized, Pascal visited the older of two convents at Port-Royal for a two-week retreat in January 1655. For the next four years, he regularly travelled between Port-Royal and Paris. It was at this point immediately after his conversion when he began writing his first major literary work on religion, the Provincial Letters.   === The Provincial LettersEdit ===  Beginning in 1656, Pascal published his memorable attack on casuistry, a popular ethical method used by Catholic thinkers in the early modern period (especially the Jesuits, and in particular Antonio Escobar). Pascal denounced casuistry as the mere use of complex reasoning to justify moral laxity and all sorts of sins. The 18-letter series was published between 1656 and 1657 under the pseudonym Louis de Montalte and incensed Louis XIV. The king ordered that the book be shredded and burnt in 1660. In 1661, in the midsts of the formulary controversy, the Jansenist school at Port-Royal was condemned and closed down; those involved with the school had to sign a 1656 papal bull condemning the teachings of Jansen as heretical. The final letter from Pascal, in 1657, had defied Alexander VII himself. Even Pope Alexander, while publicly opposing them, nonetheless was persuaded by Pascal's arguments. Aside from their religious influence, the Provincial Letters were popular as a literary work. Pascal's use of humor, mockery, and vicious satire in his arguments made the letters ripe for public consumption, and influenced the prose of later French writers like Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Charles Perrault wrote of the Letters: "Everything is there—purity of language, nobility of thought, solidity in reasoning, finesse in raillery, and throughout an agrément not to be found anywhere else."   === The PenséesEdit ===  Pascal's most influential theological work, referred to posthumously as the Pensées ("Thoughts"), was not completed before his death. It was to have been a sustained and coherent examination and defense of the Christian faith, with the original title Apologie de la religion Chrétienne ("Defense of the Christian Religion"). The first version of the numerous scraps of paper found after his death appeared in print as a book in 1669 titled Pensées de M. Pascal sur la religion, et sur quelques autres sujets ("Thoughts of M. Pascal on religion, and on some other subjects") and soon thereafter became a classic. One of the Apologie's main strategies was to use the contradictory philosophies of skepticism and stoicism, personalized by Montaigne on one hand, and Epictetus on the other, in order to bring the unbeliever to such despair and confusion that he would embrace God. Pascal's Pensées is widely considered to be a masterpiece, and a landmark in French prose. When commenting on one particular section (Thought #72), Sainte-Beuve praised it as the finest pages in the French language. Will Durant hailed it as "the most eloquent book in French prose." In Pensées, Pascal surveys several philosophical paradoxes: infinity and nothing, faith and reason, soul and matter, death and life, meaning and vanity—seemingly arriving at no definitive conclusions besides humility, ignorance, and grace. Rolling these into one he develops Pascal's Wager.   === Last works and deathEdit ===  T. S. Eliot described him during this phase of his life as "a man of the world among ascetics, and an ascetic among men of the world." Pascal's ascetic lifestyle derived from a belief that it was natural and necessary for a person to suffer. In 1659, Pascal fell seriously ill. During his last years, he frequently tried to reject the ministrations of his doctors, saying, "Sickness is the natural state of Christians." Louis XIV suppressed the Jansenist movement at Port-Royal in 1661. In response, Pascal wrote one of his final works, Écrit sur la signature du formulaire ("Writ on the Signing of the Form"), exhorting the Jansenists not to give in. Later that year, his sister Jacqueline died, which convinced Pascal to cease his polemics on Jansenism. Pascal's last major achievement, returning to his mechanical genius, was inaugurating perhaps the first bus line, moving passengers within Paris in a carriage with many seats. In 1662, Pascal's illness became more violent, and his emotional condition had severely worsened since his sister's death. Aware that his health was fading quickly, he sought a move to the hospital for incurable diseases, but his doctors declared that he was too unstable to be carried. In Paris on 18 August 1662, Pascal went into convulsions and received extreme unction. He died the next morning, his last words being "May God never abandon me," and was buried in the cemetery of Saint-Étienne-du-Mont. An autopsy performed after his death revealed grave problems with his stomach and other organs of his abdomen, along with damage to his brain. Despite the autopsy, the cause of his poor health was never precisely determined, though speculation focuses on tuberculosis, stomach cancer, or a combination of the two. The headaches which afflicted Pascal are generally attributed to his brain lesion.   == LegacyEdit ==  In honor of his scientific contributions, the name Pascal has been given to the SI unit of pressure, to a programming language, and Pascal's law (an important principle of hydrostatics), and as mentioned above, Pascal's triangle and Pascal's wager still bear his name. Pascal's development of probability theory was his most influential contribution to mathematics. Originally applied to gambling, today it is extremely important in economics, especially in actuarial science. John Ross writes, "Probability theory and the discoveries following it changed the way we regard uncertainty, risk, decision-making, and an individual's and society's ability to influence the course of future events." However, it should be noted that Pascal and Fermat, though doing important early work in probability theory, did not develop the field very far. Christiaan Huygens, learning of the subject from the correspondence of Pascal and Fermat, wrote the first book on the subject. Later figures who continued the development of the theory include Abraham de Moivre and Pierre-Simon Laplace. In literature, Pascal is regarded as one of the most important authors of the French Classical Period and is read today as one of the greatest masters of French prose. His use of satire and wit influenced later polemicists. The content of his literary work is best remembered for its strong opposition to the rationalism of René Descartes and simultaneous assertion that the main countervailing philosophy, empiricism, was also insufficient for determining major truths. In France, prestigious annual awards, Blaise Pascal Chairs are given to outstanding international scientists to conduct their research in the Ile de France region. One of the Universities of Clermont-Ferrand, France – Université Blaise Pascal – is named after him. The University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, holds an annual math contest named in his honour. Roberto Rossellini directed a filmed biopic (entitled Blaise Pascal) which originally aired on Italian television in 1971. Pascal was a subject of the first edition of the 1984 BBC Two documentary, Sea of Faith, presented by Don Cupitt.   == WorksEdit == Essai pour les coniques [Essay on conics] (1639) Experiences nouvelles touchant le vide (1647) Traité du triangle arithmétique [Treatise on the arithmetic triangle] (1653) Lettres provinciales [The provincial letters] (1656–57) De l'Esprit géométrique [On the geometrical spirit] (1657 or 1658) Écrit sur la signature du formulaire (1661) Pensées [Thoughts] (incomplete at death)   == See alsoEdit ==  Scientific revolution List of works by Eugène Guillaume   == ReferencesEdit ==   == Further readingEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Works by Blaise Pascal at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Blaise Pascal at Internet Archive Works by Blaise Pascal at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)  Blaise Pascal entry by Desmond Clarke in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Discussion of the Pascaline, its history, mechanism, surviving examples, and modern replicas at http://things-that-count.net "Avis nécessaire à ceux qui auront curiosité de voir ladite Machine et s'en servir" (Pascaline, 1635), text online and analysed on BibNum [click 'à télécharger' for English version]. Pascal's Memorial in orig. French/Latin and modern English, trans. Elizabeth T. Knuth. Biography, Bibliography. (in French) Works by Blaise Pascal at Open Library BBC Radio 4. In Our Time: Pascal. Blaise Pascal featured on the 500 French Franc banknote in 1977. Blaise Pascal's works: text, concordances and frequency lists  "Blaise Pascal". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. 1913.  Etext of Pascal's Pensées (English, in various formats) Etext of Pascal's Lettres Provinciales (English) Etext of a number of Pascal's minor works (English translation) including, De l'Esprit géométrique and De l'Art de persuader. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Blaise Pascal", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews .

Harry Kesten (19 November 1931, Germany) is an American mathematician best known for his work in probability, most notably on random walks and percolation theory.   == Biography == Kesten grew up in the Netherlands, where he moved with his parents in 1933 to escape the Nazis. He received his Ph.D. in 1956 at Cornell University under supervision of Mark Kac. He was an instructor at Princeton University and the Hebrew University before returning to Cornell where he is now professor emeritus of mathematics.   == Mathematical work == Kesten's work includes a number of fundamental contributions, including the following. Showing that amenability is equivalent to zero spectral gap and that a regular tree of degree  has spectral radius  His work with Hillel Furstenberg on products of random matrices Enumerations of self-avoiding walks and a "pattern theorem". Resolving a conjecture of Erdős and Szűsz on the discrepancy of irrational rotations Kesten did much work on percolation including proving that the critical probability of bond percolation on the square lattice equals 1/2, demonstrating the so-called scaling relations and writing the first book on percolation directed towards mathematicians. Giving an upper bound for the growth of arms in diffusion-limited aggregation His work with Vladas Sidoravicius on the spread of an infection in a moving population   == Awards and honors == Kesten was a Guggenheim fellow, Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, received the Brouwer Medal in 1981, the Steele Prize for Lifetime Achievement from the AMS, and the George Pólya Prize from the SIAM. He is also a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a correspondent member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society.   == Selected works == with Mark Kac: "On rapidly mixing transformations and an application to continued fractions". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 64 (5): 283–287. 1958. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1958-10226-8. MR 0097114; correction 65 1958 p. 67  "Symmetric random walks on groups". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 92: 336–354. 1959. doi:10.1090/s0002-9947-1959-0109367-6. MR 0109367.  "Occupation times for Markov and semi-Markov chains". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 103: 82–112. 1962. doi:10.1090/s0002-9947-1962-0138122-6. MR 0138122.  Some probabilistic theorems on Diophantine approximations. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 103. 1962. pp. 189–217. doi:10.1090/s0002-9947-1962-0137692-1. MR 0137692.  with Zbigniew Ciesielski: A limit theorem for the fractional parts of the sequence {2kt}. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 13. 1962. pp. 596–600. doi:10.1090/s0002-9939-1962-0138612-1. MR 0138612.  with D. Ornstein and F. Spitzer: "A general property of random walk". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 68 (5): 526–528. 1962. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1962-10808-8. MR 0142160.  "A convolution equation and hitting probabilities of single points for processes with stationary independent increments". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 75 (3): 573–578. 1969. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1969-12245-7. MR 0251797.  "Some linear stochastic growth models". Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 77 (4): 492–511. 1971. doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1971-12732-5. MR 0278404.  Hitting probabilities for single points for processes of stationary independent increments. Memoirs of the AMS; 93. Providence, R.I.: AMS. 1969.  "Sums of stationary sequences cannot grow slower than linearly". Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 49: 205–211. 1975. doi:10.1090/s0002-9939-1975-0370713-4. MR 0370713.  "Erickson's conjecture on the rate of d-dimensional random walk". Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 240: 65–113. 1978. doi:10.1090/s0002-9947-1978-0489585-x. MR 489585.  Percolation theory for mathematicians. Stuttgart: Birkhäuser. 1982. ISBN 3-7643-3107-0.  "What is Percolation?" (PDF). Notices AMS. 2006.    == See also == Amenable group   == References ==   == External links == Harry Kesten at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Department webpage Mini-biography

Ian MacDougall Hacking, CC, FRSC, FBA (born February 18, 1936) is a Canadian philosopher, specializing in the philosophy of science.   == LifeEdit == Born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, he has undergraduate degrees from the University of British Columbia (1956) and the University of Cambridge (1958), where he was a student at Trinity College, Cambridge. Hacking also took his Ph.D. at Cambridge (1962), under the direction of Casimir Lewy, a former student of Ludwig Wittgenstein's. He taught at UBC in Canada as an Assistant Professor, then an Associate Professor, spending some time teaching at the Makerere University in Uganda. He became a lecturer at Cambridge in 1969 before shifting to Stanford in 1974. After teaching for several years at Stanford University, he spent a year at the Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Bielefeld, Germany, (1982–1983). He became Professor of Philosophy at the University of Toronto in 1983 and University Professor (the highest honour the University of Toronto bestows on faculty) in 1991. From 2000 to 2006, he held the Chair of Philosophy and History of Scientific Concepts at the Collège de France, the first Anglophone to be elected to a permanent chair in the Collège's history. After retiring from the Collège de France, Hacking was a Professor of Philosophy at UC Santa Cruz.   == WorksEdit == Influenced by debates involving Thomas Kuhn, Imre Lakatos, Paul Feyerabend and others, Hacking is known for bringing a historical approach to the philosophy of science. The fourth edition (2010) of Feyerabend's 1975 book Against Method and the fiftieth anniversary edition (2012) of Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions include an Introduction by Hacking. Hacking is sometimes described as a member of the "Stanford School" in philosophy of science, a group that also included John Dupré, Nancy Cartwright and Peter Galison. He himself still identifies as a Cambridge analytic philosopher. Hacking defended a realism about science, "entity realism", albeit only on pragmatic and particularly experimental grounds: the electron is real because human beings use it to make things happen. This form of realism encourages a realistic stance towards the entities postulated by mature sciences but skepticism towards scientific theories. Hacking has also been influential in directing attention to the experimental and even engineering practices of science, and their relative autonomy from theory. In that way Hacking moved philosophical thinking a step further than the initial historical, but heavily theory-focused, turn of Kuhn et al. In his later work (from 1990 onward), his focus has shifted somewhat from the natural sciences to the human sciences, partly under the influence of the work of Michel Foucault. Foucault was an influence as early as Why Does Language Matter to Philosophy? and The Emergence of Probability (both 1975). In the latter book, Hacking proposed that the modern schism between subjective or personalist probability, and the long-run frequency interpretation, emerged in the early modern era as an epistemological "break" involving two incompatible models of uncertainty and chance. As history the idea of a sharp break has been criticized, but competing 'frequentist' and 'subjective' interpretations of probability still remain today. Foucault's approach to knowledge systems and power is also reflected in Hacking's work on the historical mutability of psychiatric disorders and institutional roles for statistical reasoning in the 19th century. He labels his approach to the human sciences "dynamic nominalism" (or, alternately, "dialectical realism"), a historicised form of nominalism that traces the mutual interactions over time between the phenomena of the human world and our conceptions and classifications of them. In Rewriting the Soul: Multiple Personality and the Sciences of Memory, by developing a historical ontology of Multiple Personality Disorder, Hacking provides a discussion of how people are constituted by the descriptions of acts available to them (see Acting under a description). In Mad Travelers (1998) he documented the fleeting appearance in the 1890s of a fugue state in which European men would walk in a trance for hundreds of miles without knowledge of their identities.   == Awards and lecturesEdit == In 2002, he was awarded the first Killam Prize for the Humanities, Canada's most distinguished award for outstanding career achievements. In 2004, he was made a Companion of the Order of Canada. Hacking was appointed visiting professor at University of California, Santa Cruz for the Winters of 2008 and 2009. On August 25, 2009, Hacking was named winner of the Holberg International Memorial Prize, a Norwegian award for scholarly work in the arts and humanities, social sciences, law and theology. Hacking was chosen for his work on how statistics and the theory of probability have shaped society. In 2003, he gave the The Sigmund H. Danziger, Jr. Memorial Lecture in the Humanities. In 2010, he gave the René Descartes Lectures at the Tilburg Center for Logic and Philosophy of Science (TiLPS).007. In 2010, Hacking also gave the Howison lectures at the University of California, Berkeley, on the topic of mathematics and its sources in human behavior ('Proof, Truth, Hands and Mind'). In 2012, Hacking was awarded the Austrian Decoration for Science and Art. In 2014, he was awarded the Balzan Prize.   == Selected worksEdit ==   === BooksEdit === Hacking's works have been translated into several languages. The Logic of Statistical Inference (1965) The Emergence of Probability (1975) Why Does Language Matter to Philosophy? (1975) Representing and Intervening, Introductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural Science, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1983. The Taming of Chance (1990) Scientific Revolutions (1990) Rewriting the Soul: Multiple Personality and the Sciences of Memory (1995) Mad Travellers: Reflections on the Reality of Transient Mental Illness (1998) The Social Construction of What? (1999) An Introduction to Probability and Inductive Logic (2001) Historical Ontology (2002) Why Is There Philosophy of Mathematics at All? (2014)   === Chapters in booksEdit === Hacking, Ian (1992), "The self-vindication of the laboratory sciences", in Pickering, Andrew, Science as practice and culture, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 29–64, ISBN 9780226668017.    === ArticlesEdit === Hacking, Ian (December 1967). "Slightly More Realistic Personal Probability". Philosophy of Science 34 (4): 311–325. doi:10.1086/288169. JSTOR 186120.  Hacking, Ian (September 1988). "Telepathy: Origins of Randomization in Experimental Design". Isis 79 (3: A Special Issue on Artifact and Experiment): 427–451. doi:10.1086/354775. JSTOR 234674. MR 1013489.  Hacking, Ian (May 2012). "Putnam's Theory of Natural Kinds and Their Names is Not the Same as Kripke's". Hurly-Burly 7: 129-149.   == ReferencesEdit ==   == External linksEdit == Official Website University of Toronto profile Collège de France profile with links to online lessons (French) and texts (English and French) Hacking, Ian in The Canadian Encyclopedia "How We Have Been Learning to Talk About Autism" Podcast of lecture delivered September 19, 2008 to a conference entitled Cognitive Disability: A Challenge to Moral Philosophy, held at Stony Brook University. 42 minutes 264 MB Ideas - How to think about Science. Podcast of an edited conversation on Ideas (CBC Radio, January 2009) regarding the meshing of theory and experiment. (This radio series includes interviews with several authors discussed in Hacking's The Social Construction of What?). 54 minutes. Hacking's contributions to The New York Review of Books Hacking's contributions to the London Review of Books Root and Branch, in The Nation, October 8, 2007 "The Complacent Disciplinarian" and discussion (pp. 197–203), presented in Rethinking Interdisciplinarity, January 5, 2004. "Genetics, biosocial groups & the future of identity", Daedalus, Fall 2006, Vol. 135, No. 4: 81–95 "Truthfulness", Common Knowledge, Vol. 11, No. 1. (2005), pp. 160–172. Ian Hacking International Balzan Prize Foundation

Octav Onicescu (Romanian pronunciation: [okˈtav oniˈt͡ʃesku]; August 20, 1892 – August 19, 1983) was a Romanian mathematician, member of the Romanian Academy, and founder of the Romanian school of probability theory and statistics.   == Biography == He was born in Botoşani, the son of Vlad Onicescu, from Ștefănești, Botoșani, and Ana, from Oniceni, Neamţ County. He graduated from the Botoşani A. T. Laurian High School in 1911 with a perfect average grade of 10. That same year, he entered the University of Bucharest, from where he graduated with degrees in mathematics and philosophy in 1913. From 1914 to 1916 he was a mathematics teacher at the military gymnasium of Dealu Monastery, near Târgovişte. From 1916 to 1918 he fought in World War I. In 1919, Onicescu went to study geometry at the University of Rome, under the guidance of Tullio Levi-Civita. He earned his Ph.D. in June, 1920 for a thesis titled Sopra gli spazi einsteiniani a gruppi continui di transformazione ("On Einstein manifolds and groups of continuous transformations"). The thesis, which dealt with problems in differential geometry related to Albert Einstein's theory of relativity, was defended in front of a jury of 11 mathematicians, including Levi-Civita, Vito Volterra, and Guido Castelnuovo. In the Fall of 1920 he went to Paris, where he gave talks in Jacques Hadamard's seminar at the Collège de France. While in Paris, he organized a seminar with other Romanian mathematicians, including Petre Sergescu, Şerban Gheorghiu, Alexandru Pantazi, and Şerban Coculescu. In 1922, he returned to Bucharest, where he embarked on a 40-year-long university career. In 1924, he started teaching the first college-level probability theory course in Romania. From 1928 on, he was professor at the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Bucharest, and was appointed full professor in 1931. In 1930, he organized the School of Statistics and established an Institute of Calculus, serving as its director for many years. In 1936 he entered the Legionary Movement. The Romanian poet and mathematician Ion Barbu (Dan Barbilian) was a close friend of his. He was elected corresponding member of the Romanian Academy in 1933, and became full member on February 4, 1965. He was in charge of the Probability Theory section of the Institute of Mathematics of the Romanian Academy. He died in Bucharest on the eve of his 91st birthday, after a short illness.   == Legacy == Onicescu was one of the founders of the Balkan Union of Mathematicians (in 1934) and of the International Centre for Mechanical Sciences in Udine (in 1968). The "Octav Onicescu" museum, founded in Botoşani in October 1995, houses furniture and memorabilia that belonged to him, including manuscripts, letters, diplomas, books, photographs, and military decorations. The memorial house doesn't exist anymore.   == References == (Romanian) Biography, at the Octav Onicescu National College, in Bucharest Marius Iosifescu, "Octav Onicescu, 1892-1983", International Statistical Review, vol. 54, no. 1 (1986), pp. 97–108 Christopher Charles Heyde and Eugene Seneta, "Statisticians of the Centuries", Springer, New York, 2006. ISBN 0-387-95329-9   == External links == Octav Onicescu at the Mathematics Genealogy Project

Persi Warren Diaconis (born January 31, 1945) is an American mathematician and former professional magician. He is the Mary V. Sunseri Professor of Statistics and Mathematics at Stanford University. He is particularly known for tackling mathematical problems involving randomness and randomization, such as coin flipping and shuffling playing cards.   == Card shuffling ==  Professor Diaconis received a MacArthur Fellowship in 1982. In 1992 he published (with Dave Bayer) a paper entitled "Trailing the Dovetail Shuffle to Its Lair" (a term coined by magician Charles Jordan in the early 1900s) which established rigorous results on how many times a deck of playing cards must be riffle shuffled before it can be considered random according to the mathematical measure total variation distance. Diaconis is often cited for the simplified proposition that it takes seven shuffles to randomize a deck. More precisely, Diaconis showed that, in the Gilbert–Shannon–Reeds model of how likely it is that a riffle results in a particular riffle shuffle permutation, it takes 5 riffles before the total variation distance of a 52-card deck begins to drop significantly from the maximum value of 1.0, and 7 riffles before it drops below 0.5 very quickly (a threshold phenomenon), after which it is reduced by a factor of 2 every shuffle. Interestingly, when entropy is viewed as the probabilistic distance, riffle shuffling seems to take less time to mix, and the threshold phenomenon goes away (because the entropy function is subadditive.). Diaconis has coauthored several more recent papers expanding on his 1992 results and relating the problem of shuffling cards to other problems in mathematics. Among other things, they showed that the separation distance of an ordered blackjack deck (that is, aces on top, followed by 2's, followed by 3's, etc.) drops below .5 after 7 shuffles. Separation distance is an upper bound for variation distance.   == Biography == Diaconis left home at 14 to travel with sleight-of-hand legend Dai Vernon, and dropped out of high school, promising himself that he would return one day so that he could learn all of the math necessary to read William Feller's famous two-volume treatise on probability theory, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications. He returned to school (City College of New York for his undergraduate work graduating in 1971 and then a Ph.D. in Mathematical Statistics from Harvard University in 1974), learned to read Feller, and became a mathematical probabilist. According to Martin Gardner, at school Diaconis supported himself by playing poker on ships between New York and South America. Gardner recalls that Diaconis had "fantastic second deal and bottom deal". Diaconis is married to Stanford statistics professor Susan Holmes.   === Recognition === 1982 – Awarded the Rollo Davidson Prize. 1995 - Elected to the National Academy of Sciences 1997 – Gibbs Lecturer, American Mathematical Society. 2003 – Received an honorary D. Sci. degree from the University of Chicago. 2006 – Awarded the Van Wijngaarden Award. 2012 – Awarded the Levi L. Conant Prize. 2012 – Fellow of the American Mathematical Society 2013 – Received an Honorary Degree from the University of St Andrews.   == Works == Diaconis, Persi (1988). Group representations in probability and statistics. Institute of Mathematical Statistics. ISBN 0-940600-14-5.  "Theories of data analysis: from magical thinking through classical statistics", in Hoaglin, D.C (eds) (1985). Exploring Data Tables Trends and Shapes. Wiley. ISBN 0-471-09776-4.  CS1 maint: display-authors (link) Diaconis, P. (1978). "Statistical problems in ESP research". Science 201 (4351): 131–136. doi:10.1126/science.663642. PMID 663642.    == See also == Freedman–Diaconis rule Patience sorting Random walk Mathemagician   == References ==   == External links == Interview: Persi Diaconis discusses his life, magic and mathematics on the 7th Avenue Project radio show

Robert James Elliott (born 1940) is a British-Canadian mathematician, known for his contributions to control theory, game theory, stochastic processes and mathematical finance. He was schooled at Swanwick, Derbyshire and studied mathematics in which he earn a B.A. (1961) and M.A. (1965) at the University of Oxford, as well as a Ph.D (thesis Some results in spectral synthesis advised by John Hunter Williamson, 1965) and Sc.D. (1983) from University of Cambridge. He taught and conducted research at University of Newcastle (1964), Yale University (1965–66), University of Oxford (1966–68), University of Warwick (1969–73), Northwestern University (1972–73), University of Hull (1973–86), University of Alberta (1985-2001), University of Calgary (2001-2009) and University of Adelaide (2009-2013). He is the cousin of physicist Roger James Elliott.   == Books == Stochastic Processes, Finance and Control A Festschrift in Honor of Robert J Elliott (World Scientific Publishing, 2012) with Nigel Kalton, The Existence of Value for Differential Games (American Mathematical Society, 1972) Stochastic Calculus and Applications (Springer-Verlag, 1982) Viscosity Solutions and Optimal Control (Longman, 1987) Stokasticheski Analiz i evo Prilozeniya (M.I.R. Publications Moscow, 1986) with Lakhdar Aggoun and John B. Moore, Hidden Markov Models: Estimation and Control (Springer-Verlag, 1994) with P. Ekkehard Kopp, Mathematics of Financial Markets (Springer Verlag, 1999, in Hungarian 2000). with J. van der Hoek, Binomial Models in Finance (Springer Verlag, 2005) with Rogemar S. Mamon, Hidden Markov Models in Finance (Springer, 2007) with Samuel N. Cohen, Stochastic Calculus and Applications (Springer, 2015)   == References ==

Rudolf (Rudi) Emil Kálmán (Hungarian: Kálmán Rudolf Emil; born May 19, 1930) is a Hungarian-born American electrical engineer, mathematician, and inventor. He is most noted for his co-invention and development of the Kalman filter, a mathematical algorithm that is widely used in signal processing, control systems, and Guidance, navigation and control. For this work, U.S. President Barack Obama awarded Kálmán the National Medal of Science on October 7, 2009.   == Biography == Rudolf Kálmán was born in Budapest in 1930. After emigrating to the United States in 1943, he earned his bachelor's degree in 1953 and his master's degree in 1954, both from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in electrical engineering. Kálmán completed his doctorate in 1957 at Columbia University in New York City. Kálmán worked as a Research Mathematician at the Research Institute for Advanced Studies in Baltimore, Maryland from 1958 until 1964. He was a professor at Stanford University from 1964 until 1971, and then a Graduate Research Professor and the Director of the Center for Mathematical System Theory, at the University of Florida from 1971 until 1992. Starting in 1973, he also held the chair of Mathematical System Theory at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zürich, Switzerland.   == Work == Kálmán is an electrical engineer by his undergraduate and graduate education at M.I.T. and Columbia University, and he is noted for his co-invention of the Kalman filter (or Kalman-Bucy Filter), which is a mathematical technique widely used in the digital computers of control systems, navigation systems, avionics, and outer-space vehicles to extract a signal from a long sequence of noisy and/or incomplete technical measurements, usually those done by electronic and gyroscopic systems. Kálmán's ideas on filtering were initially met with vast skepticism, so much so that he was forced to do the first publication of his results in mechanical engineering, rather than in electrical engineering or systems engineering. Kálmán had more success in presenting his ideas, however, while visiting Stanley F. Schmidt at the NASA Ames Research Center in 1960. This led to the use of Kálmán filters during the Apollo program, and furthermore, in the NASA Space Shuttle, in Navy submarines, and in unmanned aerospace vehicles and weapons, such as cruise missiles.   == Awards and honors == Kálmán is a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, the American National Academy of Engineering, and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is a foreign member of the Hungarian, French, and Russian Academies of Science. He has been awarded many honorary doctorates from other universities. In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. Kálmán received the IEEE Medal of Honor in 1974, the IEEE Centennial Medal in 1984, the Inamori foundation's Kyoto Prize in Advanced Technology in 1985, the Steele Prize of the American Mathematical Society in 1987, the Richard E. Bellman Control Heritage Award in 1997, and the National Academy of Engineering's Charles Stark Draper Prize in 2008.   == Selected publications == Kalman, R.E. (1960). "A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems" (PDF). Journal of Basic Engineering 82 (1): 35–45. doi:10.1115/1.3662552. Retrieved 2013-04-08.  Kalman, R.E.; Bucy, R.S. (1961). "New Results in Linear Filtering and Prediction Theory" (PDF). Retrieved 2013-04-08.    == References ==   == External links == The Kalman Filter website Kyoto Prize For Kálmán's PhD students see Rudolf Emil Kálmán on the Mathematics Genealogy Project page. O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Rudolf E. Kálmán", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Biography of Kalman from the IEEE

Siméon Denis Poisson (French: [si.me.ɔ̃ də.ni pwa.sɔ̃]; 21 June 1781 – 25 April 1840), was a French mathematician, geometer, and physicist. He obtained many important results, but within the elite Académie des Sciences he also was the final leading opponent of the wave theory of light and was proven wrong on that matter by Augustin-Jean Fresnel.   == BiographyEdit == Poisson was born in Pithiviers, Loiret, the son of soldier Siméon Poisson. In 1798, he entered the École Polytechnique in Paris as first in his year, and immediately began to attract the notice of the professors of the school, who left him free to make his own decisions as to what he would study. In 1800, less than two years after his entry, he published two memoirs, one on Étienne Bézout's method of elimination, the other on the number of integrals of a finite difference equation. The latter was examined by Sylvestre-François Lacroix and Adrien-Marie Legendre, who recommended that it should be published in the Recueil des savants étrangers, an unprecedented honour for a youth of eighteen. This success at once procured entry for Poisson into scientific circles. Joseph Louis Lagrange, whose lectures on the theory of functions he attended at the École Polytechnique, recognized his talent early on, and became his friend (the Mathematics Genealogy Project lists Lagrange as his advisor, but this may be an approximation); while Pierre-Simon Laplace, in whose footsteps Poisson followed, regarded him almost as his son. The rest of his career, till his death in Sceaux near Paris, was nearly occupied by the composition and publication of his many works and in fulfilling the duties of the numerous educational positions to which he was successively appointed. Immediately after finishing his studies at the École Polytechnique, he was appointed répétiteur (teaching assistant) there, a position which he had occupied as an amateur while still a pupil in the school; for his schoolmates had made a custom of visiting him in his room after an unusually difficult lecture to hear him repeat and explain it. He was made deputy professor (professeur suppléant) in 1802, and, in 1806 full professor succeeding Jean Baptiste Joseph Fourier, whom Napoleon had sent to Grenoble. In 1808 he became astronomer to the Bureau des Longitudes; and when the Faculté des Sciences was instituted in 1809 he was appointed professor of rational mechanics (professeur de mécanique rationelle). He went on to become a member of the Institute in 1812, examiner at the military school (École Militaire) at Saint-Cyr in 1815, graduation examiner at the École Polytechnique in 1816, councillor of the university in 1820, and geometer to the Bureau des Longitudes succeeding Pierre-Simon Laplace in 1827. In 1817, he married Nancy de Bardi and with her he had four children. His father, whose early experiences had led him to hate aristocrats, bred him in the stern creed of the First Republic. Throughout the Revolution, the Empire, and the following restoration, Poisson was not interested in politics, concentrating on mathematics. He was appointed to the dignity of baron in 1821; but he neither took out the diploma or used the title. In March 1818, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society and in 1823 a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. The revolution of July 1830 threatened him with the loss of all his honours; but this disgrace to the government of Louis-Philippe was adroitly averted by François Jean Dominique Arago, who, while his "revocation" was being plotted by the council of ministers, procured him an invitation to dine at the Palais Royal, where he was openly and effusively received by the citizen king, who "remembered" him. After this, of course, his degradation was impossible, and seven years later he was made a peer of France, not for political reasons, but as a representative of French science. As a teacher of mathematics Poisson is said to have been extraordinarily successful, as might have been expected from his early promise as a répétiteur at the École Polytechnique. As a scientific worker, his productivity has rarely if ever been equalled. Notwithstanding his many official duties, he found time to publish more than three hundred works, several of them extensive treatises, and many of them memoirs dealing with the most abstruse branches of pure mathematics, applied mathematics, mathematical physics, and rational mechanics. (Arago attributed to him the quote, "Life is good for only two things: doing mathematics and teaching it.") A list of Poisson's works, drawn up by himself, is given at the end of Arago's biography. All that is possible is a brief mention of the more important ones. It was in the application of mathematics to physics that his greatest services to science were performed. Perhaps the most original, and certainly the most permanent in their influence, were his memoirs on the theory of electricity and magnetism, which virtually created a new branch of mathematical physics. Next (or in the opinion of some, first) in importance stand the memoirs on celestial mechanics, in which he proved himself a worthy successor to Pierre-Simon Laplace. The most important of these are his memoirs Sur les inégalités séculaires des moyens mouvements des planètes, Sur la variation des constantes arbitraires dans les questions de mécanique, both published in the Journal of the École Polytechnique (1809); Sur la libration de la lune, in Connaissances des temps (1821), etc.; and Sur le mouvement de la terre autour de son centre de gravité, in Mémoires de l'Académie (1827), etc. In the first of these memoirs, Poisson discusses the famous question of the stability of the planetary orbits, which had already been settled by Lagrange to the first degree of approximation for the disturbing forces. Poisson showed that the result could be extended to a second approximation, and thus made an important advance in planetary theory. The memoir is remarkable inasmuch as it roused Lagrange, after an interval of inactivity, to compose in his old age one of the greatest of his memoirs, entitled Sur la théorie des variations des éléments des planètes, et en particulier des variations des grands axes de leurs orbites. So highly did he think of Poisson's memoir that he made a copy of it with his own hand, which was found among his papers after his death. Poisson made important contributions to the theory of attraction. His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.   == ContributionsEdit ==  Poisson's well-known correction of Laplace's second order partial differential equation for potential:  today named after him Poisson's equation or the potential theory equation, was first published in the Bulletin de la société philomatique (1813). If a function of a given point ρ = 0, we get Laplace's equation:  In 1812 Poisson discovered that Laplace's equation is valid only outside of a solid. A rigorous proof for masses with variable density was first given by Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1839. Both equations have their equivalents in vector algebra. Poisson's equation for the divergence of the gradient of a scalar field, φ in 3-dimensional space is:  Consider for instance Poisson's equation for surface electrical potential, Ψ as a function of the density of electric charge, ρe at a particular point:  The distribution of a charge in a fluid is unknown and we have to use the Poisson–Boltzmann equation:  which in most cases cannot be solved analytically. In polar coordinates the Poisson–Boltzmann equation is:  which also cannot be solved analytically. If a field, φ is not scalar, the Poisson equation is valid, as can be for example in 4-dimensional Minkowski space:  If ρ(x, y, z) is a continuous function and if for r→ ∞ (or if a point 'moves' to infinity) a function φ goes to 0 fast enough, a solution of Poisson's equation is the Newtonian potential of a function ρ(x, y, z):  where r is a distance between a volume element dv and a point M. The integration runs over the whole space. Another "Poisson's integral" is the solution for the Green function for Laplace's equation with Dirichlet condition over a circular disk:  where  φ is a boundary condition holding on the disk's boundary. In the same manner, we define the Green function for the Laplace equation with Dirichlet condition, ∇² φ = 0 over a sphere of radius R. This time the Green function is:  where  is the distance of a point (ξ, η, ζ) from the center of a sphere, r is the distance between points (x, y, z) and (ξ, η, ζ), and r1 is the distance between the point (x, y, z) and the point (Rξ/ρ, Rη/ρ, Rζ/ρ), symmetrical to the point (ξ, η, ζ). Poisson's integral now has a form:  Poisson's two most important memoirs on the subject are Sur l'attraction des sphéroides (Connaiss. ft. temps, 1829), and Sur l'attraction d'un ellipsoide homogène (Mim. ft. l'acad., 1835). In concluding our selection from his physical memoirs, we may mention his memoir on the theory of waves (Mém. ft. l'acad., 1825). In pure mathematics, his most important works were his series of memoirs on definite integrals and his discussion of Fourier series, the latter paving the way for the classic researches of Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet and Bernhard Riemann on the same subject; these are to be found in the Journal of the École Polytechnique from 1813 to 1823, and in the Memoirs de l'Académie for 1823. He also studied Fourier integrals. We may also mention his essay on the calculus of variations (Mem. de l'acad., 1833), and his memoirs on the probability of the mean results of observations (Connaiss. d. temps, 1827, &c). The Poisson distribution in probability theory is named after him. In his Traité de mécanique (2 vols. 8vo, 1811 arid 1833), which was written in the style of Laplace and Lagrange and was long a standard work, he showed many novelties such as an explicit usage of momenta:  which influenced the work of Hamilton and Jacobi. Besides his many memoirs, Poisson published a number of treatises, most of which were intended to form part of a great work on mathematical physics, which he did not live to complete. Among these may be mentioned Nouvelle théorie de l'action capillaire (4to, 1831); Théorie mathématique de la chaleur (4to, 1835); Supplement to the same (4to, 1837); Recherches sur la probabilité des jugements en matières criminelles et matière civile (4to, 1837), all published at Paris. A translation of Poisson's Treatise on Mechanics was published in London in 1842. In 1815 Poisson studied integrations along paths in the complex plane. In 1831 he derived the Navier–Stokes equations independently of Claude-Louis Navier.   == Flawed views on the wave theory of lightEdit == Poisson showed surprising hubris on the wave theory of light. He was a member of the academic "old guard" at the Académie royale des sciences de l'Institut de France, who were staunch believers in the particle theory of light who were alarmed at the wave theory of light's increasing acceptance. In 1818, the Académie set their prize as diffraction, being certain that a particle theorist would win it. Poisson, relying on intuition rather than mathematics or scientific experiment, ridiculed participant and civil engineer Augustin-Jean Fresnel when he submitted a thesis explaining diffraction derived from analysis of both the Huygens–Fresnel principle and Young's double slit experiment. Poisson studied Fresnel's theory in detail and of course looked for a way to prove it wrong, as he was a dogmatic supporter of the particle-theory of light. Poisson thought that he had found a flaw when he argued that a consequence of Fresnel's theory was that there would exist an on-axis bright spot in the shadow of a circular obstacle blocking a point source of light, where there should be complete darkness according to the particle-theory of light. Fresnel's theory could not be true, Poisson declared, surely this result was absurd. (The Poisson spot is not easily observed in everyday situations, because most everyday sources of light are not good point sources.) However, the head of the committee, Dominique-François-Jean Arago, who incidentally later became Prime Minister of France, did not have the hubris of Poisson and decided it was necessary to perform the experiment in more detail. He molded a 2mm metallic disk to a glass plate with wax. To everyone's surprise he succeeded in observing the predicted spot, which convinced most scientists of the wave-nature of light. In the end Fresnel won the competition, much to Poisson's chagrin. After that, the corpuscular theory of light was vanquished, not to be heard of again until in a very different form, the 20th century revived it as the newly developed wave-particle duality. Arago later noted that the diffraction bright spot (which later became known as both the Arago spot and the Poisson spot) had already been observed by Joseph-Nicolas Delisle and Giacomo F. Maraldi a century earlier.   == See alsoEdit == List of things named after Siméon Denis Poisson   == ReferencesEdit ==  O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Siméon Denis Poisson", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . Siméon Denis Poisson at the Mathematics Genealogy Project  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

